Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE.
The book shall be known and may be cited as the "Code of the City of
Asbury Park, 2015" and is herein referred to as the "Code." Any additions or
amendments to this Code are incorporated in this Code so that a reference
to "The Code of the City of Asbury Park" includes the additions and
amendments.
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require, unless as otherwise provided by specific chapter,
section or subsection of this Code:
CITY — shall mean the City of Asbury Park in the County of Monmouth and
State of New Jersey.
CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL — shall mean the governing body of the City
of Asbury Park, constituted and elected pursuant to law.
CITY MANAGER — shall mean the Manager of the City duly appointed
pursuant to law.
CIVIL SERVICE — shall mean those regulations set forth in Title 4A of
the New Jersey Administrative Code and Title 11A of the New Jersey
Statutes.?http://www.state.nj.us/csc/
CLERK or CITY CLERK — shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
CODE — shall mean the Code of the City of Asbury Park.
COUNTY — shall mean the County of Monmouth.
DAYS — shall mean the calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — shall mean an organizational unit of the government
established or designated by ordinance of this Code as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to
such organizational unit by the City Council.
DIRECTOR — shall mean the head of an administrative department of the
City government.
FISCAL YEAR — shall mean, for the purposes of financial, budgeting and
planning, the Asbury Park fiscal year runs from January 1 through
December 31.
1:1
GOVERNING BODY — shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City of
Asbury Park.
LAWS — shall mean laws of the State of New Jersey.
LICENSED — shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Code.
MONTH — shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
MUNICIPALITY — shall mean the City of Asbury Park in the County of
Monmouth, State of New Jersey.
NEW JERSEY STATUTES ANNOTATED or N.J.S.A. — shall mean the latest
published edition of the New Jersey Statutes.
OATH — shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words "swear" and
"sworn" shall be construed to be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
OCCUPANT — as applied to a building or land, shall include any person
who occupies the whole or part of a building or land, whether alone or with
others.
OFFICER or OFFICIAL (and the title of an officer or official) — shall be
construed as if the words of the City of Asbury Park followed it.
ORDINANCE — shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Code, so long as it is adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it
remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — when applied to a building or land, shall mean and include
any part owner, any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part
of such building or land.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, factors of any
kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity, acting
either for himself/herself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — shall mean goods and chattels, rights and credits,
monies and effects, evidences of debt, and all written instruments by which
any right to, interest in, or lien or encumbrances upon, property or any debt
or financial obligation as created, acknowledged, evidenced, transferred,
discharged or defeated, in whole or in part, and everything, except real
property as herein defined, which may be subject of ownership.
PRECEDING and FOLLOWING — shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — shall mean real and personal property.
§ 1-2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 1-2
1:2
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC
PLACES — shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the City.
RESOLUTION — shall mean and include any act or regulation of the
Governing Body on a matter of special or temporary interest, required to be
reduced to writing and which may be finally passed at the meeting at which
it is introduced.
RECUSE — shall mean the act of abstaining from participation in an official
action due to a conflict of interest.
SIDEWALK — shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STATE — shall mean the State of New Jersey.
STREET — shall include a street, avenue, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
TENANT or OCCUPANT — as applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
WEEK — shall mean seven (7) days.
YEAR — shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION AND INTERPRETATION OF WORD USAGE.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the City are closed, that day shall
be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-3
1:3
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Code identified by a
Roman numeral and divided by subject matter.
"Article" shall mean a major division within a chapter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, often identified by
an alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY.
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty.
For violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the City of
Asbury Park, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in connection
with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the
violation shall be by one (1) or more of the following: imprisonment in the
County Jail or in any place provided by the municipality for the detention
of prisoners, for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days; or by a fine not
exceeding two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars; or by a period of community
service not exceeding ninety (90) days.
Whenever a fine is to be imposed in an amount greater than one thousand
two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars for violations of housing or zoning
codes the owner shall be provided a thirty (30) days period during which
the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or abate the condition
and shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the Court for
an independent determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the
expiration of the thirty (30) day period, a fine greater than one thousand
two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars may be imposed if the Court has
determined that the abatement has not been substantially completed.
§ 1-3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 1-5.2
1:4
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty.
The City Council may prescribe that for the violation of any particular
provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum
penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed
at an amount not exceeding one hundred ($100.00) dollars. The court
before which any person is convicted of violating any ordinance or Code
provision shall have power to impose any fine, term of punishment, or
period of community service not less than the minimum and not exceeding
the maximum fixed in the Code or such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders.
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or an ordinance within
one (1) year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation,
shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision.
If the City Council chooses not to impose an additional fine upon a person
for a repeated violation of any municipal ordinance, the Council may waive
the additional fine by ordinance or resolution.
§ 1-5.4. Default of Payment of Fine.
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the court by which he/she was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in
the County Jail or place of detention provided by the City, for any term not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or be required to perform community service
for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days.
§ 1-5.5. Separate Violations.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the City exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.6. Application.
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
§ 1-6. MAINTENANCE OF CODE.
§ 1-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6.1
1:5
§ 1-6.1. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of City Council
to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Asbury Park" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the book containing the Code, as amendments and supplements
thereto.
§ 1-6.2. Code Book to Be Kept Up-to-Date.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the office of the Clerk for the use of the
public and the electronic version as published online. All changes in the
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted shall specifically as part of the Code,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-6.3. Altering or Tampering with Code; Penalties for Violation.
It shall be unlawful to improperly change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with this
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City to be
misrepresented thereby.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-6.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 1-6.3
1:6
ARTICLE I
Form of Government
§ 2-1. FORM OF GOVERNMENT ADOPTED.
§ 2-1.1. Council-Manager Form of Government Adopted; Applicable
Laws. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81]
The form of government for the City of Asbury Park adopted by public
referendum on November 5, 2013, and effective January 1, 2015, shall be
known as the "Council-Manager Plan," N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 to 40:69A-98,
under the Optional Municipal Charter Law, also known as the Faulkner Act.
The form of government provided in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 through 40:69A-98,
together with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-26 to 40:69A-30, and 40:69A-150 to
40:69A-210, shall govern the City of Asbury Park, the voters of which have
adopted this plan pursuant to law.
§ 2-1.2. Government by Elected Council; Appointed Manager and
Other Officers and Employees. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-82]
The City of Asbury Park shall be governed by an elected City Council and
by an appointed City Manager, and by such other officers and employees as
may be duly appointed pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et
seq., general law or ordinance.
§ 2-1.3. Educational Requirements of City Officials. [Ord. No. 3034]
All elected officials in the City are required to attend on an annual basis at
least one course offered by the Rutgers University Center for Government
Services (or a similar education provider such as the N.J. League of
Municipalities) covering the responsibilities and obligations of elected
officials (for example: ethics, municipal finance, budgeting, policy setting,
local government contracting, labor relations, capital planning, shared
services, etc.). It is recommended that an ethics course be attended every
other year for the duration of their term of office.
§ 2-1.4. Non-Discrimination Policy. [New; Ord. No. 2017-19]
In all instances of hiring, appointing and or other assignation of duties
and positions, the City of Asbury Park and its representatives shall not
discriminate on the basis of gender, sexual orientation, gender identity,
race, color, national or ethnic origin.
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-1.4
1:7

ARTICLE II
Mayor and City Council
§ 2-2. MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.
§ 2-2.1. City Council. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-83]
The City Council shall consist of five (5) members who shall serve for a term
of 4 years.
Editor's Note: The Mayor shall be considered a member of the City Council.
§ 2-2.2. Election of Council Members. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-83.1]
The City Council members shall be elected by the voters of the City through
non-partisan regular municipal elections under the Uniform Nonpartisan
Elections Law, N.J.S.A. 40:45-5 et seq., at the general election held on the
first Tuesday after the first Monday in November or at such other time as
may be provided by law for holding general elections, and the term of office
of the City Council members shall begin on January 1 next following their
election.
§ 2-2.3. Election at Large.
§ 2-2.4. First Members of City Council; Terms of Office;
Commencement of Staggered Terms. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-83.3]
The City Council members elected at the first election following the
adoption of the plan shall serve for the following terms: The Mayor shall
serve for a term of four (4) years. The length of the respective term of the
remaining members of the first City Council shall be determined by lot at
the organization meeting, with one member of the first City Council serving
for a term of four (4) years and three (3) members of the first City Council
serving for terms of two (2) years each. This will initiate the staggering of
terms. Thereafter, the term of each City Council member shall be for (4)
years.
§ 2-2.5. Mayor; Election by Voters.
a. The City Council members shall be elected at large by the voters of the
City of Asbury Park at non-partisan regular municipal elections held at
the time of the general election. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-83.2]
b. Run-off elections shall be held if a sufficient number of candidates fail to
attain a majority of votes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:45-18. [N.J.S.A.
40:45-18]
a. The Mayor shall be elected directly by the voters of the City at the nonpartisan
regular municipal election held during the general election. At
the first election following the adoption of the Council-Manager form of
government under N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq., and each appropriate
§ 2-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2.5
1:9
§ 2-2.6. Duties of the Mayor. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-87]
The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and shall have
a voice and vote in its proceedings. He/She shall fill vacancies occurring
in the trustees of the public library. All bonds, notes, contracts and written
obligations of the City shall be executed on its behalf by the Mayor or, in
the event of his inability to act, by such Councilperson as the City Council
shall designate with the title of Deputy Mayor to act as Mayor in cases of
the Mayor's absence or disability. The powers and duties of the Mayor shall
be only such as are expressly conferred upon him/her by N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81
through N.J.S.A. 40:69A-98.
§ 2-2.7. Deputy Mayor.
The Deputy Mayor shall be appointed by the Council at the reorganization
meeting of the City Council. The Deputy Mayor shall, in the event of the
Mayor's inability to act or in his/her absence, act as and possess all of the
powers of the Mayor.
§ 2-2.8. Powers of the City Vested in the City Council; Exceptions.
[N.J.S.A. 40:69A-88]
All powers of the City of Asbury Park and the determination of all matters of
policy shall be vested in the City Council, except as otherwise provided by
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq. or by general law.
§ 2-2.9. Appointment of City Manager and Municipal Clerk; Other
Appointments. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-89]
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager and a Municipal Clerk. Both
of such offices may be held by the same person. The City Council may
provide for the manner of appointment of a municipal attorney, any planning
board, zoning board of adjustment or personnel board in the City, and may
create commissions and other bodies with advisory powers.
§ 2-2.10. Executive and Administrative Departments, Boards and
Offices; Deputy City Manager. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-90]
The City Council shall continue or create, and determine and define the
powers and duties of such executive and administrative departments,
boards and offices, in addition to those provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81
et seq., as it may deem necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of
subsequent election, one position of City Council member to be elected
at large shall be designated and voted for under the title of Mayor, and
candidates for the position shall be clearly designated as candidates for
Mayor in their respective nominating petitions. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-86]
b. Run-off elections shall be held if any one candidate fails to attain a
majority of votes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:45-18. [N.J.S.A. 40:45-18;
N.J.S.A. 40:45-19]
§ 2-2.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-2.10
1:10
the affairs of the City, including the office of Deputy City Manager which
shall not be included in the classified service under Title 11A of the Revised
Statutes. Any department, board or office so continued or created may at
any time be abolished by the City Council.
§ 2-2.11. City Council to Act as a Body; Administrative Service to Be
Performed Through City Manager; Committees or Commissions.
[N.J.S.A. 40:69A-91]
It is the intention of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 to 40:69A-98 that the City Council
shall act in all the matters as a body, and it is contrary to the spirit of
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 to 40:69A-98 for any of its members to seek individually
to influence the official acts of the City Manager, or any other officer, or for
the City Council or any of its members to direct or request the appointment
of any person to, or his removal from, office; or to interfere in any way
with the performance by such officers of their duties. The City Council
and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through
the City Manager and shall not give orders to any subordinates of the
City Manager, either publicly or privately. Nothing herein contained shall
prevent the City Council from appointing committees or commissions of its
own members or of citizens to conduct investigations into the conduct of
any officer or department, or any matter relating to the welfare of the City,
and delegating to such committees or commissions such powers of inquiry
as the City Council may deem necessary. Any City Council member violating
the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof in a court of
competent jurisdiction, be disqualified as a City Council member.
§ 2-2.12. Reorganization Meeting. [New]
a. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Mayor and Council may,
by resolution, fix the date and time of its annual organization or
reorganization meeting at 12 o'clock noon on January 1, or at some
other hour on any day during the first week in January. [N.J.S.A.
40:45A-1]
b. At the reorganization meeting the Council shall elect a Deputy Mayor;
review the City fee schedule(s) and reserve a date on the calendar
within forty-five days of the date of the reorganization meeting to
review and act on recommendations to the fee schedule(s); make
professional service appointments, including the City Attorney, and
appoint contract employees; and create or recreate City advisory
committees as necessary and make appointments thereto; adopt the
smoke-free and tobacco-free areas for public parks, public areas, public
beaches and insure that proper signage is posted thereon.
§ 2-2.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-2.12
1:11

ARTICLE III
Office of the City Manager
§ 2-3. CITY MANAGER.
§ 2-3.1. Qualifications of City Manager. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-92; N.J.S.A.
52:14-7]
The City Manager shall be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis of
his/her executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to
his/her actual experience in, or his/her knowledge of, accepted practice in
respect to the duties of his/her office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of
his/her appointment, he/she need not be a resident of the City, but during
his tenure of office he/she may reside outside the City only with the approval
of City Council. He/she shall have his or her principal residence in this State
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:14-7.
§ 2-3.2. Term of City Manager; Removal; Suspension. [N.J.S.A.
40:69A-93]
The City Manager shall hold office for an indefinite term and may be
removed by a majority vote of the City Council. At least thirty (30) days
before such removal shall become effective, the City Council shall by a
majority vote of its members adopt a preliminary resolution stating the
reasons for his/her removal. The City Manager may reply in writing and may
request a public hearing, which shall be held not earlier than twenty (20)
days nor later than thirty (30) days after the filing of such request. After
such public hearing, if one be requested, and after full consideration, the
City Council by majority vote of its members may adopt a final resolution
of removal. By the preliminary resolution the City Council may suspend
the City Manager from duty, but shall in any case cause to be paid him/
her any unpaid balance of his/her salary and his/her salary for the next
three (3) calendar months following adoption of the preliminary resolution
unless he/she is removed for good cause. For the purposes of this section,
"good cause" shall mean conviction of a crime or offense involving moral
turpitude, the violation of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-163 through
40:69A-167, or the violation of any code of ethics in effect within the City.
§ 2-3.3. Absence or Disability of Manager. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-94]
The City Manager may designate a qualified administrative officer of the
City to perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability. In the
event of his/her failure to make such designation, the City Council may by
resolution appoint an officer of the City to perform the duties of the City
Manager during such absence or disability until he/she shall return or his
disability shall cease.
§ 2-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3.4
1:13
§ 2-3.4. Powers and Duties of City Manager. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-95;
New]
The City Manager shall:
a. Be the chief executive and administrative official of the City;
b. Execute all laws and ordinances of the City;
c. Appoint and remove a Deputy City Manager if one be authorized by the
City Council, all department heads and all other officers, subordinates,
and assistants, except a municipal tax assessor, for whose selection or
removal no other method is provided in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 to N.J.S.A.
40:69A-98, except that he/she may authorize the head of a department
to appoint and remove subordinates in such department, supervise and
control his/her appointees, and report all appointments or removals at
the next meeting thereafter of the City Council;
d. Negotiate contracts for the municipality subject to the approval of the
City Council, make recommendations concerning the nature and
location of municipal improvements, and execute municipal
improvements as determined by the City Council;
e. See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its
inhabitants in any statute, public utility franchise or other contract are
faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violation call
the same to the attention of the City Council;
f. Attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to take part in the
discussions, but without the right to vote;
g. Recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures as he/she
may deem necessary or expedient, keep the City Council advised of the
financial condition of the City, make reports to the City Council as
requested by it, and at least once a year make an annual report of his/
her work for the benefit of the City Council and the public;
h. Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department of the
City;
i. Provide the Council with quarterly reports reflecting the City's
administrative goals and accomplishments;
j. Perform such other duties as may be required of the City Manager by
the City Council.
The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for carrying
out all policies established by it and for the proper administration of all
affairs of the City within the jurisdiction of the City Council.
§ 2-3.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-3.5
1:14
§ 2-3.5. Budget; Preparation by City Manager. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-96]
The City budget shall be prepared by the City Manager. During the month
of November in each year, the City Manager shall require all department
heads to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing budget year,
and to appear before him/her at public hearings, which shall be held during
that month, on the various requests.
§ 2-3.6. Recommended Budget; Submission by City Manager;
System of Work Programs and Quarterly Allotments. [N.J.S.A.
40:69A-97]
On or before the fifteenth day of the fiscal year the City Manager shall
submit to City Council his/her recommended budget together with such
explanatory comment or statement as he/she may deem desirable. The
budget shall be in such form as is required by law for City budgets, and shall
in addition have appended thereto detailed analysis of the various items of
expenditure and revenue.
The City Council shall, where practicable, provide by ordinance for the
operation of a system of work programs and quarterly allotments for
operation of the budget, and for development and reporting of appropriate
unit costs of budgeted expenditures.
§ 2-3.7. Extended Budget Dates; Time for Submission of City
Manager's Recommended Budget. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-97.1]
Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-97, in any local budget
year for which budget dates are extended pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:4-5.1,
the City Manager of a municipality governed under the "Council-Manager
Plan" pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq. which takes advantage of such
extension shall submit to the City Council his/her recommended budget not
less than sixteen (16) days prior to the extended date for the introduction
and approval of municipal budgets.
§ 2-3.8. Laws Conferring Powers Upon Mayor or Other Executive
Head Construed as Meaning City Manager. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-98]
Any provision of general law conferring the appointing power or other
power upon the Mayor or other executive head of the municipality shall be
construed as meaning the municipal manager in a municipality governed
under N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-98, and the appointments or
the power exercised by the municipal manager in accordance with such
provision shall be classified and given the same force and effect as if
executed by the official named therein, except that members of the board of
education and of the trustees of the public library, whenever required to be
appointed by any such provision by any board or official of the municipality,
shall be appointed under N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-98 by the
Mayor, and except that the Mayor shall serve as the fifth member of the
board of school estimate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:22-1.
§ 2-3.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3.9
1:15
§ 2-3.9. Office of Assistant City Manager. [New]
There is hereby created the Office of Assistant City Manager, whose duties
shall be to assist the City Manager in performing the duties set forth in this
section.
§ 2-4. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT OFFICE.
§ 2-4.1. Office of Community Development. [2000 Code § 2-4.11;
Ord. No. 2099; Ord. No. 2795]
a. Establishment. There is hereby created the Office of Community
Development, which shall be responsible for community development,
affordable housing, oversight and management of the City's Regional
Contribution Agreement (R.C.A.) Program, related grants management
and related matters. This office shall be part of the City Manager's
immediate staff.
b. Director of Community Development. There is hereby created the
position of Director of Community Development. This individual shall be
appointed by the City Manager and shall report directly to the City
Manager. The Director of Community Development shall be qualified by
education, professional training and/or experience, and shall possess
such qualifications as are required for the position by the New Jersey
Department of Personnel (N.J.D.O.P.) for Civil Service jurisdictions.
c. Duties. The Director of Community Development shall have the
following duties:
1. Advise the City Manager in the area of planning for community
development, affordable housing, oversight and management of the
City's Regional Contribution Agreement (R.C.A.) Program, related
grants management and related matters.
2. Administer all programs and activities of the Office of Community
Development.
3. Supervise all employees of the Office of Community Development.
4. Prepare an annual budget under the Community Development
Block Grant Program, and seek out other funds under the Federal
and State financial assistance programs.
5. Prepare an annual Community Development Work Plan and
application for submission to the City Council.
6. Coordinate all community development activities between City
agencies, private investors and developers.
7. Such other duties as are prescribed by the N.J.D.O.P. for the
position.
§ 2-3.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-4.1
1:16
8. Such other responsibilities as may be assigned by the City Manager
and/or which are necessary for the efficient conduct of the Office of
Community Development.
§ 2-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-4.1
1:17

ARTICLE IV
Office of the City Clerk
§ 2-5. THE CITY CLERK.
§ 2-5.1. Term of Office; Salary. [2000 Code § 2-5.1]
§ 2-5.2. Powers and Duties. [New]
The City Clerk shall:
a. The City Clerk shall be appointed for a three (3) year term by the Mayor
and City Council in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133
et seq. For the purpose of tenure, the term of the Clerk shall be deemed
to have begun as of the actual date upon which the person serving as
Clerk is appointed. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Clerk, an
appointment shall be made for a new term and not for the unexpired
term. The Clerk's salary shall be established in the annual salary
ordinance.
b. Temporary Clerk. Should the office of City Clerk become vacant, the
Mayor and City Council may appoint a person to serve as Acting Clerk
pursuant to State Statute.
a. Act as Secretary of the Municipal corporation and custodian of the
Municipal seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts, and
archival records of the Municipal corporation. The City Council may,
however, provide by ordinance that any other specific officer shall have
custody of any specific other class of record.
b. Act as Secretary to the Governing Body, prepare meeting agendas at
the discretion of the Governing Body, be present at all meetings of the
Governing Body, keep a journal of the proceedings of every meeting,
retain the original copies of all ordinances and resolutions, and record
the minutes of every meeting.
c. Serve as the Chief Administrative Officer in all elections held in the
municipality, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated.
d. Serve as Chief Registrar of voters in the City, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
e. Serve as the administrative officer responsible for the acceptance of
applications for licenses and permits and the issuance of licenses and
permits, except where statute or municipal ordinance has delegated
that responsibility to some other municipal officer.
f. Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
§ 2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-5.2
1:19
§ 2-5.3. Deputy City Clerk. [2000 Code § 2-5.3; New]
g. Perform such other duties as are now or hereafter imposed by statute,
regulation or by City ordinance or regulation.
h. Supervise the responsibilities of the Registrar of Vital Statistics.
i. Provide the City Council with quarterly reports on the status of the
office and goals and accomplishments.
a. Creation. The office of Deputy City Clerk is hereby created. The term
for the appointment to the office and the compensation thereof shall be
established by the Mayor and Council.
b. Duties. The Deputy City Clerk shall assist the City Clerk with the
efficient operation and management of the City Clerk's office on a daily
basis, and shall have all of the powers and perform all the duties of the
City Clerk during such times as the City Clerk is absent. The Deputy
City Clerk shall perform such other duties as assigned by the Clerk.
§ 2-5.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-5.3
1:20
ARTICLE V
Departments and Divisions
§ 2-6. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION.
§ 2-6.1. Creation. [2000 Code § 2-6.1]
The Department of Finance and Administration is hereby created in and for
the City of Asbury Park.
§ 2-6.2. Composition of the Department. [2000 Code § 2-6.2; Ord.
No. 2795, New]
The Department of Finance and Administration shall consist of the following
divisions:
§ 2-6.3. Supervision. [2000 Code § 2-6.3; Ord. No. 2795]
The Department of Finance and Administration shall at all times be under
the supervision of the Chief Financial Officer in all actions relative to the
duties and responsibilities of the Department to the extent not prohibited
by law. The Chief Financial Officer shall serve as the Department head.
§ 2-6.4. Hiring. [2000 Code § 2-6.4; New]
The Department of Finance and Administration shall consist of employees
hired by the City Manager and certification of available funds.
§ 2-6.5. through § 2-6.10. (Reserved)
§ 2-6.11. Chief Financial Officer. [2000 Code § 2-6.11; New]
a. Finance, which may include the following: Purchasing, Treasury, and
Human Resources.
b. Tax Collection.
c. Tax Assessment.
a. Definition. "Chief Financial Officer" shall mean the official appointed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10 to be responsible for the proper
financial administration of the City under the "Local Government
Supervision Act," N.J.S.A. 52:27B-1 et seq.; the "Local Bond Law,"
N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq.; the "Local Budget Law," N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et
seq.; the "Local Fiscal Affairs Law," N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq.; the "Local
Public Contracts Law," N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., and such other
statutes, rules, and regulations promulgated by the Director of the
Division of Local Government Services, the local Finance Board or any
other State agency, as may pertain to financial administration of the
City.
§ 2-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-6.11
1:21
§ 2-6.12. Tax Collector. [2000 Code § 2-6.12; New]
§ 2-6.13. Tax Assessor. [Ord. No. 2795; New]
b. Appointment. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10
and shall serve in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq.
c. Supervision. The Chief Financial Officer shall at all times be under the
supervision of the City Manager in all actions relative to the duties and
responsibilities of this office to the extent not prohibited by law.
d. Duties. The Chief Financial Officer shall be responsible for the proper
financial administration of the City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1(d),
and the Chief Financial Officer shall provide the City Manager with
quarterly reports and goals and accomplishments.
e. Compensation. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive as
compensation the amount set forth in the salary ordinance for this
position.
a. Creation. The office of Tax Collector is hereby created in and for the
City pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141.
b. Appointment. The Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council and shall serve in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-141 et seq. with the advice and consent of the City Council.
c. Supervision. The Tax Collector shall at all times be under the
supervision of the Chief Financial Officer in all actions relative to the
duties and responsibilities of the office to the extent not prohibited by
law.
d. Duties. The Tax Collector shall be responsible for overseeing the
collection of taxes and sewer charges, and duties inherent in the
collection of taxes and sewer charges, and duties pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:56-31.
e. Compensation. The Tax Collector shall receive as compensation the
amount set forth in the salary ordinance for that position.
a. Creation. The office of Tax Assessor is hereby created in and for the City
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146.
b. Appointment. The Tax Assessor shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council and shall serve in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-146 et seq.
c. Supervision. The Tax Assessor shall report to the Chief Financial
Officer, and shall at all times be under the supervision and direction of
the New Jersey State Division of Taxation and the Monmouth County
Board of Taxation, in accordance with applicable State regulations.
§ 2-6.11 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-6.13
1:22
§ 2-7. LAW PERSONNEL.
§ 2-7.1. Positions Created. [2000 Code § 2-7.1; New; Ord. No.
2017-4]
There are hereby created the positions of City Attorney, Municipal
Prosecutor, Municipal Public Defender, and Code Enforcement Prosecutor
(collectively, the City's "law personnel"). In addition to the law personnel
positions referenced, the Mayor and Council may appoint such other special
counsels as they deem necessary who shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall appoint the City Attorney
and all special counsels. All other staff appointments shall be made by the
City Manager if such positions are created by the Mayor and Council and
the appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. All non-staff
appointments are to be made by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-7.2. City Attorney. [2000 Code § 2-7.1; New; Ord. No. 2017-4]
The City Attorney shall be appointed on an annual basis for a term of one
year or until a successor is duly appointed and qualified, and shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-7.3. Municipal Prosecutor. [Ord. No. 2017-4]
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be appointed by the City Manager if the
position is defined as a staff position as per Federal and State regulations.
If this position is not a staff position and is qualified as a consultant, then
the Mayor and Council shall appoint an attorney to the position for a term
of one year or until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. Dependent
on the nature of the appointment, there shall be at least one Alternate
Prosecutor appointed. The Municipal Prosecutor shall perform those duties
as prescribed under N.J.S.A. 2B:25-5. (N.J.S.A. 2B:25-1 et seq.)
§ 2-7.4. Municipal Public Defender; Application Fee. [2000 Code
§ 2-35.9; Ord. No. 2673; N.J.S.A. 2B:24-6; New; Ord. No. 2017-4]
The Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed by the City Manager
if the position is defined as a staff position as per Federal and State
regulations. If this position is not a staff position and is qualified as a
consultant, then the Mayor and Council shall appoint an attorney to the
position for a term of one year or until a successor is duly appointed
d. Duties. The Tax Assessor shall be responsible for overseeing the
assessment of property within the City of Asbury Park for the purpose of
general taxation, and all duties inherent in and associated with the
assessment of taxes, and such other duties as required pursuant to
applicable State law.
e. Compensation. The Tax Assessor shall receive as compensation the
amount set forth in the salary ordinance for that position.
§ 2-6.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-7.4
1:23
and qualified. The Municipal Public Defender shall perform those duties
prescribed under N.J.S.A. 2B:24-6.
The Public Defender shall receive a salary if a staff position or a contract if
appointed by the Mayor and Council. The Public Defender shall represent
defendants in the Municipal Court as directed by the Judge of the Municipal
Court. Any person applying for representation by a Municipal Public
Defender shall be required to pay an application fee of not more than
two hundred ($200) dollars. The Municipal Court may waive any required
application fee, in whole or in part, if the Court determines, in its discretion,
that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person
seeking representation.
§ 2-7.5. Code Enforcement Prosecutor. [New; Ord. No. 2017-4]
The Code Enforcement Prosecutor shall be appointed by the City Manager
if the position is defined as a staff position as per Federal and State
regulations. If this position is not a staff position and is qualified as a
consultant, then the Mayor and Council shall appoint an attorney to the
position for a term of one year or until a successor is duly appointed and
qualified. The Code Enforcement Prosecutor shall prosecute code violations
on behalf of the City.
§ 2-7.6. Other Appointments. [New; Ord. No. 2017-4]
The City Manager may make such other appointments for such positions
as created by the Mayor and Council, if the position(s) are defined as staff
positions as per Federal and State regulations.
§ 2-7.7. Compensation. [2000 Code § 2-7.2; New; Ord. No. 2017-4]
Compensation shall be set by salary ordinance (for staff positions) and/or by
contract (for consultant positions) approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-8. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-8.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, there is hereby created a Police
Department within the City of Asbury Park, which shall consist of a
uniformed force as hereinafter set forth.
§ 2-8.2. Members; Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.2; New;
Ord. No. 2017-5]
The Police Department shall not exceed more than the following:
a. Police Chief; Number of Positions - One (1)
b. Deputy Police Chief; Number of Positions - One (1)
c. Captain; Number of Positions - Four (4)
§ 2-7.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-8.2
1:24
§ 2-8.3. Duties of the Police Department. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.3]
The Police Department shall preserve the public peace, protect life and
property, detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws of the State of
New Jersey and the ordinances of the City of Asbury Park; direct and control
traffic; provide attendance and protection during emergencies; provide
appearances in court; cooperate with other law enforcement agencies;
provide training for the efficiency of its members and officers; and perform
all other duties as required or authorized by law.
§ 2-8.4. Appropriate Authority. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.4]
The City Manager, or his/her designee, is hereby designated as the
Appropriate Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118. The City Manager
shall be responsible for the overall performance of the Police Department.
The City Manager, in consultation with the Police Chief, shall adopt and
promulgate such rules and regulations as necessary for the government of
the Police Department and for the discipline of its members.
d. Lieutenants; Number of Positions - Six (6)
e. Sergeants; Number of Positions - Fifteen (15)
f. Police Officers Number of Positions - Seventy (70)
The above listing represents the chain of command within the
Department, with the Police Chief representing the highest position and
the remaining positions falling in descending hierarchical order. The
lowest ranking members of the Department shall be the Special Police
Officers, if any.
In addition civilian employees including but not limited to laborers,
telephone operators, clerks, computer personnel, telecommunications
officers, Special Law Enforcement Officer II (SLEO), school traffic
guards, and other special police officers may be hired subject to the
recommendation of the Chief of Police and/or Director of Public Safety.
The establishment of a Table of Organization for the City of Asbury
Park Police Department shall not be deemed to require that all positions
be filled, but rather the number of sworn officers in each rank and/
or position shall not exceed those set forth in this subsection unless
the Table of Organization is amended by the City Council of the City
of Asbury and such positions are subject to available funding of such
positions by the adoption of a budget and salary ordinance by the City
Council of the City of Asbury Park. Any municipal salary ordinance, as
amended, and appointment of persons in accordance with this Table of
Organization shall be consistent with the foregoing and shall serve to
fill the positions allowed pursuant to this section. In the event that a
Police Chief is not named, then the next highest ranking officer shall
have all the vested duties of that of a Police Chief.
§ 2-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8.5
1:25
§ 2-8.5. Police Chief. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.5]
a. Executive Officer. The Police Chief shall be the executive officer of the
Police Department, and shall serve as the Department Head.
b. Appointment; Qualifications. The Police Chief shall be appointed by the
City Manager in accordance with applicable Civil Service Laws, and
shall possess such qualifications as are required for the position by the
State of New Jersey Civil Service Commission.
c. Compensation. The Police Chief's compensation shall be such sum as
shall be fixed by ordinance of the City Council.
d. Responsibilities. The Police Chief shall:
1. Be the head of the Police force.
2. Be directly responsible to the City Manager for the day-to-day
operations and internal organization of the Police Department, as
well as the Department's planning and research, training and
Homeland Security Operations.
3. Administer and enforce all ordinances of the City and the laws of
the State of New Jersey, and such rules and regulations as may be
promulgated for the regulation of the Police Department.
4. Have charge of and responsibility for all property of the City used
by the Police Department.
5. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Department.
6. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all officers and
Department personnel, and provide advice and assistance as
necessary.
7. Be vested with all authority and duties of a Police Officer.
8. Approve all invoices for the expense of the Department.
9. Keep and maintain an accurate record of all operations of the
Department, and report at least monthly to the City Manager on
the operations during the preceding month. The Police Chief shall
also make such other reports as may be requested by the City
Manager.
10. Submit an annual report to the Mayor and Council, on or before
January 15 of each year, which report shall assess the operations of
the Police Department and its personnel, equipment and property
during the preceding year, as well as summarize goals and
objectives for the Department for the year ahead. The Police Chief
shall also make such other reports as may be requested by the
Mayor and Council from time to time.
§ 2-8.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-8.5
1:26
§ 2-8.6. Divisions. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.6; New; Ord. No. 2017-5]
The Police Department shall consist of the following divisions and such
other divisions and/or units as may be designated by the Police Chief:
11. Keep and maintain all records, reports, documents and data
required to be kept and maintained by the Federal and/or State
government and/or any of their respective subdivisions.
12. Keep and maintain a record of all appointments, dismissals,
removals, resignations and deaths of officers as they take place,
with such other information as may be necessary.
13. Have the authority to discipline any member of the Department for
insubordination, disorderly conduct, conduct unbecoming an
officer and/or any violation of law, rule, ordinance, regulation or
otherwise.
14. Have the power, and it shall be his duty, to suspend summarily any
member of the Department for insubordination, disorderly conduct,
conduct unbecoming an officer or violation of law, rule, ordinance,
regulation or otherwise.
15. Have responsibility for developing the annual budget for the Police
Department and shall be responsible for overseeing any and all
expenditures by the Department, subject to the approval of the City
Manager and the City Council.
16. Have responsibility for ensuring that all officers and members of
the Department are fit for full duty at all times that they are on
active status.
17. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the Department, with any delegated authority
to be exercised under his direction and supervision.
18. Perform such other duties as are prescribed for the position by the
State of New Jersey Civil Service Commission.
19. Perform such other appropriate duties as may be assigned to him
by the City Manager, and/or which are necessary for the efficient
conduct of the Police Department.
a. Patrol Division. The Patrol Division shall be headed by a superior officer
chosen by the Police Chief, and shall consist of such officers and patrol
persons as assigned by the Police Chief to carry out the duties assigned
to the Division. The School Crossing Guards and Meter Enforcement
Officers shall be part of the Patrol Division. This Division will be
responsible for the conduct and operation of the main Police desk and
such other duties as determined by the Police Chief.
b. Administrative Service Division. The Administrative Services Division
shall be headed by a superior officer chosen by the Police Chief, and
§ 2-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-8.6
1:27
§ 2-8.7. Special Police Officers. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.7; New]
§ 2-8.8. Appointment and Promotion. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.8; Ord.
No. 3072A; New]
shall consist of such officers and patrol persons as assigned by the
Police Chief to carry out the duties assigned to the Division, which
duties shall be determined by the Police Chief.
c. Investigation Division. The Investigation Division shall be headed by a
superior officer chosen by the Police Chief, and shall consist of such
other detectives and officers as assigned by the Police Chief to carry out
the duties assigned to the Division, which duties shall be determined by
the Police Chief. The grade of Detective shall be of a temporary nature
and shall apply to patrol persons when assigned by the Police Chief to
the Investigation Division of the Department. In the absence of a
superior officer, detectives shall rank patrol persons in carrying out
their duties.
d. Support Services Division. The Support Services Division shall be
headed by a superior officer chosen by the Police Chief and shall consist
of staff support to perform duties included but not limited to Records,
OPRA, Technical Services, etc.
a. Created. Pursuant to the Special Law Enforcement Officer's Act,
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., the terms and requirements of which are
incorporated herein by reference, there is hereby created the
position(s) of Special Law Enforcement Officer in and for the City.
Special Law Enforcement Officers I and Special Law Enforcement
Officers II may be hired and utilized as prescribed by State Statute.
b. The City is hereby designated a "resort municipality."
a. Procedure. All appointments to and promotions within the Police
Department shall be made by the City Manager, upon recommendation
of the Police Chief. Appointments and promotions shall be made
according to merit and fairness, which shall be ascertained, as far as
practicable, by competitive examinations. All appointments and
promotions are to be made in accordance with the rules, regulations
and qualifications as prescribed by applicable Civil Service laws.
b. All appointments shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-123.1a. Before any person shall be appointed as a member of
the Police Department, the City Manager shall classify all of the duly
qualified applicants for the position or positions to be filled in the
following classes:
I. Residents of the City of Asbury Park.
II. Other residents of Monmouth County.
III. Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-8.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-8.8
1:28
§ 2-8.9. Dismissal. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.9]
No person shall be dismissed from office or employment in the Police
Department in any manner or by any means other than those prescribed by
the applicable Civil Service Laws.
§ 2-8.10. Police Chaplain. [Ord. No. 3055; New]
The position of Police Chaplain ("Chaplain") is established.
The position shall be a volunteer position, subject to the control of the
Chief of Police. The person appointed as Chaplain shall be an ordained
clergyman in good standing in the religious body from which he/she is
selected. The Chaplain shall have basic training and shall be a certified
Police Chaplain credentialed in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the City of Asbury Park Police Department. There shall not be more than
eleven (11) Chaplains appointed in the City. The duties of Chaplain shall
include but not be limited to assisting the Asbury Park Police Department
in death notifications, station house adjustments and any other duties that
may be assigned by the Chief of Police. Any person appointed as Chaplain
shall serve in that capacity without rank or salary. A person appointed
as Chaplain shall continue to serve until he/she is replaced, reappointed,
or submits a resignation. The Chief of Police may recommend to the City
Council persons that he/she believes meet the qualifications of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-141 as well as the rules and regulations of the Asbury Park Police
Department with reference to Chaplains, if any. The City Council shall
appoint one or more persons as Chaplain(s) in accordance with the terms
set forth herein.
§ 2-9. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
IV. All other qualified applicants.
The classes of qualified applicants defined above shall be
considered as separate and successive lists of eligible applicants,
in order referenced above.
Veterans discharged from the service within 6 months prior to
making application who fulfill the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-123.1 and meet the residency requirements shall be placed
in Class II.
c. Temporary Appointments. In making temporary or "provisional"
appointments, the City Manager shall classify accordingly all duly
qualified applicants for the position or positions to be temporarily filled
and follow all requirements prescribed by applicable Civil Service
Laws.
§ 2-8.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-9.1
1:29
§ 2-9.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.10; New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7, there is hereby created a Fire Department
within the City of Asbury Park, which shall consist of a uniformed force of
career firefighters as may be required, subject to such rules and regulations
as shall be promulgated by the Fire Chief to ensure the proper and efficient
operation of the Department.
§ 2-9.2. Members. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.11]
The uniformed force of career firefighters shall consist of a Chief and such
Battalion Chiefs, Captains, Firefighters, Fire Official(s), Fire Prevention
Specialists, Supervisor(s) of Emergency Medical Services and other career
firefighters as the City Manager shall appoint.
§ 2-9.3. Duties of the Fire Department. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.12]
The Fire Department shall protect life and property from fire and other
disaster, preserve public safety, provide attendance and protection during
emergencies, cooperate with other public safety agencies, provide training
for the efficiency of its members and officers, and perform all other duties
as required or authorized by law.
§ 2-9.4. Fire Chief. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.13]
a. Executive Officer. The Fire Chief shall be the executive officer of the
Fire Department, and shall serve as the Department Head.
b. Appointment; Qualifications. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the
City Manager in accordance with applicable Civil Service Laws, and
shall possess such qualifications as are required for the position by the
State of New Jersey Civil Service Commission jurisdictions including
New Jersey Division of Fire Safety Officer I, Incident Management Level
3, Fire Service Instructor Level 2, Fire Official, and New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services Emergency Medical
Technician Basic (EMT-B).
c. Compensation. The Fire Chief's compensation shall be such sum as
shall be fixed by ordinance of the City Council.
d. Responsibilities. The Fire Chief shall:
1. Be the head of the Fire Department.
2. Promulgate such rules and regulations as deemed necessary to
ensure the proper and efficient operation of the Fire Department.
3. Be directly responsible to the City Manager for the day-to-day
operations and internal organization of the Fire Department, as
well as the Department's planning and research, and training
operations.
§ 2-9.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-9.4
1:30
4. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all officers and
Department personnel.
5. Have charge of the apparatus and all other property of the
Department and shall conduct inspections to ensure that all
property of the Department is kept in top condition for immediate
and effective service.
6. Promptly report to the City Manager any equipment or property
repairs which may be necessary and make such recommendations
or suggestions as he may deem proper.
7. Approve all invoices for the expense of the Department.
8. Keep a record of all operations of the Department, and report at
least monthly to the City Manager on the operations during the
preceding month. The Fire Chief shall also make such other reports
as may be requested by the City Manager.
9. Submit an annual report to the Mayor and Council, on or before
January 15 of each year, which report shall assess the operations of
the Fire Department and its personnel, equipment and property
during the preceding year, as well as summarize goals and
objectives for the Department for the year ahead. The Fire Chief
shall also make such other reports as may be requested by the
Mayor and Council from time to time.
10. Keep and maintain all records, reports, documents and data
required to be kept and maintained by the Federal and/or State
governments and/or any of their respective subdivisions.
11. Keep and maintain a record of appointments, dismissals, removals,
resignations and deaths of officers and firefighters as they take
place, with such other information as may be necessary.
12. See that all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations and orders
relative to the Department are promptly enforced and obeyed and
that all derelictions or transgressions that may come up to his
knowledge are promptly investigated and reported to the City
Manager.
13. Have the authority to discipline, including suspension, any member
of the Department, for any violation of law, rule, ordinance,
regulation or order.
14. Have the power, and it shall be his duty, to suspend summarily from
duty any member of the Department for insubordination, disorderly
conduct, or violation of a Department order, such suspension to
continue until the Fire Chief and City Manager shall act thereon.
15. Have responsibility for developing the annual budget for the Fire
Department and shall be responsible for overseeing any and all
§ 2-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-9.4
1:31
§ 2-9.5. Divisions. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.14; New]
The Fire Department shall consist of the following divisions and such other
divisions and/or bureaus and units as may be designated by the Fire Chief:
expenditures by the Department subject to the approval of the City
Manager and the City Council.
16. Keep a record of all fire badges and identification cards distributed
by him and shall take written receipts from each member of the
Department to whom a badge and card is given.
17. Have responsibility for ensuring that all officers and members of
the Department are fit for duty at all times that they are in active
status.
18. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the Department, with any delegated authority
to be exercised under his direction and supervision.
19. Recommend a standard of decoration for meritorious service.
20. Utilize National Fire Protection Association standards as a
guideline for the operation of the Department.
21. Perform such other duties as are prescribed for the position by the
State of New Jersey Department of Personnel for Civil Service
jurisdictions.
22. Perform such other appropriate duties as may be assigned to him
by the City Manager, and/or which are necessary for the efficient
conduct of the Fire Department.
a. Fire Suppression Division. The Fire Suppression Division shall be
headed by the Chief and shall consist of such officers and firefighters as
assigned by the Chief to carry out the duties assigned to the Fire
Suppression Division.
b. Fire Prevention Bureau. The Fire Prevention Bureau shall be headed by
the Fire Official who shall be appointed by the City Manager upon
recommendation of the Fire Chief and shall consist of the Fire
Prevention Specialists and other personnel as assigned by the Chief to
carry out the duties assigned to the Division. All qualified applicants
shall be employees of the Fire Department. The Chief of the
Department will have the discretion to recommend to the City Manager
the hiring of a Fire Prevention Specialist as defined under the New
Jersey Department of Personnel, Division of County and Municipal
Government Services or Fire Prevention Specialist - UFD, as defined
under the New Jersey Department of Personnel, Division of County and
Municipal Government Services.
c. Emergency Medical Services Division. The E.M.S. Division shall be
headed by a qualified E.M.S. Officer who shall be appointed by the City
§ 2-9.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-9.5
1:32
§ 2-9.6. Appointments and Promotions. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.15;
Ord. No. 3072A; New]
§ 2-9.7. Dismissal. [Ord. No. 2821 § 2-8.16]
No person shall be dismissed from office or employment in the Fire
Department in any manner or by any means other than those prescribed by
the applicable Civil Service Laws.
Manager upon recommendation of the Fire Chief and shall consist of
such duties assigned to the Division.
d. Right to Know/Open Public Records Division. The Right to Know/Open
Public Records Division shall be headed by the Fire Chief and shall
consist of such personnel as assigned by the Chief to carry out the
duties of the Right to Know/Open Public Records Division.
a. Procedure. All appointments to and promotions within the Fire
Department shall be made by the City Manager, upon recommendation
of the Fire Chief. Appointments and promotions shall be made
according to merit and fairness, which shall be ascertained, as far as
practicable, by competitive examinations. All appointments and
promotions are to be made in accordance with the rules, regulations
and qualifications as prescribed by applicable Civil Service laws.
b. All appointments shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-10.1a. Before any person shall be appointed as a member of the
Fire Department, the City Manager shall classify all of the duly qualified
applicants for the position or positions to be filled in the following
classes:
I. Residents of the City of Asbury Park.
II. Other residents of Monmouth County.
III. Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
IV. All other qualified applicants.
The classes of qualified applicants defined above shall be
considered as separate and successive lists of eligible applicants,
in order referenced above.
Veterans discharged from the service within 6 months prior to
making application who fulfill the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-123.1 and meet the residency requirements shall be placed
in Class III.
c. Temporary Appointments. In making temporary or "provisional"
appointments, the City Manager shall classify accordingly all duly
qualified applicants for the position or positions to be temporarily filled
and follow all requirements prescribed by applicable Civil Service
Laws.
§ 2-9.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-9.8
1:33
§ 2-9.8. Fire Hydrant, Temporary and Other Auxiliary Fire Fighting
Devices Obstructed. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.17]
The fire officers in command at any fire scene are endowed with full and
complete Police authority, and may require and secure the removal of
any and all obstructions from in front and around fire hydrants, sprinkler
connections and/or standpipe connections or where obstructions occur
preventing firefighting operations and for that purpose are authorized to
call upon the head of any City department for aid and assistance in securing
such removal of obstructions.
§ 2-9.9. Defective Hydrants. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.18]
It shall be the duty of the officer in charge of any company at a fire or drill to
report to the Chief all fire hydrants that are found frozen, out of order, leaky
or that are set in such a manner as to make it difficult to connect thereto.
§ 2-9.10. Authority at Fire Scene/E.M.S. Emergencies. [Ord. No.
2820 § 2-8.19]
During the continuance of any fire or any other emergency within the City
wherein the Fire Department has taken the lead responsibility, and for such
time thereafter as the Chief shall deem necessary, the Fire Department,
under the control of the Chief, shall have complete jurisdiction with the
police, of the territory in and about the fire or emergency scene, and may
block the same territory from the public, and prohibit the passage of all
individuals and vehicles in or upon any street adjacent to as they shall deem
necessary.
§ 2-9.11. Driving Over Fire Hose. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.20]
No person shall, during time of fire, or while a fire hose is laid out at a fire
scene, ride or drive over the hose with any vehicle.
§ 2-9.12. Auxiliary Firefighter/EMT Program. [Ord. No. 2820
§ 2-8.21; New]
a. The Asbury Park Fire Department Auxiliary Firefighter/EMT Program is
a non-paid voluntary program. The program is designed to supplement,
not supplant the career staffing with individuals interested in providing
community services that reduce property loss caused by fire, hazardous
situations, injuries, deaths, and other emergencies. Auxiliary
firefighters can provide essential functions that assist the department
and the residents of Asbury Park. Auxiliary personnel participate in
training classes, community events, department drills, and emergency
response.
b. The Auxiliary program consists of three types of personnel: (Level-1)
"Auxiliary Firefighter/EMT" (Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health-
IDLH qualified), (Level-2) "Auxiliary Emergency Medical Technician
(EMT)" (Non-IDLH qualified) personnel, and (Level-3) non-emergency
§ 2-9.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-9.12
1:34
§ 2-9.13. Fees for Emergency Medical Services. [Ord. No. 2928; Ord.
No. 3061; Ord. No. 2017-9]
The following fees are hereby established for emergency medical services
as provided through the "Emergency Medical Services Division" of the Fire
Department of the City of Asbury Park:
§ 2-9.14. Fees for Lockout Services for Motor Vehicles. [Ord. No.
2015-56]
The following fees are hereby established for the Fire Department of the
City of Asbury Park:
§ 2-10. SPECIAL DUTY ASSIGNMENTS.
personnel that wish to assist the department in a non-emergency role.
Level-1 and 2 Reserve Firefighter/EMT's and EMT's may ride on front
line emergency vehicles with the Asbury Park Fire Department crew
and are expected to meet all standards and perform the same duties
and functions as full-time firefighters. Level-3 Auxiliary personnel can
only assist with fire and emergency medical scene activities which are
outside the IDLH atmospheres, hot zones, and inner action circle.
c. Personnel assigned to the Asbury Park Fire Department Reserve must
document a minimum of training hours per month and report for a
number, previously scheduled twenty-four (24) hours shifts per month,
as determined by the Fire Chief.
d. Auxiliary Firefighters shall be subject to the jurisdiction and orders of
the Fire Chief and/or his/her designee.
e. No person shall become an Auxiliary Firefighter until the required
"Disclosure of Information Application" is completed and a background
check is made by the Fire Chief. Upon completion of this background
check and with the approval of the Fire Chief, said applicant must be
approved by the City Manager.
a. Ambulance Transportation. There shall be a fee associated with the
provision of ambulance transportation in the amount of seven hundred
eighty ($780) dollars. [Ord. No. 2017-9]
b. Basic Life Support (BLS) Mileage. There shall be a fee for basic life
support (BLS) mileage in the amount of fifteen ($15) dollars per loaded
mile.
a. Lockout Services for Motor Vehicles. Lockout service calls for motor
vehicles shall be provided to City of Asbury Park residents at no charge
up to two (2) times per calendar year. Any resident who exceeds the two
(2) calls per calendar year and any non-resident shall be assessed a fifty
($50) dollar charge for each lockout service call.
§ 2-9.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10.1
1:35
§ 2-10.1. Voluntary Special Duty Assignments for Police Officers and
Fire Fighters. [Ord. No. 2820 § 2-8.22; Ord. No. 2989; Ord. No.
3063; New; Ord. No. 2015-48]
a. Any and all extra duty assignments for police and fire personnel shall be
determined and approved by the appropriate Chief (Police or Fire) or
his/her designee, in consultation with the City Manager. No police
officer or firefighter (hereinafter "officer") shall perform special duty
assignments for private persons or organizations for compensation
other than through the procedure set forth in this subsection.
b. The appropriate Chief shall obtain such information as he/she
determines necessary and is authorized to approve such special duty
work in accordance with this subsection.
c. The appropriate Chief may assign a patrol vehicle or other vehicle for
use in performing extra duty if and in the event it is determined that the
use of such vehicle is necessary and available to perform the contracted
duty. The appropriate Chief may deny the assignment or use of police
officers, firefighters and/or vehicles and/or impose any condition or
requirement as in his/her sole discretion and determination is in the
best interest of the City and/or the officer's or public safety. The Chief
shall be guided by the nature of the assignment and should avoid those
with conflicts of interest and/or high risk of injury.
d. The work to be performed shall be considered a "special assignment
from independent contractors" and will not be considered a direct
assignment. The taking of any and all extra duty assignments covered
under this Chapter shall be on a strictly voluntary basis in accordance
with a fair and reasonable system established and administered by the
Chiefs.
e. Police officers engaged in special duty assignments shall be deemed
"on-duty" and shall conform to all Police Department rules, regulations,
procedures and orders. Firefighters engaged in special duty
assignments shall be deemed "on-duty" and shall conform to all Fire
Department rules, regulations, procedures and orders. All such
agreements for the furnishing of services to any contractor referred to
herein as "special duty assignments for the furnishing of services to any
contractor referred to herein as "special duty assignments" shall be by
written contract between the City and the contractor. No assignment
may be made for such work in the absence of such a written contract.
The contract to be entered into must be the form contract available
from the Police Department and Fire Department and shall be kept on
record as other such public documents.
No amendments to such contracts will be made without the express
written approval of the appropriate Chief.
f. All special duty assignments shall be within the City, unless specific
written approval is given by the appropriate Chief to the officer to work
outside of the City. The appropriate Chief may contact adjoining
§ 2-10.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-10.1
1:36
municipal police departments and/or fire departments to fill such
special assignments if sufficient personnel cannot be found within the
Asbury Park Police Department or Fire Department.
g. All private persons or entities requesting extra duty assignments by
police and/or fire personnel will be required to submit payment, based
on estimates of the work to be done, in advance of services rendered.
The City will "escrow" the monies in a dedicated "special duty account,"
to ensure timely payment to the police or fire personnel subject to the
required deductions, and an administrative fee to be retained by the
City. Those private persons or entities which require continuous service
shall maintain a minimum balance in an amount equal to the average
amount paid to the City's police or fire personnel within a specified
time, either monthly, or quarterly, and shall be billed as necessary to
ensure a sufficient balance at all times. If there are insufficient funds,
services shall be cut off until the fund is replenished. Conversely, the
City shall return any monies in the fund in excess of the cost of the
services to private persons or entities within a reasonable period.
1. Hourly Rate. The hourly rate for Special Duty Assignments shall be
the following for the times identified below:
8:00 a.m. — 11:59
p.m.
12:00 a.m. — 7:59
a.m.
Police Officer: $75 per hour $85 per hour
EMT/Fire
Fighters:
$75 per hour $85 per hour
Fire Inspector: regular overtime rate regular overtime rate
Fire Official: regular overtime rate regular overtime rate
2. Administrative Fees. The City of Asbury Park shall recover a rate of
fifteen ($15) dollars per hour for administrative fees out of the
rates set forth above in Subsection 1.
h. Any dispute between the contractor and the officer on assignments as
to services required or compensation due shall be determined by the
appropriate Chief.
i. Any assignment which is cancelled on less than two (2) hours' notice
shall be charged against the party. The amount charged for late
cancellation shall be the entire duration of the assignment as
contracted for, or four (4) hours, whichever is less.
j. The appropriate Chief has the authority to order any officer to vacate or
terminate any special duty assignment in response to emergency
situations or whenever the assignment creates an unacceptable risk to
the health, safety and welfare of the officer and/or public, which
decision shall be in the sole discretion of the appropriate Chief. The
contractor shall not be responsible for payment for the time that the
officer is away from the special duty assignments due to such a decision
§ 2-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-10.1
1:37
§ 2-11. ENGINEERING.
§ 2-11.1. Appointment; Term; Compensation. [N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140;
New]
The Mayor and Council shall provide for the appointment of a municipal
Engineer and fix his/her compensation in the annual salary ordinance or
on a fixed fee basis or at an hourly rate and based upon actual time and
expenses agreed upon prior to the rendering of the services. No municipal
Engineer shall be compensated by receiving a percentage of the contract
for which he/she renders services. The term of the appointment shall be one
year.
§ 2-12. (RESERVED)
§ 2-13. DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION.
§ 2-13.1. Establishment. [New]
There is created within the City of Asbury Park a Department of Building
and Construction, the head of which shall be the Construction Official.
§ 2-13.2. Construction Official. [N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126; New]
The Construction Official shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall
possess such credentials as required by the Civil Service Commission and
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126.
§ 2-13.3. Staff. [N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126; New]
Staff shall be subcode officials all of whom shall be appointed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126. A subcode official may hold more than one position as
long as they are so qualified. Staff may be full time or part time as directed
by the City Manager.
§ 2-13.4. Duties of the Construction Official. [New]
The duties of the Construction Official shall be to:
of the Chief but shall have no claim whatsoever for any costs or
damages against the City, the Chief, or the officer arising from the
termination of special duty assignment other than the prorated return
of any monies prepaid to the City.
k. The City shall be responsible for providing all necessary insurance
coverage as required by law, including but not limited to workers'
compensation, public liability, and claims for damage, for personal
injury, including death, or damage to property which may arise as a
result from the municipality's performance under the contract.
§ 2-10.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-13.4
1:38
§ 2-14. DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT AND
NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION AND CODE ENFORCEMENT.
§ 2-14.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2016-53]
There is created a Department of Property Improvement and Neighborhood
Preservation and Code Enforcement in the City of Asbury Park.
§ 2-14.2. Director; Appointment. [New; Ord. No. 2016-53]
The head of the Department shall be the Director of Property Improvement
and Neighborhood Preservation and Code Enforcement. The Director of the
Department shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Director shall
provide the City Manager with quarterly reports regarding the Department
goals and accomplishments.
The executive in charge shall be the Code Official.
§ 2-14.3. Staff. [New]
Staff shall consist of a qualified scheduler and Code Inspectors as deemed
necessary by the City Manager.
§ 2-14.4. Duties. [New]
The Department shall be responsible for the enforcement of Chapter XIII,
Property Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation-Property
Maintenance Code, and Chapter XIX, Solid Waste Management.
§ 2-15. (RESERVED)
§ 2-16. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
a. Plan, direct, organize and supervise all inspection activities within the
City including plumbing, electrical, building, public health, air pollution
control and code enforcement;
b. Supervise daily function of the department;
c. Prepare annual budget;
d. Provide the City Manager with quarterly reports regarding goals and
accomplishments;
e. Enforce the New Jersey State Uniform Construction Code;
f. Enforce the provisions of Chapter XII, Building and Construction, of the
City Code.
§ 2-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-16.1
1:39
§ 2-16.1. Establishment. [New]
There is hereby created within the City of Asbury Park a Department of
Public Works.
§ 2-16.2. Superintendent of Public Works; Appointment. [New]
There shall be the office of the Superintendent of Public Works who shall
be certified and act as the Principal Public Works Manager. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall be appointed by the City Manager.
§ 2-16.3. Duties. [New]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall:
§ 2-16.4. Assistant Superintendent of Public Works. [New]
There shall be created the position of Assistant Superintendent of Public
Works who shall act as the Superintendent when the Superintendent is
not available. The Assistant Superintendent of Public Works shall be
responsible for the following duties:
a. Administer all programs and activities of the Public Works Department;
b. Be responsible for the development and implementation of a
comprehensive maintenance program for all City-owned facilities,
property, equipment and natural resources.
c. Supervise all employees of the Public Works Department;
d. Prepare an annual budget;
e. Be responsible for those duties of the Assistant Superintendent when
such office is not established and/or vacant;
f. Supervise the Clean Communities program;
g. Provide quarterly reports to the City Manager with the goals and
accomplishments of the Department.
a. Supervise contracts for refuse removal and other contracts involving
the Department of Public Works;
b. Supervise the enforcement of litter, trash, recycling and refuse
regulations;
c. Be responsible for reporting violations of the Property Maintenance
Code to proper City officials;
d. Shall pursue grants relevant to the Department;
e. Be responsible for the supervision of the Department in the absence of
the Superintendent.
§ 2-16.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-16.5
1:40
§ 2-16.5. Department Organization. [Ord. No. 2961; New]
There shall be within the Department of Public Works the following:
§ 2-17. DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND REDEVELOPMENT.
§ 2-17.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2718; Ord. No. 2795; Ord. No.
2867]
The Department of Planning and Redevelopment (the "Department") within
the City of Asbury Park is hereby created. The head of the Department
shall be the Director of Planning and Redevelopment. The Department shall
consist of the following divisions:
§ 2-17.2. Director of Planning and Redevelopment. [Ord. No. 2633;
Ord. No. 2718]
a. Buildings and Grounds.
b. Traffic, Signs and Striping.
c. Roads and Sewers.
d. Fleet Operations.
e. Parks.
f. Wastewater Treatment Operations.
g. Solid Waste and Recycling.
a. Planning.
b. Redevelopment.
a. Appointment. The Director of Planning and Redevelopment shall be
appointed by the City Manager. The Director of Planning and
Redevelopment shall also hold the title and/or duties as found in
Chapter III, Land Development, as: Administrative officer; Development
Coordinator. [Amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
b. Qualifications. The Director shall be qualified by education and
experience and shall possess, at a minimum, the following qualifications
prior to his or her appointment by the City Manager.
1. The Director shall be a licensed professional planner in the State of
New Jersey.
2. The Director shall have at least five (5) years of full-time experience
in the fields of planning, zoning, development and/or
redevelopment.
§ 2-16.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17.2
1:41
§ 2-17.3. Functions of the Department. [Ord. No. 2718; Ord. No.
2795; Ord. No. 2867; New]
The Department, under the supervision of the Director of Planning and
Redevelopment, shall perform or supervise all appropriate functions
associated with the following:
The City Manager may waive any of the requirements set forth
above when, in his or her judgment, the best interests of the City
shall be served thereby.
3. The Director shall possess certification from the American Institute
of Certified Planners (AICP). [Added 12-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-39]
c. Compensation. The Director shall receive such compensation as shall
be set forth by ordinance of the City Council.
d. The Director of Planning and Redevelopment shall also be known as the
City Planner. [Added 11-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-46]
a. Professional services relating to all planning, zoning, development and
redevelopment matters within the City. Such services shall be available
to the Mayor and Council, the Redevelopment Entity, the Technical
Review Committee, the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as well as to City staff members and the public.
b. Preparation and submission of grant applications.
c. Drafting of land use ordinances, including amendments thereto,
concerning development regulations within the City.
d. Drafting of redevelopment plans and the preparation of preliminary
investigation reports pursuant to the New Jersey Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
e. Issuance of zoning permits and certificates of zoning compliance.
f. Receipt, completeness review, processing of all development or
redevelopment applications and subsequently forwarding the
applications to the applicable board secretaries, federal, state or county
or municipal office or other offices as required, for development within
the City [Amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
g. Maintaining a central system of filing of applications for development
within the City.
h. Maintaining and having available for public inspection and purchase
copies of the City Zoning Map, Land Development Regulations,
Redevelopment Plans, Master Plans and other planning related
documents.
§ 2-17.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-17.3
1:42
§ 2-17.4. Organization of Department; Requirements. [Ord. No.
2718; Ord. No. 2795; Ord. No. 2867; New]
The internal organization of the Department shall be as recommended
by the Director of Planning and Redevelopment, and as approved by the
City Manager. In addition to the Director of Planning and Redevelopment,
the Department may include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the
following administrative personnel: the Zoning Officer also known as the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Development Coordinator and the
Assistant Planner (all of whom may be the same person), who shall be
appointed by the City Manager, and such other personnel whose positions
may be established by the Mayor and Council and who shall be appointed
by the City Manager. All additional staff of the Department shall possess
such qualifications as are required for the particular position by the Civil
Service Commission, where applicable, and shall perform such duties as
are prescribed by the Civil Service Commission for the particular position,
where applicable, and/or as directed by the Director of Planning and
Redevelopment and/or City Manager. All staff of the Department, including
the Director of Planning and Redevelopment, shall be governed by Civil
Service Commission requirements, where applicable, as well as those
provisions set forth in any applicable collective bargaining agreements, and
shall receive such compensation as shall be set forth by ordinance of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 2-17.5. Division of Planning and Zoning. [Ord. No. 2718; Ord. No.
2795; Ord. No. 2867]
i. Such other related responsibilities as may be assigned by the City
Manager which are necessary for the conduct of City business.
[Amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
j. Shall supply the City Manager with quarterly reports on the
department's goals and accomplishments.
k. In the prolonged absence of the Director of Planning and
Redevelopment, the respective Zoning Board and Planning Board
Planner shall serve as the Administrative Officer and Development
Coordinator or designee of the City Manager. If that individual or firm is
not available, then the respective Board Secretary shall serve as the
Administrative Officer and Development Coordinator or designee of the
City Manager. [Added 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
a. There shall be within the Department of Planning and Redevelopment a
Division of Planning and Zoning.
b. The Division of Planning and Zoning, under the supervision of the
Director of Planning and Redevelopment, shall be responsible for the
following duties:
1. Administering all planning and zoning activities within the City, as
prescribed by applicable laws and local ordinances. Such activities
§ 2-17.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-17.5
1:43
§ 2-17.6. Division of Redevelopment. [Ord. No. 2718]
shall include enforcement of the zoning ordinances of the City
and monitoring and enforcing compliance with all requirements
imposed upon developers by the various boards and agencies of the
City, and performance of all activities as set forth in Chapter 30,
Land Development Regulations.
2. Providing assistance to developers regarding pending or
prospective development applications, and coordinating
development applications between the respective Boards and
agencies within the City.
3. Coordinating with City professionals and staff members regarding
development applications.
4. Providing in-house planning advice and services to the City's
boards, agencies, professionals and staff members.
5. Such other related responsibilities as may be assigned by the
Director of Planning and Redevelopment and/or the City Manager,
and/or which are necessary for the conduct of City business.
a. There shall be within the Department of Planning and Redevelopment a
Division of Redevelopment.
b. The Division of Redevelopment, under the supervision of the Director of
Planning and Redevelopment, shall be responsible for the following
duties:
1. Drafting of redevelopment plans, preparing preliminary
investigation reports and such other matters as are required
pursuant to the New Jersey Local Redevelopment and Housing
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
2. Providing assistance to developers and the public with
interpretation of Redevelopment Ordinances, Plans and/or
requirements, and providing information regarding local
regulations and application procedures.
3. Coordination and supervision of development applications within
redevelopment areas designated by the City.
4. Interfacing with all redevelopers and potential redevelopers within
the City and monitoring developer responsibilities, including
compliance with adopted Redevelopment Plans and/or Redeveloper
Agreements.
5. Providing assistance with and overseeing the implementation of
Redevelopment Plans within the City.
§ 2-17.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-17.6
1:44
§ 2-18. SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-18.1. Establishment. [2000 Code § 2-13.1; Ord. No. 2795; New]
A Department of Social Services for the City is hereby established. The head
of the Department shall be the Director of Social Services. The Department
shall be responsible for Senior Services, Human Services and Health
Services.
§ 2-18.2. Director. [2000 Code §§ 2-13.2, 2-13.6; Ord. No. 2795;
New]
§ 2-18.3. Senior Services. [2000 Code § 2-13.4; New]
6. Such other related responsibilities as may be assigned by the
Director of Planning and Redevelopment and/or the City Manager,
and/or which are necessary for the conduct of City business.
a. The Director shall be appointed by the City Manager. The Director of
the Department of Social Services shall, prior to his appointment, be
qualified by professional training in public health or public welfare and
shall be further qualified by experience in responsible administration.
The City Manager may waive any of the requirements set forth above
when, in their judgment, the best interest of the City shall be served
thereby.
The Director's compensation shall be such sum as shall be fixed by
ordinance of Council.
b. The Director, through the divisions and otherwise may:
1. Coordinate and supervise all of the social and human services in
relation to all of the socially dependent population and activities of
the City government.
2. Administer State laws and ordinances relating to senior citizens
including, but not limited to recreational activities, housing and
health issues.
3. Administer State laws and ordinances relating to public health.
4. Maintain a continuous study of social services in the City, and from
time to time recommend to the Mayor and Council appropriate
plans and programs for the protection and improvement of the
health and welfare of the people of the City.
5. Coordinate liaison with the Monmouth County Health Department.
6. Provide quarterly reports to the City Manager with the
department's goals and accomplishments.
7. Publicize and disseminate information on drug abuse services,
education and assistance available to citizens within the City.
§ 2-17.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-18.3
1:45
§ 2-18.4. Human Services. [2000 Code § 2-13.5; New]
§ 2-18.5. Health Services.
§ 2-19. DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION.
§ 2-19.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2795]
There is hereby created within the City of Asbury Park a Department of
Recreation, the head of which shall be the Recreation Director.
§ 2-19.2. Director. [Ord. No. 2795]
a. There shall be within the Department of Social Services a Division of
Senior Services, the head of which shall be the Supervisor, Division of
Senior Services.
b. The Division of Senior Services, under the supervision of the Director of
the Department of Social Services, shall be responsible for the
following duties:
1. Administer Old Age Assistance laws and local ordinances relating
to senior citizens;
2. Provide related social services including a senior citizen center,
counseling, and other public welfare activities;
3. Administer and implement a comprehensive social and recreational
program for senior citizens of the City;
4. Publicize and disseminate information on recreational activities
and services available to senior citizens within the City.
a. There shall be within the Department of Social Services a Human
Services office responsible for the following:
1. Plan, initiate, organize, direct and execute City programs for the
delivery of social services;
2. Publicize and disseminate information on the social services,
activities, and opportunities available to residents of the City;
3. Provide counseling, medical and mental health and substance
abuse interventions;
4. Administer laws and local ordinances relating to drug abuse and
drug awareness programs.
a. There shall be within the Department of Social Services a Health
Services office responsible for those duties as established in Chapter
28, Health Regulations.
§ 2-18.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-19.2
1:46
§ 2-19.3. Organization; Additional Staff. [Ord. No. 2795; New]
The internal organization of the Department shall be as recommended
by the Director, and as approved by the City Manager. In addition to
the Director, the Department may include, but shall not necessarily be
limited to, the following additional personnel: one Program Specialist. and
numerous Recreation Leaders, all of whom shall be appointed by the City
Manager, along with any additional personnel whose positions may be
established by the Mayor and Council from time to time and who shall
be appointed by the City Manager. Where applicable, all staff of the
Department shall possess such qualifications as are required for the
particular position by the Civil Service Commission, and shall perform such
duties as are prescribed by the Civil Service Commission for the particular
position and/or as directed by the Recreation Director and/or City Manager.
All staff of the Department shall be governed by Civil Service Commission,
where applicable, as well as those provisions set forth in any applicable,
collective bargaining agreements, and shall receive such compensation as
shall be set forth by ordinance of the Mayor and Council.
a. The Director of the Department of Recreation shall be appointed by the
City Manager, and shall be qualified for appointment by education,
professional training and/or experience, and shall possess such
qualifications as are required for the position by the Civil Service
Commission.
b. The Director shall report to the City Manager.
c. The Director's compensation shall be such sum as shall be fixed by
ordinance of the Council.
d. The Director shall be responsible for the following duties:
1. Planning, initiating, coordinating, organizing, directing, executing
and supervising all of the City's recreational programs, functions
and activities.
2. Administering and implementing a comprehensive recreational
program for the children and citizens of the City.
3. Publicizing and disseminating information on the recreational
activities and services available within the City.
4. Such other duties as are prescribed by the N.J.D.O.P. for the
position.
5. Such other responsibilities as may be assigned to him or her by the
City Manager, and/or which are necessary for the efficient conduct
of the Department of Recreation.
6. Provide the City Manager with quarterly reports on the
department's goals and accomplishments.
§ 2-19.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-20
1:47
§ 2-20. (RESERVED)
Editor's Note: The Department of Commerce, previously codified at Section
2-20, was repealed in entirety by Ord. No. 2015-45.
§ 2-21. (RESERVED)
§ 2-22. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNICATIONS.
§ 2-22.1. Establishment. [New; Ord. No. 2015-45]
There is established a Department of Communications, the head of which
shall be the Director of the Department of Communications. The
Department shall consist of those offices as established by ordinance of the
Mayor and Council. Appointments shall be made by the City Manager with
the advice and consent of the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-22.2. Duties and Responsibilities. [New; Ord. No. 2015-45]
The Director of the Department of Communications shall be responsible for
the following:
a. Managing and directing communications with:
1. City employees;
2. City residents;
3. City businesses;
4. General public.
b. City website;
c. Media inquiries;
d. Serve as the Public Information Officer as required by the Office of
Emergency Management during an emergency or at any time as
directed by the City Manager;
e. Branding campaigns;
f. Digital, internet, social media and print marketing campaigns;
g. Support and manage the City's computer systems including the
maintenance and upgrades for hardware and equipment;
h. Provide user training for employees;
i. Oversee the Asbury Park TV Board of Commissioners;
j. Develop, coordinate, implement and supervise the City's workforce
development initiative, including the potential creation and
implementation of a plan to assist City residents in obtaining
§ 2-20 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-22.2
1:48
§ 2-23. through § 2-29. (RESERVED)
employment and/or to counsel City residents as to how they may best
be able to obtain the skills and/or credentials needed for meaningful
employment.
k. Provide the City Manager with quarterly reports as to the Department's
goals and accomplishments.
§ 2-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-23
1:49

ARTICLE VI
Miscellaneous Municipal Offices
§ 2-30. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.
Editor's Note: See also Chapter 3, Police Regulations, Section 3-25 for
provisions concerning Declaration of a State of Emergency or Disaster.
§ 2-30.1. Findings and Purpose. [2000 Code § 2-39.1; New]
Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of
disasters and emergencies of unprecedented size and destructiveness
resulting from enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from
fire, flood, earthquake or other natural causes, and in order to insure the
preparations of this City will be adequate to deal with such disasters, and
generally to provide for the common defense and to protect the public
peace, health and safety, and to preserve the lives and property of the
people of this City it is hereby found and declared to be necessary:
§ 2-30.2. Appointment of Emergency Management Coordinator.
[2000 Code § 2-39.2; New]
The Mayor shall appoint a City resident to the position of Emergency
Management Coordinator pursuant to N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.1 et seq. who
shall serve for a term of three (3) years.
§ 2-30.3. Deputy Emergency Management Coordinators. [2000 Code
§ 2-39.3]
The Emergency Management Coordinator shall appoint such Deputy
Emergency Management Coordinators as are required in his/her judgment,
a. To create the position of Emergency Management Coordinator for the
City within the Office of Emergency Management.
b. To create an Emergency Management Council.
c. To provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other cities and
municipalities within the State of New Jersey.
It is further declared to be the purpose of this section and the policy
of the City, that all emergency management functions of this City be
coordinated to the maximum extent with the comparable functions of
the State government, including its various departments and agencies,
of other cities and localities, and of private agencies of every type, to
the end that the most effective preparation and use may be made of this
City's manpower, resources and facilities for dealing with any disaster
that may occur.
It is further declared to be the purpose of this section and the policy
of this City, to organize its emergency management organization in
conformity with N.J.S.A. App. A:9-40.1 et seq.
§ 2-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-30.3
1:51
with the approval of the Mayor. At least one such deputy shall be appointed
from among the salaried officers or employees of the City.
§ 2-30.4. Responsibilities of the Emergency Management
Coordinator; Succession of Office. [2000 Code § 2-39.4; New]
§ 2-30.5. Proclamation of State of Emergency; Powers of
Coordinator. [2000 Code § 2-39.5; New]
Whenever, in his/her opinion, a disaster has occurred or is imminent in
the City, the Emergency Management Coordinator shall proclaim a State
and local disaster emergency within the City. The Emergency Management
Coordinator, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the State
Director of Emergency Management, shall be empowered to issue and
enforce such orders as may be necessary to implement and carry out
emergency management operations and to protect the health, safety and
resources of the residents of the City.
§ 2-30.6. Aid in Time of Disaster. [2000 Code § 2-39.6]
No representative of the City shall request aid in time of disaster or
emergency directly from noncontiguous municipalities nor shall the City
send personnel or equipment into a disaster or emergency stricken
municipality unless and until such aid has been directed by the County
Emergency Management Coordinator or his Deputy. Specific exemptions
from the action of this section may be granted only by authority of the State
Director of Emergency Management.
§ 2-30.7. Emergency Management Council. [2000 Code § 2-39.7;
New]
The Emergency Management Council shall be composed of not more than
fifteen (15) members, who shall be appointed by the Coordinator and shall
hold office at the will and pleasure of the Coordinator. The Emergency
Management Coordinator shall be a member and shall serve as Chairman of
the Emergency Management Council. The Emergency Management Council
shall perform such duties as required in accordance with N.J.S.A. Appendix
A:9-40.6.
Members of the Council may include the following:
a. Responsibilities. The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be
responsible for the planning, activating, coordinating, and the conduct
of emergency management operations within the City, including the
compilation and implementation of the Emergency Operation Plan. The
Emergency Management Coordinator may declare a State of
Emergency within the City of Asbury Park.
b. Succession. In all cases if the Emergency Management Coordinator is
not available, the succession of the command shall be the Deputy
Emergency Management Coordinators followed by the City Manager.
§ 2-30.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-30.7
1:52
The Mayor,
Communications Director,
Members of the business community,
Representatives from the Housing Authority, Department of Public Works,
Department of Social Services, Police Department, Fire Department,
Religious leaders,
Board of Education or school system,
Beach Department,
Salvation Army.
§ 2-31. through § 2-34. (RESERVED)
§ 2-30.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-31
1:53

ARTICLE VII
Municipal Court
§ 2-35. MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-35.1. Established. [2000 Code § 2-35.1]
A Municipal Court for the City is established pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1.
§ 2-35.2. Name. [2000 Code § 2-35.2]
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the Municipal Court of the City of
Asbury Park.
§ 2-35.3. Seal. [2000 Code § 2-35.3]
The Municipal Court shall have a seal, which shall bear the impress of the
name of the Court.
§ 2-35.4. Judge. [2000 Code § 2-35.4]
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, appointed by the City
Council, who shall serve for a term of three (3) years from the date of his/
her appointment and until his/her successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 2-35.5. Salary. [2000 Code § 2-35.5]
The salary of the Judge of the Municipal Court shall be set by the Mayor and
Council in the salary ordinance and shall be in lieu of all fees, cost and other
allowances.
§ 2-35.6. Jurisdiction. [2000 Code § 2-35.6]
The Municipal Court and the Judge of the Municipal Court thereof shall
have, possess and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction
conferred by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq. or by any other law.
§ 2-35.7. Court Administrator. [2000 Code § 2-35.7]
There shall be the office of Court Administrator. The Mayor and Council
may, by ordinance, fix the term of office and annual salary of the Court
Administrator. The salary paid the Court Administrator shall be in lieu of all
fees, cost and any other allowances.
§ 2-35.8. Court Location. [2000 Code § 2-35.8]
The Municipal Court shall be held in such City location and at such time as
the Mayor and Council shall designate by resolution; subject, however, to
the rules applicable to Municipal Courts.
§ 2-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-35.8
1:55

ARTICLE VIII
Authorities, Boards, Commissions, Committees and Volunteers
§ 2-36. APPOINTMENTS TO CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS,
AGENCIES AND COMMITTEES; REGISTRY OF POSITIONS; OPEN
PUBLIC MEETINGS.
§ 2-36.1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2783]
The purpose of this section is to foster the openness of government and
provide citizens with information concerning the various appointed
municipal positions which exist within the City of Asbury Park. This section
further provides for a procedure whereby a citizen can indicate his/her
desire to serve in a particular appointed position. Finally, this section
provides for a notification process so that those citizens who have indicated
a desire to hold a position will be notified as to when that position is under
consideration for appointment, and will ultimately be notified as to the
action that was taken to fill the position.
§ 2-36.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2783]
As used in this section:
APPOINTED MUNICIPAL POSITION — shall mean any appointed position
within the City government, which is created either by statutory law or by
ordinance or resolution. Examples of such positions include members of any
Board, Commission, Agency or Committee of the City of Asbury Park.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — shall mean the official or body which by virtue
of statutory law or by ordinance or resolution is given the authority to
appoint a person to hold a particular appointed municipal position.
§ 2-36.3. Registry of Appointed Municipal Positions. [Ord. No.
2783]
The City Clerk shall cause a register of Appointed Municipal Positions to
be prepared and maintained within the City. Such register shall be made
available on the City's website and at City Hall and shall set forth at least
the following:
a. Title of each Appointed Municipal Position;
b. Brief description of the position's powers and duties;
c. Any special credentials or qualifications required to hold the position;
d. The length of term for the position;
e. The name of the person currently holding the position, the expiration
date of his or her term, and the number of vacant seats on the Board or
Commission; and
§ 2-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-36.3
1:57
§ 2-36.4. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 2783]
The City Clerk shall maintain a current updated listing of all existing
vacancies for each Appointed Municipal Position within the municipality.
Such list shall be made available free of charge at the City Clerk's Office and
shall, in addition, be posted by the City Clerk on a bulletin board maintained
for public announcements in City Hall.
§ 2-36.5. Filling Vacancies. [Ord. No. 2783]
Unless essential for the proper functioning and/or carrying on of business
of the local Board, Commission, Agency or Committee upon which the
vacancy has occurred, a vacancy shall not be filled for a period of thirty (30)
days from its posting in order to allow interested persons time to submit
applications as provided in Section 2-36.6 below.
§ 2-36.6. Applications. [Ord. No. 2783]
The City Clerk shall maintain an application form to be completed by
any person interested in serving in an Appointed Municipal Position. Such
application shall, at a minimum contain the following information:
§ 2-36.7. Filing Applications. [Ord. No. 2783]
Any person interested in serving in an Appointed Municipal Position may
file an application for such position with the City Clerk. Such application(s)
may be filed at any time, whether or not the Appointed Municipal Position
sought is vacant. A person may withdraw his or her application at any time.
§ 2-36.8. Maintaining Applications. [Ord. No. 2783]
The City Clerk shall maintain all filed applications in a file or binder,
segregated for each Board, Commission, Agency or Committee.
Applications shall be considered void after two (2) years unless renewed by
the applicant.
f. The dates/times and frequency of any meetings which the holder of the
position must attend.
a. Name;
b. Address;
c. Telephone number;
d. Email address;
e. Appointed Municipal Position sought;
f. Qualifications/experience for position; and
g. Signature.
§ 2-36.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-36.9
1:58
§ 2-36.9. Filling Voluntary Municipal Positions. [Ord. No. 2783;
New]
Prior to filling any Appointed Municipal Position, the appropriate
Appointing Authority shall review each application filed for that position.
Each person having submitted an application for an Appointed Municipal
Position under consideration to be filled shall be notified of said vacancy.
The Appointing Authority shall conduct such review, investigation and/or
interviews as the Appointing Authority deems necessary or advisable, in
its discretion. Consideration should be given to persons currently serving
as alternates to fill non-alternate vacancies. After a decision is reached to
fill a vacant Appointed Municipal Position, all those who had submitted an
application for that position shall be notified of the Appointing Authority's
decision.
§ 2-36.10. Open Public Meetings; Minutes Required. [New]
All meetings of boards, commissions, committees, authorities and other
volunteer functions who meet the definition of "public body" under N.J.S.A.
40:4-8 are subject to the New Jersey Open Public Meetings Act, including
the requirements to post and notice all meetings. Minutes of all meetings
shall be maintained and after the minutes are approved by that body,
the minutes shall be submitted to the City Clerk for appropriate record
retention. All meetings shall comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et
seq., the Senator Byron M. Baer Open Public Meetings Act.
Meetings of all other advisory committees and bodies, regardless of method
of appointment, who are not mandated by law to abide by the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq., shall keep minutes of all of their meetings showing
the time and place, the members present, the subjects considered, the
actions taken, and the vote of each member. Minutes shall be provided
to the City Clerk within sixty days of the meeting for which they were
recorded.
§ 2-37. HOUSING AUTHORITY.
§ 2-37.1. Findings. [2000 Code § 2-36.1]
a. There exists in the City unsanitary or unsafe dwelling accommodations,
and persons of low income are forced to reside in such unsanitary or
unsafe accommodations; and in the City there is a shortage of safe or
sanitary dwelling accommodations available at rents which persons of
low income can afford and such persons are forced to occupy
overcrowded and congested dwelling accommodations. The aforesaid
conditions cause an increase in and spread of disease and crime and
constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, and welfare of the
City residents and impair economic values; and those conditions
necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditures of public funds
for crime prevention and punishment, public health and safety, fire and
accident protection, and other public services and facilities.
§ 2-36.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-37.1
1:59
§ 2-37.2. Creation. [2000 Code § 2-36.2]
Pursuant to the provisions of the Local Housing Authorities Law of the State
of New Jersey, a body corporate to be known as the Housing Authority of
the City of Asbury Park is created and established. The City Clerk shall file a
certified copy of this section with the Executive Officer of the State Housing
Authority. The members of the Authority shall be appointed pursuant to law.
§ 2-37.3. Membership. [N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., New]
The Local Housing Authority shall consist of seven members who shall
each serve for a term of five years. Membership of the Authority shall
consist of the following: One (1) member appointed by the Commissioner
of Community Affairs, one member appointed by the Mayor, and five (5)
members appointed by the City Council. Members shall be appointed and
shall complete the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
§ 2-37.4. Redevelopment Projects to Be Carried Out by Mayor and
Council. [2000 Code § 2-36.4; New]
b. These City areas cannot be cleared, nor can the shortage of safe and
sanitary dwellings for persons of low income be relieved through the
operation of private enterprise; and the construction of housing
projects for persons of low-income, as defined in the Local Housing
Authorities Law, would therefore not be competitive with private
enterprise.
c. The clearance, replanning and reconstruction of the areas in which
unsanitary or unsafe housing conditions exist and the providing of safe
and sanitary dwelling accommodations by any public body for persons
of low income are public uses and purposes, for which public money
may be spent and private property acquired, and are government
functions.
d. It is in the public interest that work on projects for such purposes be
commenced as soon as possible in order to relieve unemployment.
a. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:14A-50 et seq. the power
previously granted to the Housing Authority of the City is herewith
amended to rescind the power to carry out redevelopment projects in
the City.
b. The Mayor and City Council reserve to themselves the right to carry out
redevelopment projects and authorize the Mayor and Council to act as
the redevelopment entity as set forth in Law 1956, c. 211, and other
laws.
c. The Clerk be, and hereby is, authorized and directed to serve and file a
certified copy of this subsection with the appropriate governmental
bodies, as necessary, including service of a copy of this subsection upon
the Housing Authority of the City.
§ 2-37.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-38
1:60
§ 2-38. SPRINGWOOD AVENUE BROWNFIELD DEVELOPMENT
AREA STEERING COMMITTEE.
§ 2-38.1. Membership. [New]
Membership on the Springwood Avenue Brownfield Development Area
Steering Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council. Members
shall serve for a term of five years or concurrent with their term of office
in the appropriate position. The Director of the Department of Planning and
Redevelopment shall serve as the Chairperson. The Committee shall consist
of the following appointments:
Mayor
City Manager,
Director and Planning and Redevelopment Department,
Board of Education member,
Planning Board member,
Representative from the STARS Community Development Corporation, and
Such private and professional persons as appointed by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 2-38.2. Responsibilities. [New]
The Springwood Avenue Brownfield Development Area Steering Committee
shall pursue the goals and abide by the guidelines as stated in the
Memorandum of Understanding with the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection as signed by the City on January 10, 2013. The
Memorandum of Understanding may be found in the City offices.
§ 2-39. LOCAL HISTORIAN.
§ 2-39.1. Position of City Historian Established. [2000 Code
§ 2-21.1]
a. The position of City Historian of the City of Asbury Park is hereby
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:10A-4.
b. The City Historian shall serve without compensation but the Mayor and
Council may annually appropriate such funds as may be necessary to
reimburse the City Historian for expenses incurred in the performance
of the duties and responsibilities set forth in this section.
c. The City Historian shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall
report to and be under the City Manager's supervision.
§ 2-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-39.2
1:61
§ 2-39.2. Powers and Responsibilities of the City Historian. [2000
Code § 2-21.2]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:10A-7, the powers and responsibilities of the City
Historian shall be as follows:
§ 2-40. PLANNING BOARD; ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
See Chapter XXX, Land Development Regulations, for the establishment
of and appointments to the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 2-41. ENVIRONMENTAL/SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
§ 2-41.1. Creation. [2000 Code § 2-41.1]
There is hereby created an Environmental/Shade Tree Commission for the
protection, development or use of the natural resources located within the
a. To carry out an historical program, including, but not restricted to,
collecting, preserving and making available materials relating to the
history of the City of Asbury Park. The historian shall store such
materials in such manner as to insure their preservation, and shall
notify the State Archivist, New Jersey Historical Commission, county
local historian and local governing body of any materials which should
be acquired for preservation. Upon leaving the position, the City
Historian shall turn over all materials and records and reports into the
possession of the successor, if then appointed, or to the governing body
until a successor shall be appointed;
b. The local historian shall make an annual report to the City Manager and
the Mayor and Council of the City of Asbury Park stating all the work
performed and accomplished during that year. The City Historian shall
transmit a copy of such report to the New Jersey Historical
Commission. The New Jersey Historical Commission may advise the
City Historian of general guidelines along which their historical
program may be implemented;
c. The City Historian may research, write and cause to have published a
municipal history, and may recommend appropriate historical materials
for publication;
d. The City Historian may assist a landmark commission, as well as advise
the governing body, concerning the acquisition, administration, use and
disposition of any landmark, or historic site, including such places in his
jurisdiction included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places.
Such advice may be furnished to the Historic Sites Section, Department
of Environmental Protection;
e. The City Historian shall assist in projects of commemoration, including
the erection of monuments, historic markers and guide signs.
§ 2-39.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-41.1
1:62
territorial limits of the City pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
et seq.
§ 2-41.2. Membership; Alternates. [2000 Code § 2-41.2; Ord. No.
2697]
The Commission shall consist of seven (7) regular and two (2) alternate
members appointed by the Mayor and Council. One (1) of the regular
members shall also be a member of the Planning Board. All members shall
be residents of the City and shall serve without compensation except as
hereinafter provided. The Commission shall designate one of the regular
members to serve as Chairperson and presiding officer of the Commission.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Alternate members shall serve
during the absence or disqualification of any regular member or members.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 2-41.3. Term of Office. [2000 Code § 2-41.3; Ord. No. 2697]
The terms of office of the Commission members shall be for five (5) years or
until the appointment and qualification of their successors.
§ 2-41.4. Removal of Member; Hearing. [2000 Code § 2-41.4]
The City Council may remove any members for cause, on written charges
served upon the member and after a hearing thereof at which the member
shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. A vacancy on the
Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled
for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
§ 2-41.5. Authority. [2000 Code § 2-41.5]
The Commission shall have the following powers, notwithstanding the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
a. Promote the conservation and development of the natural resources
and environment of the City.
b. Plan, implement, and inform the public about local environmental
problems.
c. Conduct research into the use and development of lands in the City, and
coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
purposes.
d. Recommend to the Mayor and Council and to the Planning Board plans
and programs for inclusion in the City's Municipal Master Plan for the
use and further development of the City.
§ 2-41.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-41.5
1:63
e. Recommend to such other boards and agencies of the City as may be
requested by such individual boards and agencies.
f. Study and make recommendations as to those areas relating to the
preservation, management and control of water resources, air pollution
control, solid and liquid waste management, noise control, soil and
landscape protection, environmental appearance and for the protection
of flora and fauna throughout the City.
g. Advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets which, in the judgment of the Commission, it deems
necessary to carry out the purposes expressed in this section.
h. Manage donated or purchased lands, under the advice and consent of
the Council, for conservation and environmental purposes and conduct
environmental education programs.
i. Act as a coordinating agency for the City on conservation and
environmental matters and as liaison between the City, the region,
County, State, Federal and other agencies which may be administering
to such needs, including but not limited to, with the advice and consent
of Council, the application for grants, aids, loans and other
developmental environmental aids which may be available from time to
time through County, Federal, State and other agencies.
j. Act in an advisory capacity whenever requested by the Mayor and
Council to deal with specific problems within the purview of the
Environmental Commission.
k. Provide for the accumulation of records as to areas of concern of both
publicly and privately held properties in order to obtain information on
the future use and development of such areas and for the maintenance
of standards to be applied by the City whenever dealing with
environmental matters.
l. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located, or
which may hereafter be planted in any public highway, park or parkway,
except such as are excluded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 in the City,
including the planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof.
m. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
n. Move or require the removal of any tree, or part thereof, dangerous to
public safety. For the safe passage of trucks and emergency vehicles all
trees are to be trimmed to a height of fourteen (14) feet above the
roadway.
o. Administer treatment to, or remove, any tree situated upon private
property which is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily
communicable to neighboring healthy trees in the care of the
§ 2-41.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-41.5
1:64
§ 2-41.6. Acquisitions by Commission. [2000 Code § 2-41.6]
The Commission may, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council,
acquire property, both real and personal, in the name of the City by gift,
purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes and shall
administer the same for such purposes subject to the terms of the
conveyance or gift. Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or
any lesser interest development right, easement (including a conveyance
on conditions or with limitations or reversions), as may be necessary to
acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use or otherwise
conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and water areas
in the City.
§ 2-41.7. Records and Annual Report. [2000 Code § 2-41.7]
The Environmental Commission shall keep records of its meetings and
activities and make an annual report to the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-41.8. Appropriations. [2000 Code § 2-41.8]
The Mayor and Council may, from time to time, fix, determine and
appropriate a sum sufficient for the care and maintenance of such property
acquired for the uses and purposes herein stated, and for expenses of the
Commission which shall be raised by taxation in the same manner as other
taxes and shall be provided for in the annual budget.
§ 2-42. (RESERVED)
§ 2-43. PUBLIC ART COMMISSION.
Editor's Note: The Public Art Committee was replaced by the Public Art
Commission by Ord. No. 2017-44
§ 2-43.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2017-44]
There is hereby established a Public Art Commission in and for the City of
Asbury Park in accordance with the provisions of this Section.
§ 2-43.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2017-44]
The purpose of the Public Art Commission is to facilitate the development of
public art, including but not limited to murals, within the City, recognizing
municipality and enter upon private property for that purpose, with the
consent of the owner thereof, provided the suspected condition is first
confirmed by certificate issued by or on behalf of the Department of
Agriculture.
p. Recommend the passage, alteration, amendment and repeal of
ordinances by the Mayor and Council and any and all ordinances
necessary or proper for carrying out the provisions hereof.
§ 2-41.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-43.2
1:65
such as integral to the vibrancy of the community. The Commission shall
ensure that public art contributions to the City will complement the
building(s) or neighborhood(s) with which they are associated, as well
as complement current strategies for economic development and tourism,
enhance neighborhood and community identity, and educate children and
adults alike.
§ 2-43.3. Composition; Appointment; Alternate Members. [Ord. No.
2017-44]
The Public Art Commission shall consist of nine (9) regular and two (2)
alternate members, who shall serve without compensation, as appointed by
the Mayor and Council. The membership shall include the City Manager or
his/her designee, one representative of the City Council, five (5) members
of the public who are residents of the City or part of the City's business
community, and two (2) individuals who are representatives of art, tourism
or cultural organizations that may be based within or outside of the City.
The Commission shall designate one of its regular members to serve as
Chairperson and presiding officer of the Commission on an annual basis.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Alternate members shall serve
during the absence or disqualification of any regular member or members.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead
of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 2-43.4. Term of Office. [Ord. No. 2017-44]
The term of office of regular members of the Public Art Commission shall
be for three (3) years, and the term of office of alternate members shall be
for two (2) years. Any vacancy occurring other than by the expiration of a
term shall be filled for the unexpired term only, in the same manner as the
original term.
The terms of the regular Commission members first appointed shall be for
a period of 1, 2, and 3 years, respectively, in such manner that the terms of
at least two (2) regular Commission members and not more than three (3)
regular Commission members shall expire in each year, so as to commence
the staggering of terms. Thereafter, all appointments of regular members
shall be for a term of three (3) years.
§ 2-43.5. Removal of Member; Hearing. [Ord. No. 2017-44]
Any member of the Public Art Commission may be removed by the Mayor
and Council for cause on written charges served upon the member and after
a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel.
§ 2-43.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-43.6
1:66
§ 2-43.6. Rules of Procedure; Design Guidelines; Meetings. [Ord.
No. 2017-44]
The Public Art Commission may establish rules of procedure and design
guidelines for its use.
The Public Art Commission shall establish a schedule of its regular meetings
on an annual basis. A quorum required to take action at Commission
meetings shall be a majority of the full authorized membership of the
Commission.
All Public Art Commission meetings shall be subject to the New Jersey Open
Public Meetings Act, including the requirement of posting and notification
of all meetings. Minutes of all meetings shall be maintained and
Commission approved minutes shall be submitted to the City Clerk for
appropriate record keeping.
§ 2-43.7. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2017-44]
The Public Art Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
a. The power to commission and oversee the creation of art work where
appropriate on both municipal and private property at the directive of
the City Manager or the Mayor and Council.
b. The power to hear and review applications for the creation of public art
within the City, including the erection, painting and/or installation of
murals (as defined below), and the power to render decisions regarding
the issuance or denial of permits therefor. The review process is
outlined in Section 4-18 of the Code of the City of Asbury Park.
c. The power to advise the Mayor and Council, the Redevelopment Entity,
the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and other
agencies of the City with regard to matters which affect the creation of
public art within the City, including the erection, painting and/or
installation of murals or streetscapes.
d. The power to create a non-exclusive list of spaces that are eligible and
appropriate for the potential location and siting of murals within the
City.
e. The power to develop, and to regularly review and update, a public art
plan and public art guidelines, which identify, among other things,
appropriate spaces and appropriate mediums, respectively, for public
art within the City.
f. The power to review and recommend public art projects.
g. The power to make recommendations regarding any issues that may
arise from a specific public artwork or art project.
h. The power to undertake any other duties or activities that may be
assigned to it by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-43.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-43.8
1:67
§ 2-43.8. Appropriations. [Ord. No. 2017-44]
The Mayor and Council may fix, determine and appropriate a sum sufficient
to be utilized by the Public Art Commission for the purposes herein stated,
on an annual basis or as needed.
§ 2-44. (RESERVED)
§ 2-45. WESLEY LAKE COMMISSION.
§ 2-45.1. Preamble. [2000 Code § 2-45.1]
A proposed Agreement of Charter of the Wesley Lake Commission
establishes the purposes and responsibilities of the inter-municipal body.
The Agreement of Charter embodies the mutual understandings between
the City of Asbury Park and the Township of Neptune.
The City's Staff and City Attorney have reviewed said Agreement and deem
it in the best interest of the citizens of the City of Asbury Park to be a party
to said Commission.
§ 2-45.2. Execution of Agreement. [2000 Code § 2-45.2]
§ 2-45.3. Membership. [New; Ord. No. 2017-8; Ord. No. 2017-37]
There shall be five (5) members and one alternate member of the Wesley
Lake Commission appointed for a term of three (3) years as follows:
Elected official of the Governing Body
City Manager or designee
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
Two residents appointed by the Mayor and Council
In addition of the regular members, an alternate member may be
designated by the Mayor and Council who may attend the meeting of the
Commission in place of a regular member
§ 2-46. DEAL LAKE COMMISSION.
a. The City of Asbury Park has agreed to donate and participate in the
Wesley Lake Commission.
b. The Mayor and City Clerk be and they are hereby authorized to execute
an agreement known as the Agreement of Charter of the Wesley Lake
Commission.
§ 2-43.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-46.1
1:68
§ 2-46.1. Participation in Commission. [2000 Code § 2-46.1]
The City of Asbury Park bounds the Deal Lake; and all of the municipalities
bounding the Deal Lake have joined to form the Deal Lake Commission.
§ 2-46.2. Agreement with the Deal Lake Commission. [2000 Code
§ 2-46.2]
§ 2-46.3. Membership. [New]
There shall be one City resident appointed by the Mayor and Council to
serve for a one year term and one City resident to serve as an alternate for
a term of one year on the Deal Lake Commission.
§ 2-47. SUNSET LAKE COMMISSION.
§ 2-47.1. Creation. [Ord. No. 2624]
The City Council of Asbury Park may create a Sunset Lake Commission.
§ 2-47.2. Membership. [Ord. No. 2624]
The Sunset Lake Commission shall be comprised of residents and
employees of the City of Asbury Park in accordance with the terms herein
set forth.
§ 2-47.3. Jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 2624]
a. The City of Asbury Park shall continue to be a member of the Deal Lake
Commission.
b. The Mayor and City Clerk are hereby authorized to execute a contract
with the Deal Lake Commission.
c. A copy of such contract shall be on file and available for public
inspection in the office of the City Clerk during regular business hours.
d. The City of Asbury Park hereby commits itself to the programs
described in such contract above referenced and commits itself to
making expenditures based upon its proportional obligation as set forth
in the contract herein referenced.
a. The Commission shall have jurisdiction over Sunset Lake (the Lake),
which is hereby defined as that area to include the lake and grounds
between Sunset Avenue and Fifth Avenue and between Bond Street and
Webb Street.
b. The jurisdiction of the Commission shall be designated on a map which
may be found on file in the office of the City Clerk and is made a part
hereof, and to the extent any portion of this section is inconsistent with
said map, said map delineation shall control.
§ 2-46.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-47.3
1:69
§ 2-47.4. Purposes. [Ord. No. 2624]
§ 2-47.5. Existence. [Ord. No. 2624]
The Commission shall have continual existence until such time as it is
disbanded by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-47.6. Representation. [Ord. No. 2624; Ord. No. 2961; Ord. No.
2017-1]
c. Nothing herein shall be deemed to modify any rule of law governing
municipal ownership, control and/or rights over flowing waters.
a. The Commission shall have full authority over the maintenance, control,
and improvement of the Lake to the extent that said authority is not
inconsistent with the State of New Jersey, County of Monmouth or the
City Council of Asbury Park (the Governing Body).
b. The Commission shall have the authority, with the consent and approval
of the Mayor and Council and after certification of available funds as
approved by the Mayor and Council, for the following:
1. To regulate the flow of the Lake including the flow of said waters
into Deal Lake. This authority will be subject to the approval of the
Governing Body based on the testimony of professional personnel
stating that the flow should be adjusted for the betterment of the
Lake.
2. To provide and regulate electricity, flood gates, silt traps, chemical
testing, and other lake management techniques and devices.
3. To contract for any and all necessary services in order to carry out
the purposes of this charter subject to necessary funding being
available.
4. To provide and regulate chemical treatment to the Lake for the
control of biological growth and the corrections of any and all
biologically harmful conditions.
5. To provide and regulate the dredging of the Lake and to enter into
any and all agreements to carry out the dredging of the Lake.
6. To improve the Lake to a state of balanced ecological stability to
the greatest extent possible to promote both passive and active
recreational activities.
7. To recommend to the Governing Body the adoption of ordinances
and rules for the improvement of the Lake.
8. To seek and apply for any and all grants available from County,
State, Federal, and private sources to achieve the goals and
objectives of this Commission.
§ 2-47.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-47.6
1:70
§ 2-47.7. Terms of Service. [Ord. No. 2624; Ord. No. 2017-31]
§ 2-47.8. Officers. [Ord. No. 2624]
a. The Mayor and Council shall make all appointments to the Sunset Lake
Commission.
b. The official members of the Commission shall be comprised of seven (7)
members as follows:
1. The City Manager or his/her designated representative.
2. The Director of Public Works or his/her designated representative.
3. Five (5) residents of the City of Asbury Park.
4. Two (2) alternate members as chosen by the City Council. [Ord.
No. 2017-1]
a. All persons appointed to the Commission shall serve for a two (2) year
term.
b. The term of office for all Commissioners shall commence from January 1
of the year of appointment to December 31.
c. Initially, the Governing Body shall appoint four (4) of the seven (7)
members for a term of one year and all subsequent appointments shall
be for a two (2) year term.
d. The remaining three (3) members shall be appointed by the Governing
Body for a term of two (2) years and all subsequent appointments shall
be for a two (2) year term.
e. If a vacancy occurs for whatever reason, the Chairman shall notify the
Governing Body, which shall appoint a Commissioner to the unexpired
term pursuant to Subsection 2-47.6.
a. The Commission shall have a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Treasurer, and
Secretary. Each shall serve for a term of one year commencing on
January 1. The duties of each officer shall be as follows:
1. Chairperson. The Chairperson shall be responsible for the
management and conduct of all meetings and shall call meetings to
order and close all meetings. The Chairperson shall have full voting
power.
2. Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall act in the absence of
the Chairperson.
3. Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be responsible for the keeping of all
accounts, payment of all bills, verification of debts, and to provide a
depository within the City of Asbury Park for the safekeeping of
funds, and will also be responsible for the signing of all checks.
§ 2-47.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-47.8
1:71
§ 2-47.9. Quorum. [Ord. No. 2624]
At least four (4) of the seven (7) members of the Commission must be
present to constitute a quorum.
§ 2-47.10. Public Meetings. [Ord. No. 2624]
§ 2-47.11. Attendance. [Ord. No. 2624]
§ 2-47.12. Budget. [Ord. No. 2624]
4. Secretary. The Secretary shall be responsible for the keeping of all
official records of the Commission.
5. The officers may have such other duties that may be designated
from time to time by resolution.
a. All meetings shall be open to the public, except such executive sessions
as authorized by N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq. The public shall have the right to
address and present questions to the Commission. The Commission
shall have the right to hold executive sessions pursuant to N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq.
b. The Commission shall have one regular meeting each month. The
meeting shall be on a date adopted by the Commission by resolution.
The Commission may suspend such monthly meetings at its sole
discretion.
c. The Chairman may call special meetings of the Commission provided
that at least forty-eight (48) hours' notice is given. The Chairman shall
be required to call a special meeting upon a receipt of a request by at
least four (4) members of the Commission.
d. All official action of the Commission shall be carried out only after a
duly adopted resolution is prepared.
a. If a member of the Commission should without excuse absent himself/
herself for three (3) consecutive meetings within a calendar year, the
Commission shall by resolution notify the Governing Body in order to
have the individual removed from the Commission and a suitable
replacement made.
b. The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of attendance and the
reasons for nonattendance.
a. On January 1 of each year, the Commission shall present a budget
request to the Governing Body, which shall have first been adopted by a
majority vote of the members of the Commission.
b. The Governing Body shall not be obligated to contribute any funds to
the Commission until such time as the budget is approved.
§ 2-47.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-47.12
1:72
§ 2-47.13. Public Bidding. [Ord. No. 2624]
All contracts, agreements, etc. shall be subject to the Statutes of the State
of New Jersey pertaining to public bidding.
§ 2-47.14. Reports. [Ord. No. 2624]
The Chairman shall cause to be written and transmitted to the Governing
Body, a report of activities of the Commission. This report shall be
accomplished annually.
§ 2-48. TECHNICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE.
§ 2-48.1. Created; Membership. [Ord. No. 2626]
A Technical Review Committee is hereby established to consist of eight
persons, one of which shall be a Councilmember serving on the Planning
Board, one of which shall be a member representing the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, one shall be a member
representing the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, one shall
be a professional planner, one shall be a licensed architect, the Chairman of
the Planning Board, the engineer serving the Planning Board and one shall
be a representative of the Developer team designated by Asbury Partners,
LLC.
§ 2-48.2. Duties; Limitations. [Ord. No. 2626]
The Technical Review Committee shall not impose standards or designs that
will infringe the marketability or economic feasibility of a project other than
compliance with the Redevelopment Plan and Design Guidelines.
§ 2-48.3. Review of Site Plans. [Ord. No. 2626]
The Mayor and Council shall act as Redevelopment Entity and the Planning
Board shall first submit all site plans for review to the Technical Review
Committee.
§ 2-48.4. Meetings. [Ord. No. 2626]
The Technical Review Committee shall meet as often as necessary so as to
not delay any application or project.
§ 2-49. PARKING UTILITY.
c. The Commission shall have the right to adopt emergency resolutions for
appropriations to the Governing Body for maintaining Sunset Lake and
the surrounding grounds.
§ 2-47.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-49.1
1:73
§ 2-49.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2866 § 1]
There is hereby created under the terms of this section a public utility
for the purpose of managing its parking operations within the City of
Asbury Park, County of Monmouth and State of New Jersey. For budgetary
and accounting purposes, this utility shall be a separate entity, having its
own borrowing capacity; its own separate accounts and its own separate
property, whether it be real, personal or mixed.
§ 2-49.2. Official Name. [Ord. No. 2866 § 2]
The name by which the Utility shall be known is "The Asbury Park Parking
Utility," hereinafter the "Utility."
§ 2-49.3. Functions. [Ord. No. 2866 § 3]
It shall be the function of the Utility to budget and account for the parking
operations undertaken by the City; to preserve, care for, lay out, construct,
maintain, improve and operate lands, buildings, and facilities used for the
provision of public parking and the enforcement of the City's laws and
regulations concerning parking; to construct, reconstruct, alter, provide,
renew and maintain buildings or other structures and equipment and
provide for the care, custody and control thereof in the operation of the
Utility; to raise money necessary to pay for the lands, rights or interest
therein acquired for parking activities, and for improving and equipping the
same; to pay or make provision for the payment of the reasonable expenses
in each fiscal year of the Utility; to pay to those persons entitled thereto the
interest and principal on notes and bonds of the Utility, and to deposit and
accumulate reserve funds or reserves.
§ 2-49.4. Governing Regulations. [Ord. No. 2866 § 4]
The Utility shall be governed by the ordinances, the Administrative Code,
and the resolutions adopted by the Mayor and City Council and by
administrative directives.
§ 2-49.5. Financial Affairs. [Ord. No. 2866 § 5]
The financial affairs of the Utility shall be governed in accordance with the
statutes applying to the financial affairs of the municipality and utilities in
general.
§ 2-49.6. Acquisition of Property. [Ord. No. 2866 § 6]
The Utility may, from time to time, acquire such real property as may
be authorized by the Mayor and City Council by duly adopted ordinances
according to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-49.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-49.7
1:74
§ 2-49.7. Appointment of Employees, Salaries and Compensation.
[Ord. No. 2866 § 7]
The City Manager shall have the full authority to appoint and employ all
necessary employees for the Utility. Salaries of the employees will be in
accordance with classification and salary ordinances duly adopted by the
Mayor and City Council. Portions of salaries of existing employees may
be prorated based on the amount of time spent on parking operations
compared to the employees' full-time City responsibilities.
§ 2-49.8. Utility Charges. [Ord. No. 2866 § 8]
The Utility shall have authority to charge and collect monies for the use
of the utilities facilities whether they be user charges, rental fees, or lease
payments, and to use these monies to defray the cost of acquisition of lands,
buildings and facilities, rights and interests therein, to equip the facilities,
to pay the Utility's current expenses and to pay the interest and principal
on notes and bonds.
§ 2-50. through § 2-51. (RESERVED)
§ 2-52. LIBRARY.
There shall be a Library Board of Trustees who shall be appointed pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:54-9 et seq.. The Library Board of Trustees shall be governed
by N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq.
§ 2-53. through § 2-57. (RESERVED)
§ 2-58. ASBURY PARK TV.
§ 2-58.1. Created, Title.
The Asbury Park Cable Television Advisory Committee, referred to as the
APTV Committee or APTV was initially created by a resolution adopted by
the Asbury Park City Council on December 5, 2012. The purpose of the
Asbury Park Cable Television Advisory Committee is to act as the City's
advocate and to make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
regarding all matters related to operation of the City's P-E-G (Public,
Educational and Government) Channels and to respond to any and all
related matters as requested by the Mayor and Council. The organization
shall be known as: Asbury Park TV.
§ 2-58.2. Purpose.
This organization shall be operated for Public, Education, and
Governmental purposes. More specifically, the purpose of the organization
is to further the Mission, as formulated in the organization's Mission
Statement below.
§ 2-49.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58.2
1:75
"The Mission of the Asbury Park Cable Television Advisory Committee
(APTV) is to assist with the development and oversee the operation of
Asbury Park's Public Access channels. APTV will also provide an outlet
to broadcast programs created and presented by Asbury Park's Public,
Governmental, Business, Cultural, Educational and non-profit
organizations.
APTV will provide broadcasts that respond to the interests and concerns
of the community and present programming that highlights issues and
showcases matters relating to Asbury Park. Such programming will be
designed to Inform, Educate and Entertain."
§ 2-58.3. Membership.
§ 2-58.4. Officers.
Officers of the APTV Committee shall be as follows:
a. There shall be a committee consisting of seven to thirteen appointed
members made up of officers and non-officers.
b. The APTV committee shall nominate new and/or continuing committee
members with a formal nomination proposed by an existing committee
member with discussion and review at an APTV Committee meeting and
then by majority vote at the subsequent regularly scheduled meeting.
c. These nominations will be sent to the City Council for approval.
d. A committee member, appointed by the City Council in January shall
serve a three-year term effective immediately upon the date of their
appointment by the City Council of Asbury Park.
e. A new committee member, appointed by the City Council in any other
month than January shall serve the remainder of the calendar year and
the two years following until the election cycle in January. This term will
be effective immediately upon the date of their appointment by the City
Council of Asbury Park.
f. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall not exceed 3 consecutive
terms (six consecutive years).
g. A committee member appointed by the City Council to fill an unexpired
term shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term.
h. At least 2/3 (66%) of the committee members must be either a resident,
business owner, property owner or employed in Asbury Park
i. A committee member may resign at any time by submitting written
notice to the APTV Committee.
j. Trustees shall receive no compensation for performance of their duties
as trustees.
§ 2-58.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-58.4
1:76
§ 2-58.5. Duties.
a. Among these committee members will be the following officers:
1. Chairperson
2. Vice Chairperson
3. Secretary
4. Treasurer
b. Voting for Officers will happen at the January Annual APTV meeting
with the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson on the odd number years
and with the Secretary and Treasurer on the even number years.
c. All newly elected Officers will take office immediately.
d. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson are elected for a two-year term
and bound by a three consecutive term limit (six consecutive years)
e. The Secretary and Treasurer elected for a two-year term and are not
bound to term limits.
f. If in the event that no Officer receives a majority vote, then a run-off
election will take place eliminating the lowest vote getter in the next
vote. The process will continue until a candidate gets a majority vote.
g. All Members of the APTV Committee are allowed to vote, including
people that are running for office.
h. No Officer shall hold any elected office of any governmental entity.
i. If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice Chairperson, Secretary, or
Treasurer; the Chairperson shall appoint a temporary replacement,
with a majority vote of the APTV Committee. The new Officer will serve
out the term. If the Chairperson leaves office early the Vice Chairperson
will take over the office.
a. All APTV Committee members are is expected to attend at least 80% of
all APTV Committee meetings. Any member missing three consecutive
meetings may be subject to termination by a 2/3 vote of the APTV
Committee.
b. An APTV Committee Member may request a leave of absence if they
determine they may not be able to meet the duties expected of a
Committee Member. This leave must be for a specified time and must be
approved in advance by the APTV Committee Members.
c. Any possible conflict of interest on the part of an APTV Committee
Member shall be disclosed to the rest of the APTV Committee.
d. The APTV Committee Members shall see that the duties and
responsibilities of all the members are observed. They have the power
§ 2-58.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58.5
1:77
to request the resignation and/or termination of any officer, or
Committee Member providing such action is approved by a 2/3 vote of
the Board.
e. The APTV Committee shall also be responsible for all property of APTV
and submit a yearly report to the membership at the end of the fiscal
year.
f. If an APTV Committee Member cannot make a regularly scheduled or
Special Meeting he/she should alert the Chairperson as soon as
possible.
g. The Chairperson using Roberts Rules of Order as a guide will preside
over both the regularly scheduled and Special Meetings. The
Chairperson in consultation with his/her Officers shall set the agenda
for Board Meetings 10 days in advance and send this agenda to the
Secretary.
h. The Chairperson has the right to cancel a meeting due to lack or
quorum, weather or other special circumstances in which case the
Chairperson will alert the APTV Committee Members as soon as
possible.
i. The Vice Chairperson shall assume the duties of Chairperson in his or
her absence and shall assist in every way including coordinating subcommittees,
developing community relationships and projects etc.
j. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson will be the only persons that
automatically have the right to speak as the representative of APTV at
public forums and publications. The Chairperson can grant this right to
other APTV Committee Members and Sub-Committee Chairpersons on
limited topics and limited engagements.
k. The Secretary will take the minutes during each Board Meeting. The
Secretary will send the past Board Meeting minutes and agenda of
upcoming meeting via email to all APTV Committee Members at least
one week in advance of the next meeting. At each meeting, the
Secretary during his/her Secretary Report will submit the minutes of
the previous meeting for approval. The Secretary shall also keep a
separate record of all the Policies and Procedures as they develop and
change over time. The Secretary will then make any changes and then
send the approved minutes to be kept on file in the office of APTV and to
a secure website. The Secretary shall keep the names, addresses,
emails and telephone numbers of all APTV Committee Members, and
Sub-Committee Members. The Secretary shall also have the power to
appoint an assistant with Board approval.
l. The Treasurer under the direction of the Chairperson and APTV
Committee Members, shall have, unless otherwise provided for, general
custody of the funds, securities, and other valuable assets of the APTV.
All of the Treasurer's books, accounts, and records shall be the property
of the APTV, copies of which must be kept in the APTV office. The
§ 2-58.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-58.5
1:78
§ 2-58.6. Subcommittees.
§ 2-58.7. Meetings; Board and Special Meetings.
Treasurer is authorized to open such accounts in a bank or depository
as the Board of Trustees may direct. The Treasurer shall keep
permanent records of monies received and disbursed in a Board
approved accounting system. At each board meeting the Treasurer will
present a detailed written report.
a. APTV Committee Members can create sub-committees when deemed
necessary.
b. The Chairperson shall appoint a temporary chairperson to organize the
sub-committee.
c. Once the sub-committee has been organized the sub-committee shall
choose their own chairperson by majority vote.
d. The Sub-Committee Chairperson shall call regular meetings of his/her
committee and should alert each sub-committee member by email. If a
sub-committee member cannot attend a meeting he/she should alert the
Sub-Committee Chairperson via email as soon as possible.
e. The Sub-Committee Chairperson shall provide regular progress reports
to APTV Committee Members at regularly scheduled meetings.
f. The Sub-Committee Chairperson can prepare and submit for approval
by APTV Committee, a budget or a detailed expense if such become
necessary.
a. Notice of all meetings will be posted on the APTV's website and be sent
out via email by the Secretary.
b. The APTV Committee shall meet at least once a month or as determined
by the Board.
c. APTV Committee Members, the general public and invited guests may
attend these APTV Committee Meetings, but they will not be allowed to
vote and may be subject to limited participation.
d. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or APTV Committee
Members with a seven (7) day notice to their membership.
e. A quorum for the APTV Committee Meetings shall be 1/2 (50%) of the
members.
f. Robert Rules of Order shall be the authority for parliamentary
procedure in all matters.
g. The Chairperson may appoint a Parliamentarian for Board and Special
Meetings
§ 2-58.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-58.7
1:79
§ 2-58.8. Voting.
§ 2-58.9. Amendments.
§ 2-58.10. Liability.
h. Sub-Committee chairperson may appoint a Parliamentarian if deemed
necessary.
a. The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson will preside over voting during
meetings. Only APTV Committee Members without a "Conflict of
Interest" on the motion are allowed to vote at these meetings.
b. The Sub-Committee Chairperson will preside over voting during Sub-
Committee meetings. Only duly appointed Sub-Committee members
without a "Conflict of Interest" on with the motion are allowed to vote.
c. All results are determined by majority vote with the exception of
amending the Bylaws, Mission Statement, and termination of a APTV
Committee Member which require a 2/3 vote (as in Article 9A & 5D)
d. Action by Consent: Any action permitted to be taken at any meeting of
the Board of Trustees or any committee thereof, may be taken without a
meeting, if prior consent is passed at a previous meeting.
a. Any changes to the By-Laws or Mission Statement shall be made with a
first read and discussion at an APTV Committee Meeting and then a
vote at the subsequent APTV Committee Meeting. The vote must be
passed by 2/3 majority. There can be no new amendments or deletions
to this proposal. Amendments or deletions which have been read and
discussed can be voted on at the next meeting and be to be put into the
Bylaws.
b. Any changes to the Policies and Procedures can be made by majority
vote at any APTV Committee Meeting.
a. The Producer of any broadcast not created by APTV acknowledges that
he/she has obtained all necessary copyright clearances and releases for
the cablecasting of any and all material contained within the program.
b. The Producer of any broadcast not created by APTV and/or the City, and
agrees to hold the aforementioned harmless for any liability, loss, or
damage, including reasonable attorney's fees, caused by or arising out
of any material supplied by the Producer.
c. The Producer of any broadcast not created by APTV further agrees to
indemnify and save APTV and or the City, and/or their respective
officers, members, and employees, harmless of any and all claims,
damages, costs and liability of any nature whatsoever, including
counsel fees, which may be imposed by reason of any claim that any
material cablecast and/or disseminated by the Producer, violates or
infringes upon the rights, trade names, trademarks, copyrights,
§ 2-58.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-58.10
1:80
§ 2-58.11. Non-Discrimination Policy.
APTV will not discriminate on the basis of gender, sexual orientation, race,
color, national or ethnic origin.
§ 2-58.12. Dissolutionment.
If APTV for any reason whatsoever ceases to exist, then any and all assets,
after payment of all debts and obligations of the APTV, shall be donated to
the City of Asbury Park with recommendations for the use of such assets
presented to the City by the APTV Committee.
§ 2-59. BEACH UTILITY.
§ 2-59.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The City of Asbury Park Beach Utility is hereby created and established for
the purposes of collecting expense, both direct and indirect, and revenue
data with regard to the operation, maintenance and improvement of the
beach, boardwalk and related facilities.
§ 2-59.2. Official Name. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The name by which the Utility shall be known is "The Asbury Park Beach
Utility," hereinafter the "Beach Utility."
§ 2-59.3. Functions. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
It shall be the function of the Beach Utility to manage all fiscal, operational,
maintenance and improvement of the beach, boardwalk and related
facilities.
§ 2-59.4. Governing Regulations. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The Beach Utility shall be governed by the ordinances, the Administrative
Code, applicable State and Federal laws and the resolutions adopted by the
Mayor and City Council and by administrative directives.
patents, literary of dramatic rights, or rights of privacy of any other
owner, licensor, copyright holder, writer, composer, or other person,
corporation or partnership, that said material constitutes libel or
slander.
d. The Producer of any broadcast not created by APTV hereby releases
APTV and/or the City from any legal action, claims, and demands which
the producer of his/her organization ever had, has, or may have, which
may arise against APTV and/or the City as a result of cablecast
presentation on its cable system or the production of any material for
said presentation, or for any mistakes, omissions, or interruptions.
§ 2-58.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-59.5
1:81
§ 2-59.5. Financial Affairs. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The financial affairs of the Beach Utility shall be governed in accordance
with the statutes applying to the financial affairs of the municipality and
utilities in general.
§ 2-59.6. Acquisition of Property. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The Beach Utility may, from time to time, acquire such real property as may
be authorized by the Mayor and City Council by duly adopted ordinances
according to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-59.7. Appointment of Employees, Salaries and Compensation.
[Ord. No. 2016-07]
The City Manager shall have the full authority to appoint and employ all
necessary employees for the Beach Utility. Salaries of the employees will
be in accordance with classification and salary ordinances duly adopted
by the Mayor and City Council. Portions of salaries of existing employees
may be prorated based on the amount of time spent on parking operations
compared to the employees' full-time City responsibilities.
§ 2-59.8. Beach Utility Charges. [Ord. No. 2016-07]
The Beach Utility shall have authority to charge and collect monies for the
use of the Beach Utility's facilities whether they be user charges, rental
fees, or lease payments, and to use these monies to defray the cost of
acquisition of lands, buildings and facilities, rights and interests therein, to
equip the facilities, to pay the Beach Utility's current expenses and to pay
the interest and principal on notes and bonds.
§ 2-59.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-59.8
1:82
ARTICLE IX
Administrative Policies and Procedures
§ 2-60. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
§ 2-60.1. Procedure to Submit Claim; Certification by City Employee
Required. [2000 Code § 2-60.1]
Any person claiming payment from the City shall first submit a detailed
statement of the items or demand necessitating such claim to the
responsible executive agency, specifying particularly how the bill or demand
is made up, and a certification of the party claiming payment that it is
correct. No bill, claim or demand shall be considered for payment unless
the voucher has attached to it (or includes) a certification from a designated
City employee, having personal knowledge of the facts that the goods have
been received by or the services rendered to the City, and that those
services or goods are consistent with an existing contract or purchase
order. The City Accountant shall have the Deputy audit warrants and make
recommendations on all claims and bills.
§ 2-60.2. City Clerk to Submit to Council. [2000 Code § 2-60.2; New]
The bill or claim duly certified shall be presented to the City Clerk for
inclusion in the proceedings of the next immediate formal meeting of the
City Council. All claims or bills to be considered by the City Council shall
be listed systematically and without preference, and the list shall be made
available to every member of the City Council at least three (3) full days
prior to formal action by that body.
§ 2-60.3. Approval or Rejection by Council. [2000 Code § 2-60.3]
Claims shall be considered by the City Council, which shall approve or
reject the same. If the City Council rejects any claim presented to it, the
reason for such rejection must be stated. Any disapproved claim shall be
referred back to the City Manager with such instruction as the City Council
shall give at the time of disapproval.
§ 2-60.4. Recording of Claims. [2000 Code § 2-60.4]
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to record all claims in the Official
Minutes or through an appropriate Claims Register, indicating that the
City Council has by formal action approved or disapproved the same, with
appropriate records as to any claims disapproved or rejected. All records
pertaining to disapproved or approved bills or claims shall be available for
public inspection.
§ 2-60.5. Treasurer's Duty to Issue Checks. [2000 Code § 2-60.5]
The Treasurer shall make disbursements upon receipt of an order by the
City Council, attested by the City Clerk. After the Clerk has certified that
the claims have been approved, he/she shall turn the same over to the
§ 2-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-60.5
1:83
Treasurer, who shall prepare the necessary checks for the payment thereof,
with the checks signed by the appropriate City Official(s). After preparing
checks for the payment of claims, the Finance Office shall record them in
proper books of account and thereafter mail the checks to the claimants.
§ 2-61. PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT PROPERTY TAXES OR
ASSESSMENTS PRIOR TO THE ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF
LICENSES OR PERMITS.
§ 2-61.1. Requirement to Pay Delinquent Taxes as a Condition of
the License. [2000 Code § 2-61.1]
The Mayor and City Council may, as a condition for the issuance or renewal
of any license or permit issued by, or requiring the approval of, the City,
require that the applicant, if he or she is the owner thereof, pay any
delinquent property taxes or assessments on the property wherein the
business or activity for which the license or permit is sought or wherein
the business or activity is to be conducted. The license or permit may
be revoked or suspended by the City Council when any licensee, who is
an owner of the property upon which the licensed business or activity is
conducted, has failed to pay the taxes due on the property for at least three
(3) consecutive quarters.
§ 2-61.2. Restoration of License. [2000 Code § 2-61.2]
Upon payment of the delinquent taxes or assessments, the license or permit
may be restored.
§ 2-61.3. Nonapplicability to Alcoholic Beverage Licenses. [2000
Code § 2-61.3]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage license or permit issued pursuant to the "Alcoholic Beverage
Control Act."
§ 2-62. PAYMENT OF TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS REQUIRED
PRIOR TO PAYMENT OF CLAIMS ON FIRE-DAMAGED PROPERTIES.
§ 2-62.1. Payment of Claims Subject to Municipal Liens; Certificate
of Search. [2000 Code § 2-62.1]
a. Every insurance company is prohibited from paying an insured any
claim in excess of two thousand five hundred ($2,500) dollars for fire
damages on any real property located within the City pursuant to any
fire insurance policy issued or renewed after the effective date of this
chapter and after the filing of this section with the State Commissioner
of Insurance, until such time as the insured person submits an official
certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12
certifying that all taxes, assessments or other municipal liens or
charges, levied and assessed, and due and payable, against the insured
§ 2-60.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-62.1
1:84
§ 2-62.2. Definitions. [2000 Code § 2-62.2]
As used in this section:
INSURED PERSON — shall mean and include all parties having interest
in the real estate affected by fire damage and all parties insured under
the terms and provisions of the fire insurance coverage of the property
damaged.
§ 2-62.3. Municipal Charges Payable; Effect of Appeals. [2000 Code
§ 2-62.3]
Unless the resolution, referred to in Subsection 2-62.1, above, is received
by an insurance company pursuant to Subsection 2-62.5, an insurance
company is hereby authorized and required, prior to the payment of any
claims for fire damages in excess of two thousand five hundred ($2,500)
dollars to pay to the City the amount of the liens appearing on the official
certificate and such other recorded liens or related charges as may be
certified to the insurance company; provided, however, that if an appeal
is taken on the amount of the lien or charge, other than an appeal on
the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the
insurance company shall withhold seventy-five (75%) percent of the full
amount of the lien or charge contested, pending termination of all
proceedings, at which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon
at a rate paid on interest bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings
and loan associations in the State, shall be disbursed in accordance with the
final order or judgment of the court.
§ 2-62.4. Copy of Section Filed with State Commissioner of
Insurance. [2000 Code § 2-62.4]
This section shall be filed with the New Jersey State Commissioner of
Insurance pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1978 of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-62.5. Resolution Permitting Installment Payments. [2000 Code
§ 2-62.5]
The City Council may enter into, or may authorize the tax collector by
resolution to enter into agreements with the owners of any fire damaged
property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal
property have been paid either by the owner of such real property, or
by the insurance company pursuant to Subsection 2-62.3, or the City of
Asbury Park submits a certified copy of a resolution adopted pursuant
to Subsection 2-62.5.
b. The official certificate of search may be altered by the bonded official
responsible for preparing such certificate in order to correct any errors
or omissions or to add any municipal liens or related charges due and
payable subsequent to the preparation of the official certificate.
§ 2-62.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-62.5
1:85
liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for redemption of the
tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-65 et seq.,
if the City Council is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used
to restore or improve the fire damaged property. An insurance company
receiving a certified copy of such resolution adopted by the City Council is
authorized to make full payment on the claim to the insured person.
§ 2-62.6. Claim Priority. [2000 Code § 2-62.6]
A municipal claim made in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 184
of the Laws of 1978 and the provisions of this section shall be paramount to
any other claims on the proceeds of fire insurance policy except the claim
of a holder of a mortgage on the fire-damaged property, where the fire
insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the mortgagee as a named
insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee of the proceeds shall be
paramount to the municipal lien under this section only to the extent of the
amount due and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage contract.
§ 2-62.7. Construal of Provisions. [2000 Code § 2-62.7]
Nothing in this section shall be construed:
§ 2-62.8. Correction of Official Certificate of Search. [2000 Code
§ 2-62.8]
The official certificate of search may be altered by the bonded official
responsible for preparing such certificates, in order to correct any errors or
omissions or to add any municipal liens or related charges due and payable
subsequent to the preparation of the official certificate.
§ 2-63. MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE, VETERAN'S, SMALL
BUSINESS AND WOMEN'S BUSINESS ENTERPRISE SET-ASIDE
PROGRAM.
§ 2-63.1. Goals Established; Attainment; Allotment; Set-Aside
Contracts. [2000 Code § 2-63.1; Ord. No. 2016-22]
a. To obligate an insurance company for any amount in excess of the value
of the fire insurance policy on the property, or the amount of the liability
of the insurance company thereunder;
b. Except as provided in the case of appeals under Subsection 2-62.3, to
obligate the insurance company for any liens not appearing on the
official certificate or any certified changes submitted by the bonded
official; or
c. To affect the authority of the municipality to enforce its municipal lien
under any other law of the State of New Jersey.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-41, the City of Asbury Park hereby
establishes set-aside program as a means of achieving goals herein
§ 2-62.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-63.1
1:86
§ 2-63.2. Standards of Eligibility; Definitions. [2000 Code § 2-63.2;
Ord. No. 2016-22]
adopted. The City Manager shall appoint either a Department or
individual to oversee the Program. If a proper Qualified Purchasing
Agent is on staff, then this individual shall be responsible for the
Program. For purposes of this section, the Department or individual to
oversee the Program shall be referred to as the Program Coordinator.
b. There is hereby established a goal of awarding no less than twenty-five
(25%) percent of the City contracts to minority owned businesses for
the purchase of goods and services. In determining compliance with the
twenty-five (25%) percent goal, the aggregate cost of all such contracts
within a fiscal year shall be considered.
c. There is hereby established a goal of awarding no less than ten (10%)
percent of the City contracts to women-owned businesses for the
purchase of goods and services. In determining compliance with the ten
(10%) percent goal, the aggregate cost of all such contracts within a
fiscal year shall be considered.
d. The percentage of the dollar value of the City's total procurement to be
filled by means of these set-aside programs and the process for
achieving the same shall be determined by the Program Coordinator
after review by the Manager. By February 1 of each year, the Program
Coordinator shall meet with the various procurement agencies, budget
director and the City Attorney to determine what aggregate
procurements are to be made by the City and what contracts for goods,
equipment, construction or services shall be designated for the setaside
programs. The Manager shall make a report to the City Council
indicating the goods and contracts to be included in that fiscal year.
e. "Set-aside contracts" shall mean a contract for goods, equipment,
construction, demolition or services which is designated as a contract
for which bids are invited and accepted only from qualified minority
business enterprises, as appropriate, a portion of contract when that
portion has so been designated; or any other purchase of procurement
so designated.
a. A business may be eligible for multiple components of the Program such
as being both a female and veteran business.
b. Principal Place of Business. In order to be eligible as a minority
business or a female business, a business must both have its principal
place of business in New Jersey and be independently owned and
operated.
1. For purposes of this section, a business shall be deemed to have its
principal place of business in New Jersey:
(a) When it has been either incorporated or registered to do
business in New Jersey; and
§ 2-63.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-63.2
1:87
§ 2-63.3. Registration Procedures. [2000 Code § 2-63.3; Ord. No.
2016-22]
Any business that seeks to register to be eligible for the Program must
register with the State of New Jersey's New Jersey Selective Assistance
Vendor Information (NJSAVI) found under the State's contracting services.
The NJSAVI is a database that identifies businesses that are registered as a
SBE and/or certified as a M/WBE with the State of New Jersey, through the
Division of Revenue.
§ 2-63.4. Notification Requirements and Procurement Process.
[2000 Code § 2-63.4; Ord. No. 2016-22]
(b) When fifty-one (51%) percent or more of its employees work in
New Jersey, as evidenced by the payment of New Jersey
unemployment taxes.
2. For purpose of these rules, a business shall be deemed
independently owned and operated if its management is
responsible for both its daily and its long-term operation, and if its
management owns at least a fifty-one (51%) percent interest in the
business.
c. Minority Business. In order to be eligible as a minority business, a
business must be either a sole proprietorship, partnership or
corporation at least fifty-one (51%) percent of which is owned and
controlled by persons who are Black, Hispanic, Asian American,
American Indian, or Alaskan natives, which are defined as follows:
1. Black American shall mean a person having origins in any of the
black racial groups of Africa.
2. Hispanic American shall mean a person of Mexican, Puerto Rican,
Cuban, Central or South American, Portuguese or other Spanish
culture or origin, regardless of race.
3. Asian American shall mean a person having origins in any of the
original people of the Far East, Southeast Asia and Indian
subcontinent, Hawaii or the Pacific Islands.
4. American Indian or Alaskan Native shall mean a person having
origins in any of the original peoples of North America and who
maintain cultural identification through tribal affiliation or
community recognition.
d. Women's Business. In order to be eligible as women's business, a
business must be either a sole proprietorship, partnership, or
corporation at least fifty-one (51%) percent of which is owned and
controlled by women.
e. All minority-owned businesses and women business enterprises under
this section shall be qualified in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:11-25.
§ 2-63.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-63.4
1:88
§ 2-63.5. Award Standards and Responsibility for Monitoring
Compliance. [2000 Code § 2-63.5; Ord. No. 2016-22]
a. When a business is accepted by the State of New Jersey onto the setaside
vendors lists which shall be used in determining whether the City
has fulfilled its contracting goals, and shall be used in soliciting bids or
contracts set aside for minority business and/or women's businesses
and other purchasing and contracting situations. There will be no limits
to the number of businesses on the various minority business bidders
lists. Each eligible applicant will be placed on that list or those lists for
which it is qualified.
b. When a business is accepted as a minority business and/or women's
business, that business may bid on contracts which are specifically set
aside under this section.
c. Each contracting agency shall make good faith effort to obtain the goals
established by the Administration. "Contracting agency" shall be
defined as the Local Purchasing Agency, the Finance Department and
any other agency involved in the total procurement process.
a. Any contract specifically set aside for minority and/or women's business
must be competitively bid, either through the public advertising or
through informal bidding, and may be awarded only if responsive bids
from at least three (3) qualified bidders are received.
b. The specification for a set-aside contract shall clearly and
conspicuously state that an award may only be made to a business duly
registered with the State of New Jersey.
c. The specification shall further state that a bidder who is not already
approved may submit a bid but then must apply to the State of New
Jersey, no later than the bid opening date and, in order to be eligible for
an award, must be approved by the State of New Jersey no later than
thirty (30) working days after the bid-opening date. The specification
shall state that if, for whatever reason, there is no approval of that
bidder the City shall reject that bid without any obligation or recourse
to that bidder. The dates may be adjusted to comport to the award
requirements in the Local Public Contracts Law.
d. All bids may be rejected on a set-aside contract and the contract may be
rebid as an ordinary contract where:
1. In evaluating the female and/or minority business bids, the
Program Coordinator determines that acceptance of any of the bids
would subject the City to an unreasonable expense or to a contract
otherwise unacceptable pursuant to the City's contracting laws and
rules; or
2. The City Clerk does not receive at least three (3) bids from qualified
vendors approved as female and/or minority businesses, as
appropriate; and
§ 2-63.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-63.5
1:89
§ 2-63.6. Annual Report. [2000 Code § 2-63.6; Ord. No. 2016-22]
§ 2-64. DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF PUBLIC OFFICERS
AND EMPLOYEES.
§ 2-64.1. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2666]
It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide for the defense
of certain actions against and the indemnification of public officers and
employees as permitted by N.J.S.A. 59:10-4.
§ 2-64.2. Indemnity Against Civil Actions. [Ord. No. 2666; New]
Whenever any civil action has been or shall be brought against any person
holding an elected or appointed office, position or employment under the
jurisdiction of the City of Asbury Park, including persons serving on
volunteer bodies as appointed by the Mayor and Council, for any act or
omission arising out of and in the course of the performance of the duties
of such office, position or employment, the City shall defray all costs of
defending such action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses,
together with costs of appeal, if any, and shall save harmless and protect
such person from and against any financial loss resulting therefrom. Where
allowed by law, such defense shall be provided by the City. When the City's
legal counsel is unable to participate in that defense, the official, officer or
employee shall submit the name of the attorney of his or her choice to the
City Council for approval and agreement as to the cost of services. In the
event that any official, officer or employee engages an attorney without the
prior approval of the City and an agreement as to the cost of services, any
and all such costs shall be the sole responsibility of that official, officer or
employee.
§ 2-64.3. Indemnity Against Criminal Actions. [Ord. No. 2666]
Whenever any criminal action is instituted against any person holding an
elected or appointed office, position or employment under the jurisdiction
of the City of Asbury Park, including persons serving on volunteer bodies
as appointed by the Mayor and Council, for any act or omission arising out
3. The respondent knowingly supplied false information on the
business and the contract would not otherwise have been awarded.
e. The rejection of bids and re-advertising of same shall be in accordance
with the Local Public Contracts Law.
a. The Program Coordinator shall submit an annual report to the City
Manager by January 31 of each year describing the City's efforts in
attaining the set-aside goal and the percentage of the dollar value of
total procurements awarded under this section.
b. The City Clerk shall publish a list of the City's attainments under this
section on March 1 of each year.
§ 2-63.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-64.3
1:90
of or in the course of the duties of such office, position or employment, and
should such proceeding be dismissed or result in a final disposition in favor
of such person as to all charges, the City shall reimburse such person for
the cost of defending such proceeding, including reasonable counsel fees
and expenses, together with the costs of appeal, if any. Prior to engaging
counsel for defense, the official, officer or employee shall submit the name
of the attorney of his or her choice to the City Council for approval and
agreement as to the cost of services. In the event that any official, officer
or employee engages an attorney and makes an agreement as to the cost of
services without the prior approval of the City, any and all costs shall be the
sole responsibility of that official, officer or employee.
§ 2-64.4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2666]
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth above, the City shall
not be responsible for providing a defense or indemnification under the
following conditions:
§ 2-65. through § 2-75. (RESERVED)
a. Under circumstances where the act or omission was not within the
scope of employment.
b. Under circumstances where the act or omission relates to a claim based
upon actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional
wrong.
c. The judgment calls for punitive or exemplary damages. Only that
portion of a judgment based upon compensatory damages shall be
indemnified.
d. Under circumstances where any insurance coverage is available for
payment.
e. Under circumstances where any officer or employee is found to have
acted in violation of the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:22-1
et seq.
f. Under circumstances where the defense of the action or proceeding
would create a conflict of interest between the City and the public
official or employee.
g. The public officer or employee has failed to deliver to the City Manager,
the original or a copy of the summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand or other pleading or document(s), within ten (10) calendar days
after the time that he or she is served with the same.
h. Under the circumstances where the public employee has failed to
cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 2-64.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-65
1:91

ARTICLE X
Regulation of Public Contracting, Contributions to Public Offices
and Entities
§ 2-76. AWARD OF PUBLIC CONTRACTS.
Prior source history for award of public contracts includes Ordinance No.
2681 which was repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 2969.
§ 2-76.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2969]
As used in this section:
BUSINESS ENTITY — whose contributions are regulated by this section
shall mean: (i) an individual including the individual's spouse, and any child/
children; (ii) a firm; corporation; professional corporation; partnership;
limited liability company; organization; association; and any other manner
and kind of business entity; (iii) any person who owns ten (10%) percent
of more of the equity or ownership or income interests in a person or
entity as defined in sections (i) and (ii) above and their spouses and child/
children; (iv) all partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and
their spouses and child/children; (v) any person, subcontractor, subsidiary,
corporation, firm, partnership, limited liability company, organization or
association who has received or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive,
from a person described in subparagraph (i) above, more than one hundred
thousand ($100,000) dollars in compensation or income of any kind
(including, by way of illustration, and not limitation; wages, salaries, sums
paid to independent contractors, benefits, dividends, profit-sharing, pension
contributions, deferred contributions, stock, stock options or gifts), in any
twelve (12) month period prior to the award of, or during the term of, a
contract subject to this section; and (vi) all persons who are an "affiliate" of
a Business Entity as defined in sections (i), (ii) and (v) above, as such term
is used in 11 U.S.C. 101(2).
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE — shall mean (i) every candidate for City of
Asbury Park elective municipal office; (ii) every candidate committee
established by or for the benefit of a candidate for City of Asbury Park
elective municipal office; (iii) every joint candidates committee established
in whole or in part by or for the benefit of a candidate for City of Asbury Park
elective municipal office; (iv) every political party committee of the City of
Asbury Park; (v) every political party committee of the County of Monmouth;
and (vi) every political committee, continuing political committee, or other
form of association or organization that regularly engages in the support
of candidates for the City of Asbury Park municipal or Monmouth County
elective offices or City of Asbury Park municipal or Monmouth County
political parties or political party committees. The terms in the foregoing
Subsection have the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7.
CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL OR EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES —
shall mean all contracts for "professional services" and "extraordinary
unspecifiable services" as such term is used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5.
§ 2-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-76.1
1:93
CONTRIBUTION — has the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. By
way of illustration, and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans,
and in-kind contributions.
§ 2-76.2. Prohibition on Awarding Public Contracts to Certain
Contributors. [Ord. No. 2969 § 1]
a. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with State or Federal law, the
City of Asbury Park and any of its departments, instrumentalities or
purchasing agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise
contract to procure "professional services" as such term is defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6) and used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and/or
banking, insurance or other consulting service (hereinafter
"Professional Services"), nor "extraordinary unspecifiable services" as
such term is defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(7) and used at N.J.S.A.
40A:11-5(1)(a)(ii) and/or media, public relations, lobbying, parking
garage management or other consulting and/or management service
(hereinafter "Extraordinary Unspecifiable Services") from any business
entity if such business entity has solicited or made any contribution to
(i) a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of
any candidate for elective municipal office in the City of Asbury Park or
a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a
contract, or (ii) to any City of Asbury Park or Monmouth County political
committee or political party committee, or (iii) to any continuing
political committee or political action committee that regularly engages
in the support of City of Asbury Park municipal or Monmouth County
elections and/or Asbury Park municipal or Monmouth County
candidates, candidate committees, joint candidates committees,
political committees, political parties, political party committees
(hereinafter "PAC"), in excess of the thresholds specified in
Subsection(c) within one calendar year immediately preceding the date
of the contract or agreement.
b. No business entity who submits a proposal for, enters into negotiations
for, or agrees to any contract or agreement with the City of Asbury Park
or any of its departments or instrumentalities, for the rendition of
professional services or extraordinary unspecifiable services shall
knowingly solicit or make any contribution to (i) a candidate, candidate
committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for elective
municipal office in the City of Asbury Park, or a holder of public office
having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or (ii) to any
Asbury Park or Monmouth County political committee or political party
committee, or (iii) any PAC between the time of first communication
between the business entity and the municipality regarding a specific
agreement for Professional Services or Extraordinary Unspecifiable
Services, and the later of the termination of negotiations or rejection of
any proposal, or the completion of the performance or specified time
period of that contract or agreement.
§ 2-76.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-76.2
1:94
§ 2-76.3. Contributions Made Prior to the Effective Date. [Ord. No.
2969 § 2]
No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective
date of this section (adopted March 2, 2011 by Ord. No. 2969) shall be
deemed to give rise to a violation of this section.
c. The monetary thresholds of this section are: (i) a maximum of three
hundred ($300) dollars per calendar year each for any purpose to any
candidate or candidate committee for Mayor or Governing Body, or five
hundred ($500) dollars per calendar year to any joint candidates
committee for Mayor or Governing Body, or three hundred ($300)
dollars per calendar year to a political committee or political party
committee of the City of Asbury Park; (ii) five hundred ($500) dollars
maximum per calendar year to a Monmouth County political committee
or political party committee; and (iii) five hundred ($500) dollars
maximum per calendar year to any PAC. However, for each business
entity party to a contract for professional or extraordinary unspecifiable
services as defined in subparagraph (a) of this section, or engaged in
negotiations for a contract defined in Subsection 2-76.1, when such
business entity's contribution is aggregated with all "persons" defined
in Subsection 2-76.1, by virtue of their affiliation to that business entity
party, a maximum of two thousand five hundred ($2,500) dollars to all
City of Asbury Park candidates, candidate committees, joint candidates
committees, and holders of public office having ultimate responsibility
for the award of a contract, all City of Asbury Park or Monmouth County
political committees and political party committees as described herein
combined, without violating Subsection a of this subsection.
d. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be (i) the City
of Asbury Park Mayor or Governing Body, if the contract requires
approval or appropriation from the Mayor or Governing Body, or (ii) the
Mayor of the City of Asbury Park, if the contract requires approval of
the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for the award of a
contract is appointed by the Mayor.
e. Rules Regarding Subcontractors. No person may be awarded a
subcontract to perform under a contract subject to this section, if the
subcontractor would be disqualified by Subsection a of this subsection
from receiving the contract at the time that the subcontract is awarded;
nor may any person who would be disqualified by Subsection a. of this
subsection from receiving the contract perform substantially all of the
obligations described in a contract for professional or extraordinary
unspecifiable services that is subject to this section.
§ 2-76.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-76.4
1:95
§ 2-76.4. Contract Renewal. [Ord. No. 2969 § 3]
No contract subject to this section may be renewed, extended, or materially
modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or modification would be
allowable under the provisions of this section if it were an initial contract.
§ 2-76.5. Contribution Statement by Business Entity. [Ord. No. 2969
§ 4]
§ 2-76.6. Return of Excess Contributions. [Ord. No. 2969 § 5]
A business entity that is a party to a contract for Professional Services
or Extraordinary Unspecified Services may cure a violation of Subsection
2-76.2, if, within thirty (30) days after the date on which the applicable
ELEC report is published, said business entity notifies the municipality in
writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the
recipient of such contribution.
§ 2-76.7. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2969 § 6]
The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in Subsection
2-76.2a do not apply to contracts which (i) are awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor
within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4, or (ii) are awarded in the case of
emergency under N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6. There is no exemption for contracts
a. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure Professional
Services or Extraordinary Unspecifiable Services from any business
entity, the City of Asbury Park or its purchasing agents and
departments, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from
said business entity which is the intended recipient of said contract that
he/she/it has not made a contribution in violation of Subsection 2-76.2.
The City of Asbury Park, its purchasing agents and departments shall
be responsible for informing the City Council that the aforementioned
sworn statement has been received and that the business entity is not in
violation of this section, prior to awarding the contract or agreement.
b. A business entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the City of
Asbury Park any contributions that constitute a violation of this section
that are made during the negotiation, proposal process or the duration
of a contract. The City of Asbury Park, its purchasing agents and
departments shall be responsible for informing the Governing Body
within ten (10) business days after receipt of said report from the
business entity or at the next Council meeting following receipt of said
report from the business entity, whichever comes first.
c. The certification required under this subsection shall be made prior to
entry into the contract or agreement with the City of Asbury Park, or
prior to the provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall
be in addition to any other certifications that may be required by any
other provision of law.
§ 2-76.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-76.7
1:96
awarded pursuant to a "Fair and Open Process" under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20 et
seq.
§ 2-76.8. Penalty; Prohibited Acts. [Ord. No. 2969 § 7]
§ 2-76.9. Citizens Private Right of Action. [Ord. No. 2969 § 8]
In addition to any rights that were heretofore available, or which may
hereafter be available, to citizens, taxpayers, or associations, to challenge
violations of this section, every person aggrieved by a violation of the
section, or any taxpayer or resident of the City of Asbury Park has the right,
consistent with the Rules of Court, to file charges in a court of competent
a. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a City of Asbury Park
agreement or contract for Professional Services or Extraordinary
Unspecifiable Services when a business entity that is a party to such
agreement or contract has: (i) made or solicited a contribution in
violation of this section; (ii) knowingly concealed or misrepresented a
contribution given or received; (iii) made or solicited contributions
through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution; (iv) made or solicited
any contribution on the condition or with the agreement that it will be
recontributed to a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates
committee of any candidate for elective municipal office in the City of
Asbury Park, or a holder of public office having ultimate responsibility
for the award of a contract, or any City of Asbury Park or Monmouth
County political committee or political party committee, or any PAC; (v)
engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or solicit
any contribution, which if made or solicited by the professional
business entity itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
section; (vi) funded contributions made by third parties, including
consultants, attorneys, family members, and employees; (vii) engaged
in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent of this
section; or (viii) directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or
means, done any act which if done directly would subject that entity to
the restrictions of this section.
b. Furthermore, any business entity that violates Subsection 2-76.8 shall
be disqualified from eligibility for future City of Asbury Park contracts
for a period of four (4) calendar years from the date of violation.
c. Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any
provision of this section, or who conspires with another person to
violate any provision of this section, or who, with the purpose of
promoting or facilitating a violation of this section, solicits another
person to commit it, or aids or agrees, or attempts to aid another a
person in planning or committing it, shall be subject to punishment
including fines and/or imprisonment as fixed by law for violations of the
Ordinances of the City of Asbury Park.
§ 2-76.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-76.9
1:97
jurisdiction, and/or to pursue a civil action for a violation of this section
in a court of competent jurisdiction, and to seek and obtain declaratory,
injunctive, or other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to,
attorneys' fees and costs, arising from or related to a violation of this
section.
§ 2-77. CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS IN
APPLICATIONS FOR MAJOR ZONING VARIANCES AND FOR OTHER
MUNICIPAL APPROVALS.
§ 2-77.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 2680 Preamble]
It is accordingly found and determined that the paramount public interest
in enhancing the City's commitment to openness in government, and in
providing further guarantees for a fair and impartial variance, waiver and
exception application process, and in promoting morals and the general
welfare, requires the disclosure of political contributions by property
owners, developers, redevelopers and professionals within the City as a
component of making application to the City for certain approvals, and
requires the supplementation of the municipal application checklists to
mandate the listing of specified political contributions made by property
owners, developers, redevelopers and the professionals whose services they
use.
§ 2-77.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2680 § 1]
APPLICATION CHECKLIST — shall mean the list of submission
requirements adopted by ordinance and provided by municipal agencies to
a developer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
CONTRIBUTION — shall mean every loan, gift, subscription, advance or
transfer of money or other thing of value, including any item of real property
or personal property, tangible or intangible (but not including services
provided without compensation by individuals volunteering a part or all
of their time on behalf of a candidate, committee or organization), made
to or on behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates
committee, political committee, continuing political committee or political
party committee and any pledge, promise or other commitment or
assumption of liability to make such transfer. For purposes of reports
required under the provisions of the section, any such commitment or
assumption shall be deemed to have been a contribution upon the date
when such commitment is made or liability assumed.
CONTRIBUTION DISCLOSURE STATEMENT — shall mean a list specifying
the amount, date, and the recipient of any and all contributions made
to or on behalf of any candidate, candidate committee, joint candidates
committee, political committee, continuing political committee or political
party committee of, or pertaining to, the City of Asbury Park, made prior to
filing the application with or seeking approval from the City, and required
to be reported pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq. The disclosure shall
include all such contributions made during the time period measuring from
§ 2-76.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-77.2
1:98
one year prior to the last municipal election through the time of filing
the application with or seeking approval from the City. There shall be a
continuing disclosure responsibility to require continuing disclosure of any
such contributions made following the filing of the "Contribution Disclosure
Statement" and during the pendency of the application and/or approval
process.
DEVELOPER — shall mean a developer as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, i.e.
the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed
to be included in proposed development, including the holder of an option
or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land. The term "developer" includes any applicant or entity
that wishes to undertake redevelopment activity within the City of Asbury
Park pursuant to the New Jersey Local Redevelopment and Housing Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
MUNICIPAL AGENCIES — shall mean the Municipal Planning Board, the
Municipal Zoning Board of Adjustment, and the Municipal Governing Body
acting as the Redevelopment Agency pursuant to the New Jersey Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
PROFESSIONAL — shall mean any person or entity whose principals are
required to be licensed by New Jersey Law and who supplies legal
representation, expert testimony or written reports in support of an
application. Professionals shall include both any individuals supplying the
representation, testimonies or reports and the firms or entities in which said
individuals practice.
§ 2-77.3. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2680 § 2]
a. Disclosure Requirements.
1. Any applicant for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d or a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c in conjunction with any
application for a subdivision not considered a minor subdivision
pursuant to local ordinance of a site plan not considered a minor
site plan pursuant to local ordinance, as well as any application for
a subdivision not considered a minor subdivision pursuant to local
ordinance or site plan not considered a minor site plan pursuant to
local ordinance requiring waivers or exceptions pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51, as well as an applicant who wishes to undertake
redevelopment activity within the City of Asbury Park pursuant to
the New Jersey Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq., shall include in its application with and/or
submit to the relevant municipal agency a Contribution Disclosure
Statement for all developers involved in the said application; all
associates of said developers who would be subject to disclosure
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 or 40:55D-48.2 shall also be
subject to this requirement; and all professionals who apply for or
provide testimony, plans, or reports in support of said application
or who have an enforceable proprietary interest in the property or
development which is the subject of the application or whose fee in
§ 2-77.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-77.3
1:99
whole or part is contingent upon the outcome of the application
shall also be subject to this requirement. Regardless of whether the
owner of the property which is the subject of the application falls
in any of the categories established in the preceding sentence, the
applicant shall include in its application to the relevant municipal
agency a Contribution Disclosure Statement for said owner.
2. During the pendency of the application process until the final
approval associated with the application is granted, any applicant
required to comply with this section shall amend its Contribution
Disclosure Statement to include continuing disclosure of all
contributions within the scope of disclosure requirement of the
above subsection.
b. Inclusion of Contribution Disclosure Statements as an Element of the
Application Checklist.
1. An Application Checklist Ordinance is hereby adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 to require that the Contribution Disclosure
Statements specified in Subsection a. of this subsection be
submitted by the applicant for all applications for variance relief
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, as well as for relief pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c, or for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 in
applications for site plan and subdivision approval not considered
to be minor site plans or minor subdivisions pursuant to local
ordinance, or for approval to undertake redevelopment activity
within the City of Asbury Park pursuant to the New Jersey Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
2. The City's municipal agencies shall amend their Application
Checklists to include the Contribution Disclosure Statements
specified in Subsection a. of this subsection.
3. An application shall not be deemed complete by the administrative
official or accepted for public hearing by the municipal agency until
the required Contribution Disclosure Statements are submitted.
c. Availability of Contribution Disclosure Statements. All Contribution
Disclosure Statements shall be available in the office of the
administrative officer for review by any member of the public.
d. Intent of Contribution Disclosure Statements. It is the intent of this
section that Contribution Disclosure Statements shall serve solely as a
means to inform the public and shall not serve in any manner as
evidence relevant to the decision-making criteria for granting or
denying requested variances or other approvals. Such decisions shall
continue to be governed strictly under the relevant criteria set forth in
the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or other relevant
law.
§ 2-77.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-78
1:100
§ 2-78. CONTRIBUTIONS BY REDEVELOPERS RESTRICTED WHEN
ENTERING INTO REDEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.
§ 2-78.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2757, Preamble]
The policy of the City of Asbury Park shall be to create such a regulation
which states that any entity or individual seeking to enter into a
redevelopment agreement or amendment thereto, or who is otherwise
seeking to obtain rights to develop pursuant to an existing or future
redevelopment agreement, who makes political contributions to City of
Asbury Park elected officials or to candidates for elective office within the
City of Asbury Park, or to local or county political committees, or to any
political action committee (PAC) which regularly engages in the support
of municipal elections and/or municipal parties or which engages in the
support of Asbury Park municipal campaigns and/or municipal parties, will
be ineligible to such agreements or amendments thereto.
§ 2-78.2. Prohibition of Entering Into or Amending Redevelopment
Agreements with Certain Contributors. [Ord. No. 2757]
a. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the City of
Asbury Park or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into or
amend an agreement, or otherwise contract with any redeveloper for
the planning, replanning, construction or undertaking of any
redevelopment project, including the acquisition or leasing of any
public property in conjunction with the redevelopment of any area
within the City of Asbury Park pursuant to the Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law, if that redeveloper has made any contribution of
money or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions,
during the applicable time period as specified below, to a campaign
committee of any City of Asbury Park candidate for public office or
holder of public office having responsibility for arranging, entering into
or approving the redevelopment agreement, or for appointing those
who enter into the agreement on behalf of the City of Asbury Park; or to
any municipal political campaign committee; or to any City of Asbury
Park or Monmouth County party committee; or to any political action
committee (PAC) which regularly engages in the support of municipal
elections and/or municipal parties or which engages in the support of
Asbury Park municipal campaigns and/or municipal parties. For
purposes of this section, the "applicable time period" shall be defined as
the time period between the date that the property which is the subject
of the redevelopment project has been included in a memorializing
resolution adopted by the Asbury Park City Council directing the
Asbury Park Planning Board to conduct a preliminary investigation to
determine if the site is in need of redevelopment pursuant to and in
accordance with the New Jersey Local Redevelopment and Housing
Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., and the date of entering into the
redevelopment agreement, or the twelve (12) months prior to entering
into the agreement, whichever is shorter.
§ 2-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-78.2
1:101
§ 2-78.3. Contributions Made Prior to the Effective Date. [Ord. No.
2757]
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a redeveloper to a campaign committee of any City
of Asbury Park candidate for public office or holder of public office having
responsibility for arranging, entering into or approving the redevelopment
agreement, or for appointing those who enter into the agreement on behalf
of the City of Asbury Park, or to any municipal political campaign
b. All redevelopment agreements or amendments thereto entered into by
the City of Asbury Park shall contain a provision prohibiting
redevelopers as defined in Subsection (c) below from soliciting or
making any contribution of money or pledge of a contribution, including
in-kind contributions, to a campaign committee of any City of Asbury
Park candidate for public office or holder of public office having
responsibility for arranging, entering into or approving the
redevelopment agreement, or for appointing those who enter into the
agreement on behalf of the City of Asbury Park, or to any municipal
political campaign committee, or to any City of Asbury Park or
Monmouth County party committee, or to any political action
committee (PAC) which regularly engages in the support of municipal
elections and/or municipal parties or which engages in the support of
Asbury Park municipal campaigns and/or municipal parties, between
the time of first communication between that redeveloper and the
municipality regarding a redevelopment project and the later of the
termination of negotiations or the completion of all matters specified in
the redevelopment agreement.
c. As defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-3, a "redeveloper" means any person,
firm, corporation or public body that shall enter into or propose to enter
into a contract with the City of Asbury Park or other redevelopment
entity for the redevelopment or rehabilitation of an area in need of
redevelopment, or an area in need of rehabilitation, or any part thereof,
under the provisions of the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, or
for any construction or other work forming part of a redevelopment or
rehabilitation project within the City of Asbury Park. For the purposes
of this section, the term "redeveloper" shall include all "sub-developers"
who are under contract with a redeveloper to perform redevelopment
or rehabilitation work at any redevelopment site within the City of
Asbury Park. Furthermore, for the purposes of this section, the
definition of a redeveloper shall include the corporation, business trust
or other entity that is performing the redevelopment or rehabilitation
work within the City of Asbury Park, as well as all partners and/or
officers therein, and all owners of ten (10%) percent or more of the
equity in the corporation, business trust or other entity. Spouses and
registered domestic partners of those regulated hereunder, as well as
adult children living at home, shall also be considered "redevelopers"
under this section. In addition, subsidiaries owned or controlled by the
redeveloper shall also be covered by this definition.
§ 2-78.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-78.3
1:102
committee, or to any City of Asbury Park or Monmouth County party
committee, or to any political action committee (PAC) which regularly
engages in the support of municipal elections and/or municipal parties
or which engages in the support of Asbury Park municipal campaigns
and/or municipal parties, shall be deemed a violation of this section, nor
shall an agreement for redevelopment projects of any kind whatsoever be
disqualified thereby, if that contribution or agreement was made by the
redeveloper prior to the effective date of this section.
§ 2-78.4. Notice Given by Municipality; Sworn Statement of
Redeveloper. [Ord. No. 2757]
§ 2-78.5. Return of Excess Contributions. [Ord. No. 2757]
A redeveloper may cure a violation of Subsection 2-78.2, if, within thirty
(30) days after the general election, the redeveloper notifies the City
Council in writing and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution
from the municipal candidate or office holder or the municipal or county
political committee or the PAC referenced in this section.
§ 2-78.6. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2757]
a. It shall be the City's continuing responsibility to give notice of this
section when the City gives notice of redevelopment pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:114-6 and when the City adopts a resolution directing the
Planning Board to prepare a redevelopment plan and at the time that
the City adopts an ordinance to implement a redevelopment plan.
b. Prior to arranging, entering into or approving a redevelopment
agreement with any redeveloper, the City of Asbury Park or any of its
purchasing agents or agencies or independent authorities, as the case
may be, shall receive a sworn statement from the redeveloper that the
redeveloper has not made any contribution in violation of Subsection
2-78.2a above. Furthermore, the redeveloper shall have a continuing
duty to report any violations of this section that may occur while
arranging and entering into the redevelopment agreement, and until all
specified terms of the agreement have been completed. The
certification required under this subsection shall be made prior to entry
into the agreement with the municipality and shall be in addition to any
other certifications that may be required by any other provision of law.
a. It shall be a breach of the terms of the City of Asbury Park
redevelopment agreement for a redeveloper to: (1) make or solicit a
contribution in violation of this section; (2) knowingly conceal or
misrepresent a contribution given or received; (3) make or solicit
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution; (4) make or solicit any
contribution on the condition or with the agreement that it will be
contributed to a campaign committee of any candidate or holder of the
public office of City of Asbury Park; (5) engage or employ a lobbyist or
§ 2-78.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-78.6
1:103
§ 2-79. through § 2-80. (RESERVED)
consultant with the intent or understanding that such lobbyist or
consultant would make or solicit any contribution, which if made or
solicited by the redeveloper itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this section; (6) fund contributions made by third parties,
including consultants, attorneys, family members, and employees; (7)
engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent of this
section; or (8) directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or
means, do any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of
this section.
b. Any redeveloper who commits a violation of any of the provisions
referenced in Subsection a. above shall be disqualified from eligibility
for future City of Asbury Park redevelopment agreements for a period
of four (4) calendar years from the date of the violation.
§ 2-78.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-79
1:104
ARTICLE XI
Fees
§ 2-81. ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
§ 2-81.1. Copying Costs. [Ord. No. 2577; N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5; New]
The following costs shall be charged for copies and other requested
material from the municipality in accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5.b.
§ 2-82. HOURLY BILLING RATES FOR CITY EMPLOYEES FOR
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT; PROJECTS FEE SCHEDULE.
§ 2-82.1. Hourly Billing Rates Established. [Ord. No. 2707 § 1; Ord.
No. 2829]
The City of Asbury Park shall establish the hourly billing rates to be charged
for the services of City employees for capital improvement projects within
a. Basic per page copy fees, actual cost not to exceed:
1. 8 1/2 x 11: $0.05 per page
2. 8 1/2 x 14: $0.07 per page
3. Should the actual costs to produce paper copies exceed the $0.05
and $0.07 rates, the municipality may charge the actual cost of
duplication;
4. The Borough will provide electronic records free of charge (i.e.
records sent via e-mail and fax); and
5. The Borough will charge the actual cost to provide records in
another medium (i.e. computer disc, CD-ROM, DVD).
b. Access to electronic records and non-printed materials shall be
provided free of charge, but the public agency may charge for the
actual costs of any needed supplies such as computer discs.
c. Special service charges; Extraordinary expenditure of time and effort.
1. Special Service Charge. Whenever the nature, format, manner of
collation, or volume cannot be reproduced by ordinary document
copying equipment in ordinary business size or involves an
extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the
request, the public agency may charge in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, a special service charge of twenty-eight
dollars and fifty-one cents ($28.51) per hour. Requests that require
legal review or other special professional review will be estimated
upon submission and review of the request. The requestor shall
have the opportunity to review and object to the charge prior to it
being incurred.
§ 2-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-82.1
1:105
the City of Asbury Park by a fee schedule which shall be approved and
adopted by the Mayor and City Council by resolution.
§ 2-82.2. Fee Schedule Adopted. [Ord. No. 2707 § 2; Ord. No. 2829]
The City shall adopt a fee schedule and rates by resolution of the Mayor and
City Council.
§ 2-82.3. Applicability of Fees. [Ord. No. 2707 § 3]
Fees may be charged to any developers and/or funding agencies, as
appropriate, who are involved with and/or funding capital improvement
projects within the City of Asbury Park.
§ 2-82.4. Deposit and Use of Fees. [Ord. No. 2707 § 4]
Any and all fees charged to developers and/or funding agencies as a result
of this section shall be placed into the City's General Revenue Account,
and shall be utilized to offset the expenses associated with the provision of
services by City employees to assist with or facilitate capital improvement
projects performed within the City. All such assessments must be paid
within thirty (30) days of the due date. If not paid, then all City services and
activities with respect to the capital improvement project shall cease.
§ 2-83. TAX COLLECTOR FEES.
§ 2-83.1. Redemption Calculations; Requests; Fees. [Ord. No. 3009]
§ 2-84. RECREATION FEES.
§ 2-84.1. Fees Established. [Ord. No. 3027]
a. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-54 the Tax Collector shall provide to
any party entitled to redeem a certificate pursuant to this section
(N.J.S.A. 54:5-54) two (2) calculations of the amount required for
redemption within a calendar year at no cost. For each subsequent
calculation requested from the Tax Collector there shall be a fifty ($50)
dollar fee. A request for a redemption calculation shall be made in
writing to the Tax Collector.
b. In accordance with the N.J.S.A. 54:5-97 the Tax Collector may charge a
lienholder of a tax lien fifty ($50) dollars for the calculation of the
amount due to redeem the tax lien as required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-97. Any request for a redemption calculation shall specify the date
to be used for the calculation, which shall be the date of the notice.
Neither the Tax Collector nor the municipality shall be liable for an
incorrect calculation. The fee paid to the municipality shall not become
part of the lien and shall not be passed on to any party entitled to
redeem pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-54.
§ 2-82.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-84.1
1:106
§ 2-85. MARRIAGE AND CIVIL UNION CEREMONIES; FEES;
MAYOR'S EXPENSES.
§ 2-85.1. Fees for Performance of Ceremonies. [Ord. No. 3080]
The purpose of this section is to establish policies and procedures for the
collection of fees associated with the performance of marriage or civil union
ceremonies by the Mayor or Deputy Mayor.
§ 2-85.2. Fee Established, Disposition of Fees; Method of Payment.
[Ord. No. 3080]
§ 2-86. REQUESTS FOR PROFESSIONAL SERVICES OF CITY
OFFICIALS AND CITY EMPLOYEES.
§ 2-86.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2015-50]
A resident of the City of Asbury Park (the "City") or owner of a business
located within the City or other applicant (the "applicant"), may from time
to time submit a request to the Mayor and Council relating to a certain
project which requires professional services to be rendered by professionals
appointed and/or employed by the City.
Such professional services may include research, preparation and/or review
of documents, and/or other services which are billable at the regular hourly
rates of those professionals providing the services.
a. There are hereby established certain nonrefundable fees for
participation in the various recreational programs offered by and
through the Recreation Department of the City of Asbury Park. A fee
schedule setting forth all of the fees shall be established on an annual
basis by the Mayor and Council by resolution.
b. A request for a waiver from the fees established shall be considered on
a case by case basis by the Recreation Department pursuant to
established criteria. The Recreation Department is hereby authorized
to grant such waivers when the appropriate criteria have been met by
an applicant, which determination shall be made in the sole discretion
of the Recreation Department.
a. Collection of Fees. Persons seeking to be married or joined in civil union
by the Mayor or Deputy Mayor, as appropriate, shall remit a fee of
seventy-five ($75) dollars payable to the City of Asbury Park.
b. Compensation for Services.
1. The fee shall be paid by check to the City of Asbury Park and
deposited into the City's current fund.
2. Fees for services rendered under this section shall be disbursed to
the Mayor or Deputy Mayor through the appropriate budget line
item and with appropriate authorization.
§ 2-84.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-86.1
1:107
The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for said process,
including the posting of escrow funds by the private applicant. In this way,
the costs and expenses associated with such private requests shall be paid
by the applicant whose interests are being furthered by the request, rather
than by the City's taxpayers.
§ 2-86.2. Application; Required Submissions. [Ord. No. 2015-50]
§ 2-86.3. Distribution. [Ord. No. 2015-50]
Upon receipt of a complete application, the City Manager shall distribute
copies of the request to the Mayor and Council and appropriate
professionals.
§ 2-86.4. Escrow Deposit. [Ord. No. 2015-50]
a. Requests made by an applicant relating to private project(s) which
require professional services to be rendered by professionals appointed
and/or employed by the City may be made in accordance with the
provisions set forth in this section.
b. The applicant must submit a written request to the City Manager which
shall include a precise, written description of the application and the
request that is being made of the City. If available, the applicant shall
also submit conceptual plans to describe the specific project. These can
include a sketch site plan and floor plans. Plans need not be prepared
by a licensed professional, but must be of sufficient detail to describe
the proposed project.
c. The City Manager, the Mayor and Council, and/or City staff may request
additional information that is found necessary to complete their review.
a. Escrow fees, in an amount to be determined by the City Manager and
Chief Financial Officer, shall be deposited at the time that an
application is filed. The minimum escrow amount shall be five hundred
($500)dollars. The applicant shall supplement the escrow deposit, as
required, to cover the cost of professional services rendered in
connection with the project, as needed.
b. Any escrow funds not needed to pay outstanding invoices of
professionals who have rendered professional services related to the
project shall be returned to the applicant within a reasonable time after
the services are rendered.
c. If an escrow account contains insufficient funds at any time to enable
the City and/or the approved professionals to perform the required
services, the City will provide the applicant with a notice of the amount
of insufficient funds. Said notice will also provide that in order for the
professional services to continue, the deficiency must be paid within the
time frame set forth in the notice. If the applicant does not comply with
§ 2-86.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-86.4
1:108
§ 2-86.5. Professional Services Covered by Escrow Deposit. [Ord.
No. 2015-50]
Professional services contemplated hereunder shall include, but shall not be
limited to attorneys engaged by the City, professional planners, consultants,
and/or other advisors to the City.
§ 2-87. PAYMENT IN LIEU OF PARKING IN THE CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD). [Ord No. 2017-6]
The payment in lieu of parking shall be $15,000 per space.
All units that are deeded affordable per HUD standard for Monmouth
County for a minimum of ten (10) years shall pay fifty (50%) percent
($7,500) of the fee per space.
The proceeds shall be deposited into a fund established solely for the
acquisition, development, expansion or capital repair of public and
municipal parking facilities, traffic- or transportation-related capital
projects, the provision or operating expenses of transit facilities designed
to reduce reliance on private automobiles, programs to facilitate carpooling
or ride sharing, and creating a consistent streetscape for all user groups
utilizing all modes of transportation by introducing context-sensitive design
elements at intersections and corridors, such as parking meters, wayfinding
signage, kiosks, trails, sidewalks, crosswalks, streets and similar
improvements that connect users to public and municipal parking facilities
throughout the City. The proceeds of such fund shall not be considered a
part of the municipal general fund.
§ 2-88. DEVELOPMENT FEES. [Added 12-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-21]
§ 2-88.1. Purpose.
the terms of the notice all professional services will cease until such
time as the applicant complies with the terms of the notice.
a. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
b. COAH was authorized by P.L. 2008, c. 46, Section 8 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.2), and the Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7) to adopt and promulgate
regulations necessary for the establishment, implementation, review,
monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust
funds and corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under
the jurisdiction of COAH or a court of competent jurisdiction and have a
§ 2-86.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-88.1
1:109
§ 2-88.2. Basic requirements.
§ 2-88.3. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development that is
inclusionary development, a municipal construction project containing
affordable units or a 100% affordable development. This shall include any
project that contains restricted very-low, low-, moderate-, or middle-income
units on or off-site. This shall also include any project that utilizes funds
from the City's Regional Contribution Agreements (RCA).
COAH or THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Fair Housing Act.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
COAH- or court-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
c. In Re: Adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:971 by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing, 221 N.J. 1 (2015), also known as the Mount Laurel
IV decision, the Supreme Court remanded COAH's duties to the
Superior Court. As a result, affordable housing development fee
collections and expenditures from the municipal affordable housing
trust funds to implement municipal Third Round Fair Share Plans
through July 1, 2025, are under the Court's jurisdiction and are subject
to approval by the Court.
d. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32 through 38 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-329.2 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7,
respectively). Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for
the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This
section shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules on
development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.2
a. This ordinance shall not be effective until approved by the Superior
Court pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93.8.
b. The City of Asbury Park shall not spend development fees until the
Court has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
1. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 expired on 6-2-2015.
2. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93.8 expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 2-88.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-88.3
1:110
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 2-88.4. Residential development fees.
a. Imposed fees.
1. Within all Zoning Districts and redevelopment areas, residential
developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized
assessed value for residential development, provided no increased
density is permitted.
2. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional units that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application. Example: If an approval allows four units to be
constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could
equal 1.5% of the equalized assessed value on the first two units;
and the specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized
assessed value for the two additional units, provided zoning on the
site has not changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application.
b. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
1. Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
2. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval or are subject to an executed redevelopment or
§ 2-88.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-88.4
1:111
development agreement (including master redeveloper agreement)
prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee ordinance
shall be exempt from development fees unless the developer seeks
a substantial change in the approval. Where a site plan approval
does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall be
synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
3. Renovations or additions to any single-family or two-family
residence shall be exempt from paying a development fee except if
the assessed value of the renovated/expanded structure is greater
than or equal to 151% of the previously assessed value of the
structure. Example: If the post-renovation/addition assessed value
of a house originally assessed at $100,000 structure is increased to
$151,000, the developer must pay a development fee on the
increase in assessed value).
4. Buildings that are elevated or buildings that are replaced in an
elevated position shall be exempt from paying a development fee
provided the buildings are located in a special flood hazard area
and meet the following. Notwithstanding, the exemption shall not
apply if the number of residential units in the existing or
demolished building is increased.
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated to or above base flood elevation; and
(b) Within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as
the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth
number is specified) and require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and
away from proposed structures.
5. Buildings demolished and replaced due to being "destroyed" as a
result of a fire or natural disaster (excluding flood damaged
buildings that are located in the special flood hazard area) shall be
exempt from paying a development fee, except:
(a) If the assessed value of the reconstructed structure is greater
than or equal to 151% of the assessed value of the original
structure (Example: If a house assessed at $100,000 is
replaced with a house assessed at $151,000, the developer
must pay a development fee on the increase in assessed value);
or
§ 2-88.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-88.4
1:112
§ 2-88.5. Nonresidential development fees.
(b) If the number of residential units in the replacement building is
greater than the number of units in the original building being
demolished (Example: A single-family house is replaced with a
house having three residential units).
a. Imposed fees.
1. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
2. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
b. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
1. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2 1/2% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
2. The 2 1/2% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
3. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
4. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, shall
be subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
§ 2-88.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-88.5
1:113
§ 2-88.6. Collection procedures.
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
5. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by Asbury Park as a lien against the real property of the owner.
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
b. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption," to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The Construction Official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
d. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
e. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
f. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
g. Should Asbury Park fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request
§ 2-88.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-88.6
1:114
§ 2-88.7. Affordable housing trust fund.
for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and
pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
h. 50% of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at
building permit and that determined at issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
i. Appeal of development fees.
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by Asbury Park.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the Tax
Court in accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Tax
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
2. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by Asbury Park. Appeals from a determination of the Director may
be made to the Tax Court in accordance with the provisions of the
State Uniform Tax Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within
90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
a. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
b. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the affordable
housing trust fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
§ 2-88.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-88.7
1:115
§ 2-88.8. Use of funds.
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with Asbury Park's
affordable housing program.
a. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by the Court to address the City's fair share
obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such
activities include, but are not limited to, preservation or purchase of
housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability
controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units
and related costs, accessory apartment, market-to-affordable or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green building
strategies designed to be cost-saving and in accordance with accepted
national or state standards, purchase of land for affordable housing,
improvement of land to be used for affordable housing, extensions or
improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable housing sites,
financial assistance designed to increase affordability, administration
necessary for implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-83 and
specified in the approved spending plan.
b. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Asbury Park for past housing
activities.
c. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
3. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93.8 expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 2-88.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-88.8
1:116
§ 2-88.9. Monitoring.
§ 2-88.10. Ongoing collection of fees.
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
d. Asbury Park may contract with a private or public entity to administer
any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:93-8.16.4
e. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with annual monitoring requirements.
f. Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the affordable housing trust fund.
a. On or about June 30 of each year through 2025, Asbury Park shall
provide annual reporting of trust fund activity to the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs ("DCA"), COAH, or Local Government
Services ("LGS"), or other entity designated by the State of New Jersey,
with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center and posted on the
municipal website, using forms developed for this purpose by the DCA,
COAH, or LGS. This reporting shall include an accounting of all housing
trust fund activity, including the collection of development fees from
residential and nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of
constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other
funds collected in connection with Asbury Park' housing program, as
well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan
as proved by the Court.
4. Editor's Note: N.J.A.C. 5:93.8 expired on 10-16-2016.
§ 2-88.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-88.10
1:117
a. The ability for Asbury Park to impose, collect and expend development
fees shall expire with its Court-issued judgement of compliance unless
Asbury Park has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
with the Court, has filed a declaratory judgement action, and has
received the Court's approval of its development fee ordinance. If
Asbury Park fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development
fees prior to the expiration of its judgment of compliance and repose, it
may be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its
municipal trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the
"New Jersey Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to
Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Asbury Park shall
not impose a residential development fee on a development that
receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its
judgment of compliance and repose, nor shall Asbury Park retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. Asbury Park shall not
expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance and repose.
§ 2-88.10 ASBURY PARK CODE § 2-88.10
1:118
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. SALE OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES OR
POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS CONTAINING ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 3-1.1. Sale, Consumption or Possession of Alcoholic Beverages in
Public Places Prohibited. [2000 Code § 3-1.1; New]
§ 3-2. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED
IN UNLICENSED PREMISES.
§ 3-2.1. Permitting of or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
Prohibited in Certain Places. [2000 Code § 3-1.2]
a. No person shall serve, sell, dispense, drink or consume any alcoholic
beverage or have in their possession an open container containing an
alcoholic beverage on a public street, highway, avenue, alley or road of
the City or upon any public grounds, parks, sidewalks, beaches, marine
basins, beachfronts, or boardwalks in the City, or in any nonoperating
automobile, other vehicle or in any other means of transportation on the
public streets, highways, alleys, avenues, grounds, sidewalks, beaches,
parks, marine basins, beachfronts or boardwalks in the City.
b. No person shall possess any alcoholic beverage with intent to violate
Subsection a. of this subsection.
c. Any person violating any provision of Subsections a. or b. of this
subsection in the presence of a police officer shall be subject to arrest
without a warrant.
a. Definitions. As used in this section:
BUSINESS or MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT — shall mean any
dance hall, theater or any place of amusement, but shall not include any
hotel, motel or rooming house of bona fide restaurant.
b. Owner and Employees to Prohibit Consumption. No owner, agent or
employee of any business or mercantile establishment shall suffer or
permit any person to consume any alcoholic beverage, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., upon the premises, or furnish ice, glasses or
other beverages to be used in conjunction with the consumption of
alcoholic beverages unless such consumption is permitted on the
premises pursuant to a valid liquor license issued by the City.
c. Bringing Alcoholic Beverages for Consumption Prohibited. No person
shall consume any alcoholic beverage, as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et
seq., or bring with intent to consume any alcoholic beverage upon the
premises of any business or mercantile establishment unless such
§ 2-88.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2.1
1:119
§ 3-3. POSSESSION OR CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES BY PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
§ 3-3.1. Prohibited Conduct. [2000 Code § 3-3.1]
consumption is permitted upon the premises pursuant to a valid liquor
license issued by the City.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age who, without
legal authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes any
alcoholic beverage on private property. Violations of this section shall
be punishable by a fine of two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars for the
first offense and three hundred fifty ($350.00) dollars for any
subsequent offense.
b. In addition to the fine imposed pursuant to this section, the Court may,
suspend or postpone for six (6) months, the driving privilege of the
defendant. Upon conviction of any person and the suspension, or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the Court shall forward
a report to the Motor Vehicle Commission stating the first and last day
of the suspension or postponement period imposed by the Court
pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of the
sentence is less than seventeen (17) years of age, the period of license
postponement, including the suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day
the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six (6) months
after the person reaches the age of seventeen (17).
c. If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, imposed
pursuant to this section, has a valid driver's license issued by this State,
the Court shall immediately collect the driver's license and forward it to
the Commission along with the report. If for any reason the license
cannot be collected, the Court shall include in the report the complete
name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the person, as well as
the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by the
Court.
d. The Court shall inform the person in writing pursuant to P.L. 2000,
Chapter 33, amending R.S. 40:48-1, as to the potential consequences of
violating the period of suspension of postponement.
e. This section shall not be construed to prohibit an underage person from
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony, or rite, or consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase
and consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 3-2.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-3.1
1:120
§ 3-4. URINATING AND DEFECATING IN PUBLIC.
§ 3-4.1. Prohibited Acts; Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-36]
It shall be unlawful and shall be a public nuisance for any person: to
urinate or defecate in public places or streets, or on the lawns or yards of
private homes and residences, or in the public view. Any person violating
the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be liable for a minimum
fine of four hundred ($400.00) dollars and a maximum fine of one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars.
§ 3-5. SMOKING OR LITTERING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
§ 3-5.1. Smoking or Littering of Tobacco Products Prohibited in
Certain Public Parks. [Ord. No. 3018]
1. For purposes of this section, "guardian" is defined as a person who
has qualified as a guardian of the underage person pursuant to
testamentary or Court appointment.
2. Pursuant to this section "relative" shall be defined as the underage
person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or any other person
related by blood or affinity.
f. This section shall not be construed to prohibit possession of alcoholic
beverages by any person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey, or actively engaged in the
preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel
management program at a County vocational school, or post-secondary
educational institution.
a. Smoking Prohibited in Certain Public Parks. No person shall smoke any
cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products at any time in those public
parks which have been designated as smoke-free parks by the Mayor
and City Council on a list to be established annually by resolution.
b. Discarding of Cigarette Butts and Tobacco Products Prohibited. No
person shall throw or discard any cigarette butts, cigar butts, and/or
any other tobacco products at any time in those public parks which
have been designated as smoke-free parks by the Mayor and Council on
a list to be established annually by resolution.
c. Smoke-Free Zone Signs. The City shall attach or erect appropriate
signage indicating "City of Asbury Park Smoke-Free Zone" to all such
public parks designated as smoke-free by the May or and Council.
d. Penalties. The penalty for violation of this section shall, upon
conviction, be two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars for the first offense,
five hundred ($500.00) dollars for the second offense, and one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars for each subsequent offense.
§ 3-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6
1:121
§ 3-6. DRUG-FREE ZONES SURROUNDING PUBLIC HOUSING
FACILITIES, PARKS AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
§ 3-6.1. Official Record of Location and Boundaries. [2000 Code
§ 3-8.1; Ord. No. 2823; Ord. No. 2901; Ord. No. 2018-45]
The map entitled, "Drug Free Zone Map," produced by the City Engineer,
Brian Grant, P.E., dated February 1, 2007, and last revised April 14, 2009,
and now revised by the City Engineer Christine Ballard with a map date of
September 19, 2018 and certified as accurate according to the certification
which may be found on file in the office of the City Clerk as annexed to
Ordinance No. 2901, is hereby approved and adopted by the Mayor and City
Council of the City of Asbury Park as the official finding and record of the
location and boundaries of the area or areas on or within five hundred (500)
feet of all real property within the City of Asbury Park that comprise a public
housing facility, a public park or a public building.
§ 3-6.2. Distribution of Map. [2000 Code § 3-8.2; Ord. No. 2901]
The original map approved by this section, this section and the certification
annexed to Ordinance No. 2901 as Exhibit A, or true copies of these
documents, shall be forwarded to the Clerk of the County of Monmouth and
to the office of the Monmouth County Prosecutor.
§ 3-7. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-7.1. Adoption of Drug-Free School Zone Map. [2000 Code
§ 3-9.1; Ord. No. 2823; Ord. No. 2901; Ord. No. 2018-45]
The map entitled, "Drug Free Zone Map," produced by the City Engineer,
Brian Grant, P.E., dated February 1, 2007, and revised April 14, 2009, and
now revised by the City Engineer Christine Ballard with a map date of
September 19, 2018 and certified as accurate according to the certification
which may be found on file in the office of the City Clerk as annexed to
Ordinance No. 2901, is hereby approved and adopted by the Mayor and
City Council of the City of Asbury Park as the official finding and record of
the location and boundaries of the area or areas on or within one thousand
(1,000) feet of all property within the City that is used for school purposes,
or which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board.
§ 3-7.2. Establishment of Map. [2000 Code § 3-9.2; Ord. No. 2823;
Ord. No. 2901]
The "Drug Free Zone Map" approved and adopted pursuant to § 3-7.1 shall
continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location and
boundaries of areas on or within one thousand (1,000) feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this section
§ 3-6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-7.2
1:122
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and Drug Free Zones.
§ 3-7.3. Notification of Changes in Boundaries. [2000 Code § 3-9.3]
The School Board, or the Chief Administrative Officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-7.4. Clerk to Maintain Map. [2000 Code § 3-9.4]
The City Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the original
of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 3-7.1, and to provide, at a
reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which
may request such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true
copy of the map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby
further directed that a true copy of such map and of this section shall be
provided without cost to the County Clerk and to the office of the Monmouth
County Prosecutor.
§ 3-7.5. Use of Map. [2000 Code § 3-9.5; Ord. No. 2823]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 3-7.1
was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in prosecutions
arising under the criminal laws of this State, and that pursuant to State
law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within one
thousand (1,000) feet of such school property.
b. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that Statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to Subsection a1 of this subsection. The failure of the
map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned
§ 3-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7.5
1:123
§ 3-8. FIREARMS; DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
§ 3-8.1. Prohibited Acts. [2000 Code § 3-10]
§ 3-9. NOISE.
§ 3-9.1. Prohibited Noise Nuisances; Findings. [Ord. No. 2932
§ 3-25.1]
Excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, safety and welfare,
and to the quality of life of the residents of the City of Asbury Park, and
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The residents of the City of
Asbury Park have a right to and should be insured an environment free from
excessive sound. The following regulations are enacted to prevent excessive
sound that may jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the City's citizens
or degrade their quality of life.
§ 3-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2932 § 3-25.2]
As used in this section:
EMERGENCY WORK — shall mean any work or action necessary to deliver
essential services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas,
electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, and public transportation, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way, or abating life threatening conditions.
MOTORCYCLE — shall mean an unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle
for the use of the operator and two (2) or three (3) wheels in contact with
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries
of such property, which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record
that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school
board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
c. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug Free Zone Map have been
complied with.
a. No person shall discharge any firearm within the City. The word
"firearm" includes any pistol, revolver, shotgun, rifle, air gun, air pistol,
or any other instrument from which any shot, bullet or other missile is
propelled with sufficient force to injure a person.
b. This section does not apply to any person authorized to discharge a
firearm by reason of his/her membership in any Police Department or
other law enforcement agency or any Police Officer or other person
authorized by law to carry and discharge firearms in the carrying out of
his/her duties, or the discharge of a firearm for any lawful purpose.
§ 3-7.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-9.2
1:124
the ground, including, but not limited to, motor scooters, mopeds, minibikes
and ATVs.
MOTOR VEHICLE — shall mean any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on
land by an engine or motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars/
automobiles, buses, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, go-carts,
snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies, or racing vehicles,
but not including motorcycles.
MUFFLER — shall mean a sound dissipative device or system for abating
the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.
NOISE — shall mean any sounds of such level and duration which are,
or tend to be, injurious to human health or welfare, or which would
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, company,
association, society, club, partnership, joint stock company, or any other
form of association or organization, and shall also include the State or any
political subdivision thereof, and any agency or instrumentality of the State.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road,
highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place that is leased, owned or controlled
by, or otherwise under the jurisdiction of, a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — shall mean any real property or structures thereon that
are owned or controlled by the City of Asbury Park or other governmental
entity.
§ 3-9.3. Prohibited Conduct; Nuisance Noise. [Ord. No. 2932
§ 3-25.3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or to cause, suffer or permit
to be made or to be continued, any behavior or loud, unnecessary or
unusual noise, or any noise or act which either annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any other person
within the corporate limits of the City of Asbury Park. Such conduct shall be
considered a nuisance.
§ 3-9.4. Nuisance Prohibitions Enumerated. [Ord. No. 2932
§ 3-25.4]
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation
of this section, when the noise emanating from such acts is clearly audible
to neighboring property owners or inhabitants, or clearly audible from at
least one hundred (100) feet from the actor, source or device. The following
enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive:
a. Audio, Video or Musical Devices. The playing or use of any audio, visual
or music devices, including but not limited to radios, stereos, I-Pods,
televisions, musical instruments or equipment, musical amplifying
devices of any kind, or other machines or devices of any kind for the
production or reproduction of sound, in such a manner or in such
§ 3-9.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-9.4
1:125
volume as to unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or
repose of persons in any dwelling unit or other type of residence, or
while otherwise on their property, or to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of any person in general, or to play or operate the same
with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the
person or persons who are in the room, chamber, venue, place or area
in which said machine or device is operated and who are voluntary
listeners thereto.
b. Yelling, Shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on
the public streets, or yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing at
any other place, whether public or private, in such a manner and in
such volume and intensity to disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
persons in any office or dwelling, or any other type of residence, or of
any persons in the vicinity.
c. Sounds of Peddlers, Hawkers and Vendors. The sounds or shouting of
peddlers, hawkers and/or vendors soliciting business in such a manner
and in such volume and intensity to disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood, or so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose
of persons in any office or dwelling, or any other type of residence, or of
any persons in the vicinity.
d. Loudspeakers and Amplifiers for Advertising. The use, operation, or
permitting the playing, use or operation of any radio, television, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound which is
cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising
or attracting the attention of the public to any building, structure, store
or establishment, except that noncommercial public speaking and
public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public
right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this section.
e. Construction. The operation of any equipment used in commercial
construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings,
structures, streets or appurtenances thereto, in residential or
commercial zone districts or in mixed-use zone districts which permit
residential uses, as identified in the City's Land Development
Regulations and Zoning Map or as identified in a duly adopted
redevelopment plan, on weekdays between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day, or between 6:00 p.m. Saturday night and
8:00 a.m. Monday morning and on legal holidays, except in the case of
emergency work.
f. Landscaping Equipment. The operation of power mowers and power
tools used in landscaping outdoors between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day.
§ 3-9.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-9.4
1:126
g. Loading Operations. Loading, unloading, opening, or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage cans or similar objects
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, in such
a manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons
in any office or dwelling, or any other type of residence, or of any
persons in the vicinity.
h. Refuse Compacting Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
any motor vehicle which can compact refuse, and which creates, during
the compacting cycle a disturbing noise between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. the following day in residential zone districts or in mixed-use zone
districts which permit residential uses, as identified in the City's Land
Development Regulations and Zoning Map or as identified in the duly
adopted redevelopment plan.
i. Vehicle Repairs or Testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing
any motor vehicle, off-road vehicle or motorboat in or near a residential
zone district or in or near a mixed-use zone district which permits
residential uses, as identified in the City's Land Development
Regulations and Zoning Map or as identified in a duly adopted
redevelopment plan, in such a manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office or dwelling, or any other type
of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
j. Standing Motor Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of a
motor vehicle or any attached auxiliary equipment for a period longer
than three (3) minutes in any hour while such vehicle is stationary, for
reasons other than traffic congestion or emergency work, on a public
right-of-way or public space within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a
residential zone district or mixed-use zone district which permits
residential uses, as identified in the City's Land Development
Regulations and Zoning Map or as identified in a duly adopted
redevelopment plan, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the
following day, or while on private property in a residential zone district
or mixed-use zone district which permits residential uses, as identified
in the City's Land Development Regulations and Zoning Map or as
identified in a duly adopted redevelopment plan, while not within a
completely enclosed structure.
k. Bells and Alarms. The sounding or permitting the sound of any alarm,
including but not limited to an alarm on any building or motor vehicle,
or the sounding of bells, unless such alarm or bells shall terminate
operation within fifteen (15) minutes of being activated.
l. Horns, Signal Devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any motor vehicle, motorcycle or any other vehicle on any
street or public space within the City of Asbury Park, except as a danger
warning; the creation by means of any horn or signaling device of any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; or the sounding of any said horn or
signaling device for any unnecessary or unreasonable period of time; or
the use of said horn or signaling device when traffic is for any reason
§ 3-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-9.4
1:127
§ 3-9.5. Prevailing Time. [Ord. No. 2932 § 3-25.5]
The hours referenced in this section shall refer to prevailing time, i.e.,
either Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time.
§ 3-9.6. Persons Affected. [Ord. No. 2932 § 3-25.6]
This section is intended to apply to and bind all owners, tenants and
occupants of real property within the City of Asbury Park, as well as
to guests at such real property, and to all visitors and passers-by while
within the corporate limits of the City of Asbury Park, and to all other
persons as heretofore defined within this section. This section shall not
apply to representatives and/or employees of the City of Asbury Park while
performing tasks on official business of the City of Asbury Park, or for
specific activities authorized by the Mayor and City Council.
§ 3-9.7. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2932 § 3-25.7]
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and the Code Enforcement
Official of the City of Asbury Park to determine whether or not this section
has been and is being complied with and to enforce the provisions of this
section against any person violating the same.
§ 3-9.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2932 § 3-25.8]
Any Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Asbury Park,
or any taxpayer or resident of the City of Asbury Park, may make a
complaint in the Municipal Court of the City of Asbury Park for any
violations of this section, or any subsection, Subsection or provisions
thereof. Upon a conviction in such case, for each and every violation, the
person committing, taking part in or assisting in such violation or violations
shall be liable to the penalties as set forth in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 3-10. BEGGING AND PANHANDLING.
§ 3-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2018-36]
As used in this section:
AGGRESSIVE MANNER — shall mean:
held up; or the use of any horn, whistle or device operated by engine
exhaust.
m. Animals, Birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which emits
frequent or long-continued noises, including but not limited to barking,
howling, growling or whining, which disturbs the peace or quiet, or
interferes with the sleep or rest of any person.
n. Mufflers. The use of a motor vehicle, motorcycle or any other vehicle on
any street or public space within the City of Asbury Park which does not
have a muffler in good working order.
§ 3-9.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-10.1
1:128
ASK — see "Beg."
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE ("ATM") — shall mean a device linked
to a financial institution's account records which is able to carry out
transactions including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash
withdrawals, balance inquiries and mortgage and loan payments.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY — shall mean the area
comprised of one or more automated teller machines and any adjacent
space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking
hours.
BANK or CHECK-CASHING BUSINESS — shall mean any person or entity
licensed by the State of New Jersey Department of Banking to engage in
the business of cashing checks, drafts or money orders for consideration
pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey banking laws.
BEG — shall mean using the spoken, written or printed word or bodily
gestures, signs or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate
donation of money or other item of value or soliciting the sale of goods or
services.
PUBLIC PLACE — shall mean a place to which the public or a substantial
group of persons has access and includes, but is not limited to, any street,
highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of
amusement, park, playground, any hallway, lobby and other portion of an
apartment, house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed
for actual residence. Public places shall also include door-to-door begging
in an aggressive manner as defined herein.
SOLICIT — see "Beg."
Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before,
during or after soliciting, asking or begging, if that conduct is intended
or is likely to cause a reasonable person to:
Fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of
property or the commission of an offense under the New Jersey
Criminal Code upon oneself or another;
1.
2. Otherwise be intimated into giving money or other item of value; or
3. Suffer unreasonable inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
a.
Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person
or with an occupied vehicle, without that person's consent, in the
course of soliciting, asking or begging.
b.
Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a
pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a
pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical
contact.
c.
d. Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited.
§ 3-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10.2
1:129
§ 3-10.2. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. No. 2018-36]
No person shall:
§ 3-10.3. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2018-36]
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any unenclosed ATM located
within any building, structure or space whose primary purpose or function
is unrelated to banking activities including, but not limited to,
supermarkets, airports and school buildings, provided that such ATM shall
be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the
buildings, structure or space in which such machine is located.
a. Solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place.
b. Solicit, ask or beg within ten (10) feet of any entrance or exit of any
bank or check-cashing business during its business hours or within ten
(10) feet of any ATM during the time it is available for customers' use;
provided, however, that when an ATM is located within an automated
teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the
entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; provided,
further, that no person shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated
teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know
that (s)he does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other
person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this subsection
shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending and services within
such areas.
c. Approach an operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle when such
vehicle is located on any street, for the purpose of either performing or
offering to perform a service in connection with such vehicle or
otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services, if such approaching,
performing, offering or soliciting is done in an aggressive manner as
defined in § 3-10.1; provided, however, that this subsection shall not
apply to services rendered in connection with the lawful towing of such
vehicle or in connection with emergency repairs requested by the
operator or other occupant of such vehicle.
d. Solicit, ask or beg from an individual(s) who is/are sitting at a sidewalk
café located on Bangs Avenue, Cookman Avenue, Lake Avenue, Main
Street, the Asbury Park boardwalk, or any other location(s) within the
City where a sidewalk café permit has been issued.
e. Solicit, ask or beg from an individual(s) who is/are waiting in line for an
entertainment-oriented purpose at one of the commercial venues within
the City, or at a restaurant or other type of eating or drinking
establishment within the City.
§ 3-10.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-10.4
1:130
§ 3-10.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2018-36]
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a violation
punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, General Penalty, of the
Code of the City of Asbury Park, New Jersey.
§ 3-11. through § 3-13. (RESERVED)
§ 3-14. LITTER.
§ 3-14.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 3-21.1]
As used in this section:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — shall mean and include a Police Officer,
Code Enforcement Officer, the Health Officer or his/her agent and/or the
Fire Chief or his/her agent.
GARBAGE — shall mean putrescible animal, vegetable or mineral wastes
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein, and
all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — shall mean a container suitable for depositing
litter.
OFFICIAL — shall mean the Code Enforcement Officer, the Health Officer
or his/her agent, or a Police Officer.
PUBLIC PLACE — shall mean any and all streets, gutters, sidewalks,
boulevards, alleys or other public ways; any and all public parks, squares,
spaces, grounds, and buildings; any pond, lake or stream or other body of
water within the City or on its borders.
REFUSE — shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid, residential, commercial
and/or industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, including but not limited to paper,
wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood,
glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 3-14.2. Litter in Public Places; Placement of Material in Sidewalk
or Street Prohibited. [2000 Code § 3-21.2]
a. No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of
business, shall sweep, throw or deposit litter in or upon any occupied,
§ 3-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-14.2
1:131
§ 3-14.3. Litter Thrown by Persons from Vehicles. [2000 Code
§ 3-21.3]
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter in, upon, or about any public place or private property within the City.
§ 3-14.4. Truck Loads Causing Litter. [2000 Code § 3-21.4]
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any public place or
private property within the City.
§ 3-14.5. Transportation from Outside Municipality. [2000 Code
§ 3-21.5]
No person shall bring, cart or transport any litter into this City for the
purpose of dumping or disposing thereof, unless so permitted by the
authorized Municipal Officer of the City.
§ 3-14.6. Casting of Advertisements; Placement of Certain Circulars
Regulated. [2000 Code § 3-21.6; New]
No person shall cast or place, or cause to be cast or placed any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on any public street or on the
sidewalks thereof, or into any vestibules or yards, or upon porches of
any dwelling house or other building, or on any vehicle while on any
roadway, street or parking lot, public or private; provided, however, that this
open or vacant property whether owned by such person or not, or
in any public place within the City except in public receptacles or
in authorized private receptacles for collection. Persons placing litter
in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so
in such manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by
the elements in, upon, or about any public place or private property.
Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front
of their premises free from litter.
b. No owner, occupant or tenant of any store, dwelling or building within
the City, or his/her agent, or employee, shall sweep, throw or deposit, or
permit to be swept, thrown or deposited any paper, dirt, garbage,
rubbish or any waste or other material of any kind, from his/her store,
dwelling or other building, on, into, or upon the sidewalk or gutter in
front of the premises occupied by him/her, unless the material is
contained in receptacles or deposited in the manner required by City
ordinances.
c. No person shall throw, scatter or deposit on any sidewalk, street, bridge
or public passageway, public place, or private property, lake or
waterway, or on any crosswalk in any street, any fruit or vegetable,
trash, garbage, rubbish, waste or other material or substance.
§ 3-14.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-14.6
1:132
section shall not apply to newspapers and addressed envelopes delivered
to subscribers and addressees. Advertisements, handbills, circulars and
papers may be distributed in the City provided the same are securely placed
at each dwelling so as not to be blown away by the wind.
§ 3-14.7. Placement of Posters on Trees and Posts Prohibited. [2000
Code § 3-21.6]
No person shall place any bill, poster, dodger or other advertising matter
upon any post, tree or other object standing in the public street in the City.
This does not apply to the posting of notices authorized to be posted by the
City Code.
§ 3-14.8. Illegal Dumping. [2000 Code § 3-21.8; New]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture, or private property, except by written consent to the owner of the
property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
Any person who is found to be in violation of this section and/or N.J.S.A.
13:1E-9 shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5 and
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-9.
All conveyances used or intended for use in the willful discharge, in
violation of this section and/or the provisions of N.J.S.A. 13:1E-9 of any solid
waste, or hazardous waste, are subject to forfeiture to the State pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 13:1K-1 et seq.
Any member of the public who supplies information to an enforcing
authority which proximately results in the imposition and collection of a
civil penalty as a result of a civil action; or any code, rule or regulation
promulgated, administrative order issued, or assessment imposed pursuant
thereto, shall be entitled to a reward of ten (10%) percent of the civil
penalty collected, or two hundred ($200.00) dollars, whichever amount is
greater. The reward shall be paid by the City from any money received by
the City pursuant to Subsection (i) of Section 9 of P.L. 1970, c. 39 (N.J.S.A.
13:1E-9) and this section.
§ 3-14.9. Litter Receptacles Required; Location and Event
Requirements. [2000 Code § 3-21.9]
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the municipality, including sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
minimum there shall be no singular linear quarter (1/4) mile without a
receptacle; buildings held out for the use by the public, including schools,
government buildings, railroad and bus stations, parks and drive-in
restaurants; all street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas;
§ 3-14.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-14.9
1:133
construction sites; gasoline service station islands; shopping centers;
parking lots; beaches and bathing areas; at special events to which the
public is invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and
festivals. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events
shall be responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
§ 3-14.10. Maintenance of Sidewalks; Sweeping Onto Sidewalk or
Street Prohibited. [2000 Code § 3-21.10]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Every person who owns or occupies property shall
keep the sidewalk in front of his/her premises free of litter. All litter
sweepings shall be collected and properly containerized for disposal.
§ 3-14.11. Open and Overflowing Waste Disposal Bins. [2000 Code
§ 3-21.11]
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 3-14.12. Construction Sites. [2000 Code § 3-21.12]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or immediately following completion of any construction or
demolition project. It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor
in charge of a construction site to furnish containers adequate to
accommodate flyable or non-flyable debris or trash at areas convenient to
construction areas and to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a
manner and with such a frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse. See also
Chapter XII, Building and Housing for additional construction regulations.
§ 3-14.13. Duty of Owner, Lessee and Tenant to Keep Sidewalks Free
from Obstruction. [2000 Code § 3-21.13]
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and curb
abutting the building or structure free of obstruction or nuisances of every
kind, and to keep sidewalks, area ways, backyards, courts and alleys free
from litter. See also Chapter XVI for regulations on streets and sidewalks.
For additional regulations on property maintenance, see Chapter XIII.
§ 3-14.14. Storage of Tires. [2000 Code § 3-21.14]
It shall be unlawful to store tires in any areas zoned residential except in a
fully enclosed structure.
§ 3-14.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-14.15
1:134
§ 3-14.15. Penalties. [2000 Code § 3-21.17]
The penalty for each violation shall be as stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. If
the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it continues
constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
§ 3-14.16. Cost for Removal of Litter to Be a Lien on the Premises.
[2000 Code § 3-21.18]
In the event that the owner or possessor of private property or land shall
refuse or neglect to abate or remedy the condition which constitutes a
violation of this section, the City may cause the condition to be abated and
remedied. Upon the removal of any materials prohibited to be stored or
abandoned on land by this section by or under the direction of an appointed
officer or officers of this jurisdiction, in cases where the owner or tenants
shall have refused or neglected to remove the materials within five (5) days
of receiving a notice of violation, such officer shall certify the cost thereof
to the City, which shall examine the certificate and if found correct, shall
cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the land and will be
added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon the lands. The lien shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 3-15. DUMPSTERS.
§ 3-15.1. Permit Required for Dumpsters on Streets or Public
Property. [2000 Code § 3-21.15a]
No person shall park or leave unattended any waste or refuse container,
commonly known as a roll-off dumpster, or roll-off container, on or along
any highway or public property, without the written consent of the Code
Enforcement Office. Consent shall be valid and remain in effect for a period
of not more than thirty (30) days, but may be renewed by the appropriate
official upon re-application.
§ 3-15.2. Permit Fee. [2000 Code § 3-21.15b]
A fee in the amount of fifty ($50.00) dollars shall be charged for the issuance
of a dumpster permit to offset the costs of inspections and processing of the
permit application.
§ 3-15.3. Display Markers Required. [2000 Code § 3-21.15c]
To warn the operators of vehicles of the presence of a traffic hazard
requiring the exercise of unusual care, any roll-off dumpster or roll-off
container parked on or along any highway or street within the municipality
shall be equipped with and display markers consisting of all yellow
reflective diamond-shaped panels having a minimum size of eighteen (18)
inches by eighteen (18) inches. These panels shall be mounted at the edge
of the dumpster or container at both ends nearest the path of passing
§ 3-14.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-15.3
1:135
vehicles and facing the direction of oncoming traffic. These markers shall
have a minimum mounting height of three (3) feet from the bottom of the
panels to the surface of the roadway.
§ 3-16. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE FROM SIDEWALKS.
Editor's Note: Prior source history includes the 2000 Code § 3-31.2; Ord.
No. 2610 and Ord. No. 2015-29.
§ 3-16.1. Responsibility for Removal of Snow and Ice. [Ord. No.
2016-04]
The owner(s) or tenant(s) of premises abutting or bordering upon any
street, roadway, alleyway or lane in the City of Asbury Park shall remove
all snow or ice from the abutting sidewalks of such streets. In the case of
ice which may be so frozen as to make removal impractical, the owner(s),
occupant(s) or tenant(s) shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered with
sand, salt or cinders. Removal of snow and ice, or treatment of ice where
required, shall be done within twelve (12) hours of daylight after snow
falls or ice is formed on said sidewalks. In the event of a declared State of
Emergency by the Federal Government, Governor or the City, the removal
of snow and ice shall be completed within twenty-four (24) hours.
§ 3-16.2. Failure to Comply; Removal by City; Costs. [Ord. No.
2016-04]
If snow and ice are not removed, or treated as indicated in § 3-16.1, within
the time period permitted, it may be removed or treated by the Department
of Public Works or other employees or agents of the City of Asbury Park. The
cost as best can be ascertained, shall be billed to the property tax owner as
per the most recent tax duplicate and, if said bill is not paid within thirty
(30) days, a lien shall be placed upon the property and shall be added to,
recorded and collected in the same manner as taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon such premises. The imposition and collection of any fine
imposed by the provisions of this section shall not constitute any bar to the
right of the City to collect the costs as certified for the removal of any snow
and/or ice. All fees, including work performed by the Department of Public
Works, legal fees, filing fees and other associated costs shall be billed or
liened as appropriate.
§ 3-16.3. Placement of Snow or Ice on Streets, Roads and Alleys
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
No person, including the owner, tenant or occupant of any lands or premises
shall place, deposit, throw or shovel any snow or ice into or upon any street,
roadway, alleyway or lane of the City of Asbury Park.
§ 3-16.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-04]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalties provided by Chapter I, Section 1-5,
§ 3-15.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-16.4
1:136
including a penalty of not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both for a first
offense.
§ 3-17. through § 3-19. (RESERVED)
§ 3-20. PARKING OF VEHICLES FOR SALE OR REPAIR ON
SIDEWALKS OR STREETS. [2000 Code § 3-37]
No garage keeper or automobile dealer shall park or store any vehicle, or
parts, tools or equipment, on any street or sidewalk in the City. No person
shall place a "For Sale" sign on any vehicle parked on any street in the City.
§ 3-21. GRAFFITI.
§ 3-21.1. Purpose. [2000 Code § 3-12.1]
The application of what is commonly known as "graffiti," on both public and
private spaces and property in the City of Asbury Park causes a serious
defacement of such spaces and property and contributes to the
deterioration of property values, infringes upon the public's right to
enjoyment of its public and private spaces and is thus contrary to the
public health and welfare. In addition, such contempt for the property
rights of private citizens and taxpayers alike contributes to the erosion of
law and order and contributes to the deterioration of the quality of life of
the community and must be opposed. This section is intended not only to
deter and penalize the application of graffiti, but also to enact measures to
enforce its removal and to restrict the availability of its instrumentalities.
§ 3-21.2. Application of Graffiti Prohibited. [2000 Code § 3-12.2]
§ 3-21.3. Property Owners Responsible for Cleanup. [2000 Code
§ 3-12.3]
a. No person shall apply graffiti, or write, print or draw or otherwise make
any inscription, with ink, paint or other substance on the real or
personal property of another, whether the personal or real property be
publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, any bridge,
building, public transportation vehicle or facility, rock, wall, sidewalk,
street or other exposed surface without the permission of the owner.
b. This section shall not be construed to prohibit:
1. Easily removable chalk markings on public sidewalks and streets in
connection with traditional children's games, including, but not
limited to baseball, stickball, handball, hopscotch and the like; and
2. Temporary, easily removed chalk markings in connection with any
lawful business or public purpose or activity.
§ 3-16.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21.3
1:137
§ 3-21.4. Juveniles and Parental Responsibility. [2000 Code
§ 3-12.4]
§ 3-21.5. Possession, Sale and Display for Sale of Spray Paint and
Ink Markers. [2000 Code § 3-12.5]
a. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of real or personal property
whose property has been defaced by graffiti, or otherwise written,
printed, drawn or inscribed upon with ink, paint or other substance, to
remove the same from his or her real or personal property in a
professional, workmanlike manner and restore it as nearly as possible
to its original condition within thirty (30) days of written notification to
do so from the enforcing authority.
b. Enforcement authorities shall include the Department of Police, the
Department of Building and Housing, the Department of Public Works
and the Department of Planning and Redevelopment.
a. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian or other person
having custody and care of any minor child under the age of eighteen
(18) years to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage the minor to
violate the provisions of this section, as defined herein, either by words,
overt act, by failing to act, or by lack of supervision and control over the
minor child.
b. Any minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years apprehended for a
violation of this section shall be brought before a Judge of the
Monmouth County Juvenile and Domestic Relations Court, and their
parent, legal guardian or other person having care and custody of the
minor shall be summoned, or arrested, and brought before the
Municipal Court of the City of Asbury Park and be subject to the
penalties provided herein.
a. Definitions. As used in this section:
INK MARKER — shall mean any marker containing ink or fluid which is
not water soluble and has a brush applicator, or other writing surface,
that is one-half (1/2) inch or greater in length or width.
SPRAY PAINT — shall mean any paint or pigmented substance in an
aerosol or similar spray container, or intended for use in an aerosol or
similar spray container.
b. Possession Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess
spray paint or ink markers on the property of another, or in any public
building, or at any public facility, or on any public way with the intent to
use the same to deface any building, structure or property. It shall be a
defense to an action for violation of this section that the owner,
manager, or other person having control of the property, building or
facility, consented to the presence and use of the paint or ink marker.
This prohibition shall also not apply to any employee of a public utility,
§ 3-21.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-21.5
1:138
§ 3-21.6. Posting of Signs and Display Requirements for the Sale of
Spray Paint and Ink Markers. [2000 Code § 3-12.6; Ord. No. 2767]
or of the Municipal, State or Federal government using spray paint or a
marker within the scope of his or her prescribed duties.
c. Possession by Person Under Eighteen (18). No person under the age of
eighteen (18) shall possess any spray paint or any ink marker. This
prohibition shall not apply in the following circumstances:
1. A child using paint or ink markers while under the immediate
supervision of his or her parent or legal guardian; and
2. A student using paint or ink markers while under the immediate
supervision of his or her teacher; and
3. An employee using paint or ink markers under the supervision of
his or her employer.
d. Sale of Spray Paint and Ink Markers Prohibited to Persons Under
Eighteen (18). It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer to sell,
to any person under eighteen (18) years of age any spray paint, or
hobby kit or any similar kind of kit containing spray paint and/or any ink
markers. No person may sell or offer to sell any of the items defined in
this section to any other person unless the buyer presents evidence of
his or her identity and age.
a. Every person who engages in the business of selling spray paint or ink
markers regulated by this section, shall post in clear public view at or
near the display of such products using bold lettering at least one (1)
inch in height a placard stating as follows:
GRAFFITI ORDINANCE NO. 2499
ANY PERSON DEFACING REAL PROPERTY NOT HIS OR HER OWN
WITH PAINT OR ANY OTHER LIQUID IS SUBJECT TO A FINE OF
$2,000.00 OR IMPRISONMENT FOR UP TO NINETY (90) DAYS AND
N.J.S.A. 2C:33-25.
b. Every person who engages in the business of selling spray paint, or ink
markers regulated by this section shall also post in the direct view of
such persons or persons responsible for accepting customer payment
for spray paint or ink markers, using bold lettering at least one (1) inch
in height a placard stating as follows:
IT IS UNLAWFUL TO SELL OR OTHERWISE CONVEY SPRAY PAINT
OR WIDE-TIPPED MARKERS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN (18)
YEARS OF AGE IN THE CITY OF ASBURY PARK. VIOLATORS SHALL
BE SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $2,000.00 OR IMPRISONMENT
FOR UP TO NINETY (90) DAYS AND N.J.S.A. 2C:33-5.
§ 3-21.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21.7
1:139
§ 3-21.7. Aiding and Abetting Persons Under Age Eighteen (18) to
Obtain Spray Paint and Ink Markers. [2000 Code § 3-12.7]
§ 3-21.8. Penalties. [2000 Code § 3-12.8]
Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalties set forth in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 3-22. CURFEW FOR MINORS.
§ 3-22.1. Title. [2000 Code § 3-6.1; Ord. No. 2997]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Curfew Regulations of
the City of Asbury Park."
§ 3-22.2. Definitions. [2000 Code § 3-6.2; Ord. No. 2997]
As used in this section:
MINOR — shall mean a person under the age of eighteen (18), or an
equivalent phrasing often herein employed, any person seventeen (17) or
less years of age.
PARENT — shall mean any person having legal custody of a minor:
STREET — shall mean a way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use
of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular traffic or in the
case of sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. The term street includes the
legal right-of-way, including but not limited to, the cartway or traffic lanes,
the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots
or other grounds found within the legal right-of-way of a street. The term
"street" applies irrespective of what it is called or formally named, whether
alley, avenue, court, road or otherwise. The term street also includes the
a. No person shall aid, assist, or abet a person under the age of eighteen
(18) in obtaining possession of spray paint or any ink markers. This
prohibition shall not apply to:
1. A parent or legal guardian assisting and supervising his or her own
child or ward in the use of paint or ink markers;
2. A teacher, assisting and supervising, his or her student in the use of
paint or ink markers; or
3. An employer assisting and supervising his or her employee in the
use of paint or ink markers.
a. As a natural or adoptive parent,
b. As a legal guardian,
c. As a person who stands in loco parentis,
d. As a person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
§ 3-21.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-22.2
1:140
boardwalk, shopping areas, parking lots, public buildings, and similar areas
that are open to the use of the public.
TIME OF NIGHT — shall mean and is based upon the prevailing standard
of time, whether Eastern/Standard Time or Eastern/Daylight Saving Time,
generally observed at that hour by the public in the City, or then observed
in the Police station.
YEAR OF AGE — shall mean and continue from one (1) birthday, such as the
seventeenth, but not including the day of the next, such as the eighteenth
birthday; making it clear that seventeen (17) or less years of age is herein
treated as equivalent to the phrase "under eighteen years of age." Similarly,
for example, thirteen (13) or less years of age means under fourteen (14)
years of age.
§ 3-22.3. Curfew for Minors. [2000 Code § 3-6.3; Ord. 331 No. 2997]
§ 3-22.4. Exceptions. [2000 Code § 3-6.4; Ord. No. 2997]
In the following exceptional cases, a minor on a City street during the
periods of time prohibited under § 3-22.3, shall not, however, be in violation
of the curfew regulations when any of the following shall occur:
a. It shall be unlawful for any persons seventeen (17) or less years of age
to be or remain in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, public
places and/or public buildings, places of amusement and/or
entertainment, public transportation facility, public vehicles used for
transportation, vacant lots or other public places within the confines of
the City at night, during the period ending at 6:00 a.m. and beginning:
1. At 9:30 p.m. for minors thirteen (13) or less years of age.
2. At 11:00 p.m. for minors fourteen (14) or more years of age.
b. In addition, it shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to allow or
permit any minor to be in or upon any public streets, highways, roads,
public places and/or public buildings, places of amusement and/or
entertainment, public transportation facility, public vehicles used for
transportation, vacant lots or other public places within the confines of
the City at any time during the hours in which said minor's school is in
session, unless such minor has been officially excused (excluding
suspension and expulsion) from attendance at such school by school
authorities.
c. Similarly, it shall be unlawful for any owner, operator or employee of an
establishment to knowingly allow or permit any minor to remain in or
upon such establishment at any time during the hours in which such
minor's school is in session, unless such child has been officially
excused (excluding suspension and expulsion) from attendance at such
school by school authorities.
a. When accompanied by a parent of such minor.
§ 3-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-22.4
1:141
§ 3-22.5. Parental Responsibility. [2000 Code § 3-6.5; Ord. No. 2997]
It shall be unlawful for a parent having legal custody of a minor knowingly
to permit or by inefficient control to allow such minor to be or remain in
or upon any public streets, highways, roads, public places and/or public
buildings, places of amusement and/or entertainment, public transportation
facility, public vehicles used for transportation, vacant lots or other public
places within the confines of the City under circumstances not constituting
an exception, or otherwise beyond the scope of, the curfew. The term
"knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent would reasonably be
expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in the parent's
legal custody. it is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless
parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility
through an objective test. It is no defense that a parent was completely
indifferent to the activities, conduct or whereabouts of such minor.
b. When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take the parent's place in accompanying the minor for a designated
period of time and purpose within a specified area.
c. When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United
States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona
fides of such exercise by having in his/her possession a written
communication, signed by such minor and countersigned, if
practicable, by a parent of such minor with their home address and
telephone number, specifying when, where and in what manner the
minor will be on the streets at night, an exercise of a First Amendment
right specified in such communication.
d. When the minor is returning home from a night school, fraternity,
church, social or school meeting, or is en route to or returning from a
doctor or dentist office, where treatment has been rendered or is to be
rendered by such doctor or dentist, provided such minor can evidence
the rendering of treatment or the need for treatment by a physician's
statement.
e. When the minor is no more than fifty (50) feet from the minor's place of
residence.
f. When the minor carries a certified card of employment or worker's
permit, pursuant to State Law.
g. When the minor is, with parental consent, in a motor vehicle. This
contemplates normal travel. This clearly exempts bona fide interstate
movement through the City and interstate travel beginning or ending in
the City.
§ 3-22.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-22.6
1:142
§ 3-22.6. Enforcement Procedure. [2000 Code § 3-6.6; Ord. No.
2997]
If a Police Officer reasonably believes that a juvenile is in or upon the public
streets, highways, roads, public places and/or public buildings, places of
amusement and/or entertainment, public transportation facility, public
vehicles used for transportation, vacant lots or other public places within
the confines of the City in violation of the curfew regulations, the officer
shall notify the juvenile that he or she is in violation of the regulations and
shall require the juvenile to provide his or her name, address and telephone
number and how to contact his or her parent or guardian. In determining
the age of the juvenile and, in the absence of convincing evidence such as
a birth certificate or driver's license, a Police Officer on the street shall
use his or her best judgment in determining age. If the Officer determines
that a person is in violation of this section he/she shall take the juvenile
to the Police station, where a parent or guardian shall immediately be
notified to come for the juvenile, and whereupon they shall be questioned.
This is intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards,
of relevant facts and to centralize responsibility in the person designated
there and then on duty for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform
enforcement and recording, thus making available experienced personnel
and access to information and records.
a. Police procedures shall constantly be refined in the light of experience
and may provide that the Police Officer may deliver to a parent or
guardian thereof a juvenile under appropriate circumstances, for
example, a juvenile of tender age near home whose identity and address
may readily be ascertained or are known.
b. A Police Officer discharging an enforcement obligation under this
section shall file a written report with the Police Chief or his/her
designee or shall participate to the extent of the information for which
he/she is responsible in the preparation of a report on the curfew
violation. It is not the intention of this section to require extensive
reports that will prevent Police Officers from performing their primary
Police duties. The reports shall be as simple as is reasonably possible
and may be completed by Police Departmental personnel other than
sworn Police Officers.
c. When a parent or guardian, immediately called, has come to take
charge of the juvenile, and the appropriate information has been
recorded, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of such parent. If
the parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then
the juvenile shall be released to the juvenile authorities, except that in
accordance with Police regulations, approved in advance by juvenile
authorities, the juvenile may temporarily be entrusted to an adult
relative, neighbor or other person who will on behalf of a parent or
guardian assume the responsibility of caring for the juvenile pending
the availability or arrival of a parent or guardian.
§ 3-22.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-22.6
1:143
§ 3-22.7. Presumption of Knowledge. [Ord. No. 2997]
There shall be a presumption that whenever a minor has been convicted of
a violation of this section, the parents, guardians, or other adult persons
having care of the minor knew or should have known of the minor's violation
of this section if the minor had been convicted on a prior occasion within six
(6) months of the date of the present violation.
§ 3-22.8. Violations and Penalties. [2000 Code § 3-6.7; Ord. No.
2800; Ord. No. 2997]
§ 3-22.9. Notice. [2000 Code § 3-6.8; Ord. No. 2997]
Notice of the existence of this section and of the curfew regulations
established by it shall be posted in, on or about such public or quasi-public
places as may be determined by the Police Chief or his/her designee, in
order that the public may be constantly informed of the existence of this
section and its regulations.
d. In the case of a first violation by a juvenile, the Police Chief or his/her
designee shall send, by certified mail, to the parents or guardian of the
minor, written notice of the violation with a warning that any
subsequent violations will result in full enforcement of the curfew
regulations, including enforcement of parental responsibility and of
applicable penalties.
a. If, after receipt of a warning notice pursuant to § 3-6.6 of a first violation
by a juvenile, a second curfew violation is adjudicated against the same
minor, the parents or guardian of the minor shall be subject to
prosecution under § 3-6.5. For the first parental offense a parent shall
be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than eighty ($80.00) dollars
and for each subsequent offense by a parent there shall be a mandatory
Municipal Court appearance with any penalties to be assessed by the
Judge of the Municipal Court, in accordance with Chapter I, Section
1-5. The Judge of the Municipal Court, upon finding a parent guilty, may
sentence the parent to pay this fine and the costs of prosecution.
b. If a minor has been found to be in violation of this section on a second
occasion within a six (6) month period, that minor shall receive a
summons and complaint from the Police Officer who apprehended the
minor for the violation of this section. The Judge of the Municipal Court,
upon finding the minor guilty, may sentence the minor to perform
community service for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days.
c. In addition, any juvenile who shall violate any of the provisions of the
curfew regulations more than three (3) times shall be reported by the
Police Chief or his/her designee to the juvenile authorities as a juvenile
in need of supervision and the Police Chief or his/her designee may
proceed to file such charges with the Superior Court of New Jersey,
Family Part, Monmouth County, as he/she may deem appropriate.
§ 3-22.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-23
1:144
§ 3-23. OBSCENE MATERIALS; SALE OR DISPLAY PROHIBITED.
§ 3-23.1. Prohibited Acts. [2000 Code § 3-30.1]
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale, or to circulate, pass from one
person to another or expose in any public place or anywhere in view of a
store or place frequented by the public, any morally indecent or obscene
publications or explicit sexual material, printed or written matter, picture
or other representation. It shall be unlawful to keep any such publication,
printed or written matter, picture or other representation in any place
frequented by minors or where it may come into the possession of minors
or to disclose or expose any such material to a minor.
§ 3-23.2. Definitions. [2000 Code § 3-30.2]
As used in this section:
EXPLICIT SEXUAL MATERIAL — shall mean any pictorial or threedimensional
material depicting human sexual intercourse, masturbation,
bestiality, oral intercourse, anal intercourse, direct physical stimulation
of unclothed genitals, flagellation, or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or human genitals, nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
abuse.
OBSCENE — shall mean any material or performance for which, if
considered as a whole,
§ 3-24. (RESERVED)
§ 3-25. DECLARATION OF A STATE OF DISASTER OR EMERGENCY.
§ 3-25.1. Declaration. [2000 Code § 3-7.1]
Where there exists in the City a state of disaster or emergency, brought
about by natural causes or by the action of any person and such state
of disaster or emergency causes or may cause violence and injury to be
inflicted upon people in the City and causes or may cause damage and
destruction to property in the City, both public and private, all being against
the health, safety and welfare of the people of the City, and in that event the
City Manager shall have the authority to declare that a state of disaster or
emergency exists and he/she shall have the authority and be empowered to
do the following:
Its predominant appeal is to the prurient, shameful, or morbid interest
in nudity, sex, excretion, sadism or masochism.
a.
It is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community
standards in describing or representing such matters.
b.
Which taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific value.
c.
§ 3-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-25.1
1:145
§ 3-25.2. Notification of News Media. [2000 Code § 3-7.2]
The City Manager, upon declaring that a state of disaster or emergency
exists, shall forthwith advise any newspaper and radio station located
within the City and request that the announced state of disaster or
emergency be publicized at once.
§ 3-25.3. Authority. [2000 Code § 3-7.3]
The judgment of the City Manager that a state of disaster or emergency
exists within the City and that it has caused or is likely to cause injury and
damage to persons and property shall be final and absolute. This authority
is conferred upon the City Manager by virtue of the authority of N.J.S.A.
40:82-4.
§ 3-25.4. Violation. [2000 Code § 3-7.4]
After the City Manager has declared that a state of disaster or emergency
exists in the City and has issued an order or proclamation regulating the
movements of persons or vehicles in or about the City or the dispensing
by licensed persons of alcoholic beverages therein, or the sale of gasoline
by gasoline service stations in the City, it shall be unlawful and a violation
of this section for any person to be upon the streets, ways, or places in
the City, to drive vehicles over the street in the City, to dispense alcoholic
beverages, or to sell gasoline at any gasoline service station during the
hours prohibited by the order or proclamation, unless otherwise permitted
by the City.
§ 3-26. INTERFERENCE WITH K-9 PATROL.
§ 3-26.1. Injury or Interference with Police Dog or Patrol
Prohibited. [2000 Code § 3-17]
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously torment, beat,
kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the Police
a. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
persons shall be prohibited from remaining upon the public street, ways
and places in the City.
b. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which
vehicular traffic shall be prohibited or restricted from traveling over the
City streets.
c. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
businesses licensed by the City to dispense in any way alcoholic
beverages shall be closed to business.
d. Issue orders or proclamations regulating the hours during which all
sales of gasoline by gasoline service stations in the City shall be closed
to business.
§ 3-25.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-26.1
1:146
Department of the City in the performance of the functions or duties of
such Department or to interfere with any such dog while being used by
the Department or any member thereof in the performance of any of the
functions or duties of the Police Department or of any Officer or member of
the Department.
§ 3-27. INTERFERENCE WITH STREET WORK. [2000 Code § 3-18]
No person shall prevent, delay or interfere with any lawful work undertaken
by the City in any street or public place.
§ 3-28. SHOPPING CARTS.
§ 3-28.1. Operation of Shopping Carts; Distance from Owner's
Property Restricted. [2000 Code § 3-32]
No person, except store owners and their employees, shall operate or use
any store-owned four (4) wheel wire carts, commonly known as shopping
carts, on the streets of the City for a distance of more than two hundred
(200) feet from the property of any store or shop from which the cart is
obtained.
§ 3-29. CLOTHING HANGING ON FRONT PORCH.
§ 3-29.1. Hanging of Clothing on Front Porches Prohibited. [2000
Code § 3-13]
No person shall hang clothing on the front porch of any building for the
purpose of cleaning, airing or drying.
§ 3-30. through § 3-33. (RESERVED)
§ 3-34. GAMES OF CHANCE PERMITTED ON SUNDAY. [2000 Code
§ 3-11]
Games of chance may be conducted on Sunday in the City, by virtue of and
under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq., known as the "Raffles License
Law" and the "Bingo License Law." The games of chance shall be conducted
in accordance with the provisions of the laws and shall be subject to all
conditions set forth therein.
§ 3-35. SLEEPING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 3-35.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2812]
As used in this section:
LOITER — shall encompass, but shall not necessarily be limited to, one or
more of the following acts:
a. Obstruction of the free unhampered passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
§ 3-26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-35.1
1:147
OPEN PUBLIC PLACE — shall be deemed to include the quasi-public area
in front of or adjacent to any store, shop, restaurant, luncheonette or other
place of business and shall also include any parking lots or other vacant
buildings or properties.
§ 3-35.2. Sleeping in Public Places Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2812; New]
§ 3-35.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2812]
Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalties set forth in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully upon any
street, park, beach, boardwalk or other public place.
b.
Remain idle in essentially one location without being able to establish
having a legitimate business or purpose in so remaining idle or, by
conduct, exhibiting the absence of a lawful purpose in so remaining
idle.
c.
Conduct involving the concept of standing idly by, loafing, walking
about aimlessly without purpose and including the colloquial
expression of "hanging around."
d.
Refusing to move on when so requested by a peace officer, provided
that the peace officer has exercised his/her discretion reasonably under
the circumstances in order to preserve or promote public peace and
order.
e.
a. No person shall loiter, lounge or sleep in or upon any public street,
highway, park, boardwalk, beach, pavilion or other public place, or in
any public building, or obstruct access to any public building or any
part thereof or obstruct passage through or upon any public street,
park, beach, boardwalk or public place.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep upon any beach, in any
public park or other public place between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 8:00 a.m., local time prevailing.
c. No person shall at any time use any automobile, truck or other motor
vehicle, or any vehicle of any description, while the same is parked on
any of the public streets, ways, alleys or in any public or quasi-public
place, driveway, lot or premises, for sleeping or living purposes.
d. It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks, or any other
temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any
person leave in any park or in any beach, public street, way, alley or in
any public or quasi-public place, driveway, lot or premises, any
moveable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could be used
for such purpose, such as house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or
the like except in those areas designated for those purposes.
§ 3-35.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-36
1:148
§ 3-36. (RESERVED)
§ 3-37. DISTURBING THE PEACE; OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC
AREA.
§ 3-37.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 3-22.1]
As used in this section:
PARENT or GUARDIAN — shall mean and include any adult person having
care or custody of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the
order of a court or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — shall mean any place to which the public has access
and shall include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also
include the front or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern,
or other place of business and public grounds, areas, parks as well as
parking lots or other vacant private property not owned by or under the
control of the person charged with violating this section or in the case of a
minor not owned or under the control of his/her parents or guardian.
§ 3-37.2. Certain Acts Prohibited. [2000 Code § 3-22.2; New]
No person shall:
§ 3-37.3. Discretion of Police Officers. [2000 Code § 3-22.3]
Whenever any Police Officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or
is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 3-37.2 he/she may,
if he/she deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and
safety, order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse
to leave after being ordered to do so by a Police Officer shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
§ 3-37.4. Acts by Persons Under the Age of Eighteen (18) Years.
[2000 Code § 3-22.4]
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years shall
knowingly permit that minor to loiter in violation of this section.
a. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
b. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
c. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
d. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 3-37.1. This subsection shall include the making of
unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or
which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to whom, or in
whose hearing, they are made.
§ 3-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-37.5
1:149
§ 3-37.5. Notice of Violation. [2000 Code § 3-22.5]
Whenever any person under the age of eighteen (18) years is charged with
a violation of this section, his/her parent or guardian shall be notified of this
fact by the Chief of Police or any other person designated by him/her to give
such notice.
§ 3-37.6. Presumption. [2000 Code § 3-22.6]
If at any time within thirty (30) days following the giving of notice the
minor to whom such notice relates, again violates this section, it shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that the minor did so
with the knowledge and permission of his/her parent or guardian.
§ 3-38. USE OF BICYCLES.
§ 3-38.1. Operation of Bicycles. [2000 Code § 3-39; New; Ord. No.
2016-51]
a. Every person operating a bicycle shall at all times operate the bicycle
with due regard for the safety of other persons and vehicles lawfully
upon the streets, highways, parkways and public places, as well as for
his own or her safety, and shall at all times and under all conditions
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians on the streets highways, parkways,
public places and on the crosswalks.
b. Every person operating a bicycle shall comply with all vehicle traffic
laws which apply to bicycles and all vehicular traffic signs and signals
erected for the regulation of traffic.
c. Every bicycle, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at
least five hundred (500) feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear
which shall emit a red light visible from a distance of at least five
hundred (500) feet to the rear. In addition to the red lamp, a red
reflector may be mounted on the rear, of a type approved by the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, which shall be visible from all
distances from fifty (50) feet to three hundred (300) feet to the rear
when directly in front of the lawful upper beams of head lamps on a
motor vehicle.
d. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least
one hundred (100) feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped
with, nor shall any person use upon a bicycle, any siren or whistle.
e. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel stop on dry, level, clean pavement.
f. A person propelling or riding on a bicycle shall not ride other than upon
or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall be/
she ride with his/her feet removed from the pedals, or with both hands
§ 3-37.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-38.1
1:150
§ 3-38.2. Penalties. [2000 Code § 3-3.10; Ord. No. 2016-12; Ord. No.
2016-51]
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as prescribed by State Statute
(N.J.S.A. 39:4-10 through 39:4-14.15). For any violations other than those
covered by the aforementioned statutes, the penalties shall be as follows:
For the first offense, there shall be a fine not to exceed fifty ($50.00)
dollars; For each subsequent offense, there shall be a fine not to exceed one
hundred ($100.00) dollars, along with confiscation of the offender's bicycle,
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 3-39. USE OF ELECTRIC SCOOTERS. [Added 7-10-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-27]
§ 3-39.1. Scope.
The provisions of this section shall apply whenever an electric scooter is
operated upon any street or upon any public way within the City of Asbury
Park, subject only to those exceptions stated in this section. Where the
provisions of this Article contradict and/or overlap with any state laws, the
state law shall govern.
§ 3-39.2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
removed from the handlebars, nor shall be/she practice any trick or
fancy riding in the street. No bicycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and
equipped.
g. No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself/
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway and no operator of any vehicle
shall knowingly allow any person riding upon any bicycle to attach the
same or himself/herself to the vehicle.
h. Before turning or changing the direction of any bicycle upon any street,
highway, parkway or public place it shall be the duty of the bicycle rider
to give a signal, by the extension of the hand, to indicate the direction it
is the intention to proceed.
i. No person shall ride a bicycle on a sidewalk. Nothing in this section
shall prevent the use of toy bicycles or children's tricycles on a
sidewalk.
j. Every rider of a bicycle shall obey all traffic regulations as established
by N.J.S.A. 39:4-1 et seq., and all ordinances passed by the City as to the
regulations of traffic on stop streets, one-way streets and through
streets.
§ 3-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-39.2
1:151
ELECTRIC SCOOTER — A scooter with a floorboard that can be stood upon
by the operator, with handlebars, and an electric motor that is capable
of propelling the device with or without human propulsion at a maximum
speed of less than 19 miles per hour.
PRIVATE ELECTRIC SCOOTER — Any electric scooter owned and operated
by a private individual.
SHARED ELECTRIC SCOOTER — Any electric scooter owned by a company
permitted to offer publicly accessible electric scooters through a pay-perride
or subscription program.
USER — Any person who is operating an electric scooter.
§ 3-39.3. Application of Traffic Laws to Electric Scooters.
Every rider of an electric scooter shall obey all traffic regulations as
established by N.J.S.A. 39:4-1 et seq., and all ordinances passed by the City
as to the regulations of traffic on stop streets, one-way streets and through
streets.
§ 3-39.4. Electric Scooter Rules and Regulations.
a. Obedience to traffic control devices.
1. Any person operating an electric scooter shall obey the instructions
of official traffic control signs, and other control devices applicable
to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
2. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that a turning
movement is restricted no person operating an electric scooter
shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where that
person dismounts from the electric scooter to make the turn, in
which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable
to pedestrians.
3. No person shall ride or operate an electric scooter in any direction
except that permitted of vehicular traffic traveling on the same side
of the roadway.
4. Any person operating an electric scooter shall stop for pedestrians
in crosswalks.
b. Riding on roadways and bicycle paths generally.
1. Every person operating an electric scooter upon a roadway shall
ride as near to the right hand side of the roadway as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or a vehicle
proceeding in the same direction, unless an exclusive bicycle lane
is provided.
2. Persons riding an electric scooter upon a roadway shall not ride
more than two abreast except on paths of parts of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
§ 3-39.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-39.4
1:152
3. Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a roadway, any
person operating an electric scooter upon the roadway at a speed
less than the normal speed of traffic moving in the same direction
shall ride within the bicycle lane, except that such a person may
move out of the lane under any of the following situations:
(a) Whenever overtaking or passing another electric scooter,
bicycle, vehicle, or pedestrian within the lane or about to enter
the lane if such overtaking and passing cannot be done safely
within the lane.
(b) When preparing for a turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway.
(c) When reasonably necessary to leave the bicycle lane to avoid
debris or other hazardous conditions.
c. User age restrictions. No person younger than 18 shall operate an
electric scooter.
d. Manner of riding an electric scooter. No electric scooter shall be used to
carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is
designed and equipped.
e. Speed restrictions. No person shall operate an electric scooter at a
speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the condition then
existing provided it does not exceed 19 miles per hour.
f. Yielding right-of-way from a bicycle path. Every person operating an
electric scooter on a bike path that is about to enter or cross a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic on such roadway.
g. (Reserved)
h. Electric scooters emerging from alleys or driveways; yielding right-ofway.
The operator of an electric scooter emerging from an alleyway,
driveway, or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk area
extending across any alleyway or driveway, yield the right-of-way to all
pedestrians or bicyclists approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area.
Upon entering the roadway, the user shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on the roadway.
i. Attachment to motor vehicles. No person riding upon any electric
scooter shall attach the same or themself to any vehicle upon a roadway
and no operator of any vehicle shall knowingly allow any person riding
upon any electric scooter to attach the same or themself to the vehicle.
j. Riding on sidewalks.
1. No person shall ride an electric scooter upon a sidewalk.
§ 3-39.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-39.4
1:153
2. Any person traveling on the sidewalk with an electric scooter shall
dismount before entering the sidewalk throughway and walk the
electric scooter along the sidewalk.
3. No person shall start or stop an electric scooter trip on the
sidewalk.
k. Carrying articles. No person operating an electric scooter shall carry
any package, bundle, or article which prevents the user from keeping
both hands upon the handlebars.
l. Lamps and equipment on electric scooters.
1. Electric scooters in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front with a lamp emitting a red light visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.
2. An electric scooter shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person
use, any siren or whistle upon an electric scooter.
3. Electric scooters shall be equipped with a brake which will enable
the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean
pavement.
4. Electric scooters shall be equipped with a bell or other audible
signal for the purposes of overtaking and passing any pedestrians,
bicycles, or other electric scooters.
5. Electric scooters shall be equipped with a kickstand to prevent
them from toppling over when parked.
m. Electric scooter parking.
1. Electric scooters shall be parked in designated electric scooter
parking areas if they are available and advertised as such by either
signage, pavement markings, or racks.
2. Electric scooters may be attached or secured to bicycle racks with
a U-lock, chain lock, or any type of lock made specifically for
bicycles. No person shall attach or secure an electric scooter to any
fixed object not suited for electric scooter parking. No person shall
leave an electric scooter lying on or standing upon the sidewalk in
such a manner as to hinder or impede pedestrians.
n. Abandonment of electric scooters.
1. An electric scooter may be deemed abandoned by the City if:
(a) It has been parked for a period of seven or more consecutive
calendar days in the same location; or
(b) It appears visually to be in a state of prolonged disuse such
that is has deflated tires, damaged or missing equipment
§ 3-39.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 3-39.4
1:154
§ 3-39.5. Penalties.
Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be as prescribed by state statute
(N.J.S.A. 39:4- 10 through 39:4-14.15). For any violations other than those
covered by the aforementioned statutes, the penalties shall be as follows:
For the first offense, there shall be a fine not to exceed $50; for each
subsequent offense, there shall be a fine not to exceed $100.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. BUSINESS LICENSES.
§ 4-1.1. License Required. [2000 Code § 4-1.1; Ord. No. 2015-49]
No person within the City shall engage in or carry on any business, listed in
§ 4-1.4, or use any vehicle, stand, store or other place listed in § 4-1.4 unless
a license is first obtained from the City.
making it inoperable, accumulated leaves and debris
associated with it; or
(c) 75% or more of the electric scooter is rusted; or
(d) It is found in any other condition in which an electric scooter
would be deemed abandoned.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any electric scooter
within the City.
3. In the event that an electric scooter is deemed to be abandoned by
the City, the Police Department shall have the authority to remove
the scooter from its location by any means necessary and be
disposed of by the City.
o. Shared electric scooter rental restriction. The shared electric scooter
user shall be the same person who made the rental reservation. No
person shall rent a shared electric scooter for another user.
p. Electric scooter charging. No electric scooter battery shall be
recharged in the public right-of-way without prior written authorization
from the City.
q. Electric scooter disposal. All electric scooters shall be disposed of in a
manner in accordance with state and federal regulations as they relate
to hazardous materials disposal.
§ 3-39.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.2
1:155
§ 4-1.2. License Application. [2000 Code § 4-1.2; Ord. No. 2962;
Ord. No. 2977]
Application for a license, unless otherwise provided, shall be made to the
License Inspector, City Clerk or duly authorized representative of the Clerk,
and the license shall be issued by the City Clerk or duly authorized
representative of the Clerk. In addition to all other requirements, each
applicant must provide proof of liability insurance coverage concerning the
licensed premises, including the name of the applicant's insurance carrier,
the expiration date of the general liability insurance policy covering the
licensed premises, and a copy of the declaration page. No license shall be
granted until the license fee has been paid. Every license shall specify by
name the person to whom it is issued, the business for which it is granted
and the location at which such business is to be carried on.
§ 4-1.3. Terms of License. [2000 Code § 4-1.3; Ord. No. 2962; Ord.
No. 2015-49; amended 12-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-53]
License fees shall be payable annually to the City Clerk or duly authorized
representative of the Clerk, on January 1 and licenses shall expire on the
following December 31. Year-round businesses shall pay the applicable fee
no later than March 1, or a late fee of $100 will be assessed. Seasonal
businesses (May 1 to September 30) shall pay the applicable fee no later
than June 1, or a late fee of $100 will be assessed. New business licenses
issued between September 1 and December 31 shall be issued for 1/2 of the
fees prescribed in § 4-1.4.
§ 4-1.4. Fees. [2000 Code § 4-1.4; Ord. No. 2615; Ord. No. 2015-49;
Ord. No. 2016-50]
a. Fees Enumerated. The annual license fees paid to the City for
conducting the business herein named at the place to be designed in
the license certificate issued therefor are as follows:
Amusements or amusement rides, each $200
Arcade Games, per machine $25
Automobile/Motor Cycles agency or show rooms:
Sale of New Cars/Motor Cycles only $250
Sale of Used Cars/Motor Cycles only $250
Sale of New and Used Cars/Motor Cycles $500
Automobile Rentals $100
Automobile Repair and/or Service Station $100
Barber Shop/Hair Salons $50
Plus per chair $10
Brewery/Distributors $300
Brewery/Distributors that provide tours and/or
sells product to public
$500
§ 4-1.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-1.4
1:156
Boarding houses, hotels, motels, inns, bed &
breakfast, lodging houses
Each sleeping room $10
Minimum license fee $50
Concessions $100
Contractors/General Builders, any kind $100
Dance Hall $150
Liquor Distributors $100
Driving School $100
Drug Store/Pharmacy $200
Food Store
0 to 3,000 square feet $150
3,001 square feet and over $1,500
Live entertainment conducted for private
pecuniary gain in
Non-City owned buildings with an occupancy
capacity of 1,000 persons or more
$2,500
Garage and Parking lot $250
Market Place/Inside Flea Markets $100
Miscellaneous (other business not classified or
enumerated)
$100
Newspaper Publisher $150
Nightclubs, established, permitting dancing or
public entertainment where food or beverages
are served to patrons
Accommodations, up to 100 persons $100
Accommodations, from 101 to 200 patrons $200
Accommodation over 200 patrons $400
Professional Services (accounting, legal, medical
and other such services provided by a formally
certified member of a professional body) [Ord.
No. 2016-50]
$100
Real Estate Agent $100
Restaurants
Less than 15 tables $100
15-30 tables $150
Over 30 tables $200
Retail (any sale of goods) $100
Shuttle Services $200
§ 4-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.4
1:157
§ 4-1.5. Compliance with Laws; Revocation of License After
Hearing; Transfers. [2000 Code § 4-1.6; Ord. No. 2962; Ord. No.
2015-49]
No license certificate shall be issued to any person who has not complied
with the laws of the State of New Jersey, or the provisions of this Code
providing regulations respecting the safety of persons who may have
occasion to use the premises, place or thing licensed. In case any person
licensed fails to comply with such laws or ordinances after due notice and
opportunity to be heard, the City Council may revoke such license. Any
license provided for by this Chapter may be transferred from one (1) person
to another but no license shall cover any other place of business than that
for which it was issued. Any such transfer of license shall be subject to a
fee of ten (10%) percent of the regular license fee, with a minimum fee of
fifteen ($15) dollars, and shall be payable to the City Clerk.
§ 4-1.6. Enforcement. [2000 Code § 4-1.7; Ord. No. 3056; Ord. No.
2015-49]
Any police officer of the City, the Construction Code Official of the City, the
Zoning Officer, any Health Officer or any other City official or employee
authorized by the City Manager, is permitted to execute and enforce the
enforcement regulations adopted to protect and facilitate the carrying on of
the several businesses, licensed by this Chapter.
§ 4-1.7. Access to Premises. [2000 Code § 4-1.8; Ord. No. 3056; Ord.
No. 2015-49]
Every person conducting a business required to be licensed shall permit
any police officer of the City, the Construction Code Official of the City, the
Studios (dance, art, photography, etc.) $100
Swimming Pools $500
Theater, opera or movie
0-150 persons $150
151-350 persons $400
351-999 persons $800
1,000 persons or more $2,500
Trucks or other vehicles selling food or drinks
(stationary)
$100
b. Additional Fee for Mercantile Licenses with Non-Life Hazard Uses. In
addition to the fees enumerated in Subsection a. above, all mercantile
licenses with non-life hazard uses, as determined by the Fire Official of
the City of Asbury Park, shall pay an additional fee as established in
Chapter XIV, Fire Prevention and Protection, per year to cover the cost
of an annual fire inspection as required by the Division of Fire Safety
Bureau of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
§ 4-1.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-1.7
1:158
Zoning Officer, any Health Officer or any other City official or employee
authorized by the City Manager to have access to any building or premises
for the purpose of ascertaining whether there has been compliance with the
provisions of this section and to determine the fees to be paid and to issue
summonses when warranted.
§ 4-1.8. Issuance, Renewal and Revocation of Business Licenses
Where Property Taxes, Assessments, or Sewer Utility Bills are
Delinquent; Hearing. [2000 Code § 4-1.9; Ord. No. 2962; Ord. No.
2015-49]
a. The City Clerk or duly authorized representative of the City Clerk, may
condition the issuance or renewal of any license or permit described in
this Chapter upon the following requirements: payment by the
applicant, if he/she is the owner thereof, of any delinquent property
taxes and assessments, including any sewer utility bills, on the property
wherein the business or activity is to be conducted.
b. Where the holder of any license or permit described in this Chapter is
also the owner of the property wherein the business or activity is
conducted and where the owner has failed to pay property taxes,
assessments, and sewer utility bills due upon the property for at least
three (3) consecutive quarters, such license or permit may be revoked
by the Mayor and Council. Upon payment of the delinquent taxes,
assessments and sewer utility bills, the license or permit shall be
restored, provided that all other requirements of the license or permit
are satisfied.
c. Any person who is denied a license or permit pursuant to Subsection a.
or whose license or permit is revoked pursuant to Subsection b. may file
a written appeal with the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council
shall then schedule a hearing within thirty (30) days from the date or
the filing of the written appeal or a reasonable time thereafter. At the
hearing the Mayor and Council will consider the following factors as
well as any and all other factors relevant in determining whether to
deny or revoke a license or permit:
1. The amount due on delinquent taxes and for what period(s);
2. Any prior history of delinquent taxes;
3. Reasons for failure to pay taxes; and
4. The ability to pay delinquent taxes as of the hearing date or within
a reasonable time thereafter.
Mayor and Council shall notify the applicant in writing of its
decision within ten (10) days of the hearing. If the appeal is denied,
the written decision shall set forth the reasons for the denial.
§ 4-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.9
1:159
§ 4-1.9. Standards of Operation; Revocation or Suspension;
Complaints. [2000 Code § 4-1.10; New; Ord. No. 2015-49; Ord. No.
2016-50]
a. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing references to revocation of a
Business License, a license may be revoked or suspended in the event
that any business is operated in a manner which substantially impairs
public safety to its customers or to the general public. As a specific
standard, the following activities shall be deemed to be injurious to the
public health and therefor prohibited: loud and abusive noises coming
from tenants, guests or business invitees; loud gatherings at all hours of
the day and night within and upon the business premises; boisterous
activities; loud, unruly and profane language; public drunkenness;
minors consuming alcoholic beverages; overcrowding upon the
business premises or near the business premises due to activity upon
the business premises; use of fireworks; public urination; excessive
noise as defined in the following subsections; and any other disorderly
acts which disturb the peace and good order of the neighborhood and
community.
b. As a further specific standard, any creating of loud or unnecessary
noise shall be prohibited upon the business premises or near the
business premises due to activity upon the business premises. The
making, creating or permitting of any unreasonably loud, disturbing or
unnecessary noise in the City is hereby prohibited.
c. The making, creating or permitting of any noise of such character,
intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life, health or welfare of
any individual or which either steadily or intermittently annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of
any individual is hereby prohibited.
d. In the event that the City, through its Police Department or municipal
offices or officers, receives a complaint(s) arising from incidents
concerning the improper operation of a business establishment
constituting an action injurious to the public health, safety and welfare,
the following actions shall be taken.
1. If the City Clerk, or a duly authorized representative of the Clerk,
shall be of the opinion that the violation substantially impairs the
public safety to its customers or to the general public, the Business
License shall be immediately be suspended. At the request of the
Business Licensee, a hearing will thereafter be scheduled before
the City Manager, or a duly authorized representative, within five
(5) days of the request, to reinstate said Business License.
2. If the City Clerk, or a duly authorized representative of the Clerk,
shall be of the opinion that the violation is minor in nature, the City
Clerk, or a duly authorized representative of the Clerk, shall cause
a written notice to be issued and served upon the licensee in
question. Service of said written notice may be made by personal
§ 4-1.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-1.9
1:160
§ 4-1.10. Sale of Animals Restricted. [Ord. No. 2017-25]
service, certified mail, return receipt requested, or regular mail
in the event that service is refused. If the whereabouts of the
licensee is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the Clerk, or a duly authorized
representative of the Clerk, shall make an affidavit to that effect
and then serve such written notice by publishing the same once
each week for two (2) consecutive weeks in the newspaper printed
and published in the City of Asbury Park or in the absence of said
newspaper, in a newspaper printed and published in Monmouth
County and circulating in the City of Asbury Park. The written
notice shall clearly state the charges brought against the licensee
and shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the City
Manager, or a duly authorized representative, at a place therein
fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days
after the service of said written notice. The written notice shall also
advise the licensee that said licensee shall have the right to file a
response to the written notice and to appear, in person, by attorney,
or otherwise, to give testimony or present evidence in his defense.
3. No later than ten (10) days after the conclusion of the above
hearing, the City Manager, or a duly authorized representative, or
such person as they shall designate shall issue a written decision
setting forth its findings. If the City Manager, or a duly authorized
representative, concludes that the licensee has operated its
business in a manner injurious to the public health, safety and
welfare, then said written order shall prescribe the remedial action
to be taken by the licensee and/or the penalty to be imposed.
Penalties may include the suspension or revocation of the licensee's
Business License. Any person who violates any provision of this
section, upon conviction, shall be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter I, Section 1-5.
a. Definitions.
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — shall mean an animal control center or
animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county,
or municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or significant
part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or
rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — shall mean any not-for-profit
organization which has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice
is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals
in permanent homes.
CAT — shall mean a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — shall mean a member of the species of domestic dog, Canis
familiaris.
§ 4-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-1.10
1:161
§ 4-2. PEDDLERS.
§ 4-2.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 4-2.1]
As used in this section:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — shall mean any person, whether a City
resident or not, who goes from house to house, from place to place, or
from street to street, soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders
for sale of services, goods, wares or merchandise, including magazines,
books, periodicals, photographs or personal property of any nature for
future delivery, or for service to be performed in the future, whether or
not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject
of such order or whether or not he/she is collecting advance payment on
such orders. The term also includes any person who, for himself/herself
or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, motor
vehicle, trailer, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging
house, apartment, shop or other place in the City for the primary purpose
of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The terms also
include any person who distributes circulars, or any other matter, from
house to house in the City.
PEDDLER — shall mean any person, whether a City resident or not, who
goes from house to house, from place to place or from street to street,
conveying or transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or
exposing same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to
purchasers.
§ 4-2.2. License Required. [2000 Code § 4-2.2]
No peddler, canvasser or solicitor shall engage in any such business in the
City without first obtaining a license therefor.
OFFER FOR SALE — shall mean to sell, offer for sale or adoption,
advertise for the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose
of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — shall mean shall mean a retail establishment where dogs
and cats are sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals
to the general public at retail. Such definition shall not include an
animal care facility or animal rescue organization, as defined.
b. Restrictions on the Sale of Animals.
No pet store shall sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, give away,
or otherwise transfer or dispose of cats or dogs. Nothing in this section
shall prohibit pet stores from collaborating with animal care facilities or
animal rescue organizations to offer space for such entities to showcase
adoptable dogs and cats.
§ 4-1.10 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-2.3
1:162
§ 4-2.3. Exceptions. [2000 Code § 4-2.3]
This section does not apply to persons selling personal property at
wholesale to dealers in such articles, or to newsboys, or to any sale required
by statute or by order of any court, or to any person conducting a bona fide
auction sale pursuant to law.
§ 4-2.4. Application for License. [2000 Code § 4-2.4]
§ 4-2.5. Charitable Solicitations. [2000 Code § 4-2.5]
a. Applicants for a license under this section shall file with the City Clerk a
sworn application, in writing on a form to be furnished by the City
Clerk, which shall give the following information:
1. Name and physical description of the applicant.
2. Complete permanent home and local address of the applicant.
3. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold.
4. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship.
5. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
6. The source of the supply of goods or property proposed to be sold,
or order taken for the sale thereof, where such goods or products
are located at the time the application is filed, and the proposed
method of delivery.
7. A recent photograph of the applicant, approximately two (2) inches
by two (2) inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant
clearly.
8. The names of at least two (2) property owners of Monmouth County
who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business
respectability; or in lieu of the names of references, such other
appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to
properly evaluate such character and business responsibility.
9. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any City ordinance other
than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the punishment
or penalty assessed therefor.
10. The last municipalities, not to exceed three (3), where applicant
carried on business immediately preceding date of application and
the addresses from which such business was conducted in those
municipalities.
§ 4-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.5
1:163
§ 4-2.6. Investigation of Applicant. [2000 Code § 4-2.6; New]
Upon receipt of each application it shall be referred to the Chief of Police,
who shall immediately institute such investigation of the applicant's
business and moral character as he/she deems necessary for the public
good. The Chief of Police shall endorse his/her approval or disapproval on
the application within seventy-two (72) hours after it has been filed by the
applicant with the Clerk. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's
character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief
of Police shall endorse on such application his/her disapproval and reasons
for same, and return the application to the City Clerk, who shall notify the
applicant of such disapproval and that no license shall be issued.
§ 4-2.7. Fees. [2000 Code § 4-2.7; Ord. No. 2763]
a. Exemption from Provisions. Any organization, society, association or
corporation desiring to solicit or have solicited in its name money,
donations of money or property, or financial assistance of any kind, or
desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or merchandise for
which a fee is charged or solicited from persons other than members of
such organization upon the streets, in office or business buildings, by
house to house canvass, or in public places for a charitable, religious,
patriotic or philanthropic purpose, shall be exempt from the provisions
of subsections 4-2.4, 4-2.6 and 4-2.7 provided there is filed a sworn
application, in writing on a form to be furnished by the City Clerk,
which gives the following information:
1. The name and purpose of the cause for which permit is sought.
2. Names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
3. Period during which solicitation is to be carried on.
4. Whether or not any commission, fees, wages or emoluments are to
be expended in connection with.
b. Issuance of Permit. Upon being satisfied that such organization,
association or corporation is a religious, charitable, patriotic or
philanthropic organization, the City Clerk shall issue a permit without
charge to such organization to solicit in the City. Such organization
shall furnish all of its members, agents or representatives conducting
solicitation credentials in writing stating the name of the organization,
name of the agent and purpose of solicitation.
a. The applicant for a license under this section shall pay the following:
1. The cost charged by the N.J. State Police for background check
(fingerprinting) to be paid at the time of filing the application.
2. Fifty ($50) dollars per week.
§ 4-2.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-2.7
1:164
§ 4-2.8. (Reserved)
§ 4-2.9. Regulation of Activities. [2000 Code § 4-2.9; Ord. No. 2763]
Every person to whom a license is issued under this section shall be
governed by the following rules and regulations.
The annual fees shall be assessed on a calendar year basis. On or
after September 1, the fee for a license to the end of the calendar
year shall be one hundred ($100) dollars.
b. Any veteran who holds a special State license issued under the laws of
the State of New Jersey is exempt from securing a license, but shall
comply with subsections 4-2.11 and 4-2.12 and shall procure from the
City Clerk a special veteran's permit, which shall be issued by the Clerk
upon proper identification.
c. Any person engaged in interstate commerce is exempt from the
payment of any application and license fees, but such person is subject
to all other provisions of this section. In lieu of the license he/she shall
apply for and procure a special permit from the City Clerk upon proper
identification and proof.
d. Any individual or corporation who employs three (3) or more persons as
peddlers, solicitors or canvassers in the City in the operation of his/her
business may have licenses issued to his/her employees at an annual fee
of fifteen ($15) dollars per year for each employee. The employee is
subject to all the provisions of this section. No license shall be issued to
any such employee unless his/her employer certifies in writing that he/
she is a bona fide employee and recommends the issuance of the
license.
a. Circulars, samples or other matter shall be handed to an occupant of
the property and not left on or about the premises.
b. No person shall canvass, solicit or distribute circulars or other matter,
or call from house to house except on weekdays between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
c. No person shall enter or attempt to enter the house, apartment, or
room of any resident in the City without having been requested or
invited to do so by the legal occupant of the house, apartment or room.
d. No person shall conduct himself/herself in such manner as to become
objectionable or to annoy an occupant of any house.
e. No licensee, nor any person in his/her behalf, shall shout, cry out, blow
a horn, ring a bell or use any sound amplifying device upon any street or
other public places, or upon private premises where sound of sufficient
volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard
upon a street or other public place for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares or merchandise for sale.
§ 4-2.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2.9
1:165
§ 4-2.10. Exhibition of License. [2000 Code § 4-2.10]
Licensees are required to exhibit their certificate of license at the request
of any citizen or member of the Police Department.
§ 4-2.11. Reports of Violations. [2000 Code § 4-2.11]
The Chief of Police shall report to the City Clerk all convictions for violation
of this section and the City Clerk shall maintain a record for each license
issued and record the reports of violation therein.
§ 4-2.12. Revocation of License; Hearing. [2000 Code § 4-2.12]
f. No licensee has any exclusive right to any location in the public streets,
nor shall any licensee be permitted in a stationary location thereon. The
licensee shall begin the sale of his/her items/foodstuffs within five (5)
minutes of the time he/she sets up and leave the location within five (5)
minutes of his/her last sale to pedestrian patrons using the service. No
licensee shall operate in a congested area where such operation might
impede or inconvenience the public use of such streets. The judgment
of a Police Officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive
as to whether the area is congested and the public impeded or
inconvenienced.
a. Licenses issued under this section may be revoked by the Mayor and
Council after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation, or a material incorrect statement
contained in the application for license.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or a material incorrect statement made
in the course of carrying on his/her business as solicitor, canvasser
or peddler.
3. Any violation of this section.
4. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
5. Conducting the business of a peddler, canvasser or solicitor in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
b. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by the
City Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint
and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed postage
prepaid, to the licensee at his/her last known address at least five (5)
days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be delivered by a Police
Officer in the same manner as a summons at least three (3) days prior to
the date set for hearing.
§ 4-2.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-2.13
1:166
§ 4-2.13. Term of License. [2000 Code § 4-2.13]
All annual licenses expire at midnight of December 31, in the year when
issued. Other licenses expire at midnight on the date specified in the
license.
§ 4-3. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND ITINERANT VENDORS.
§ 4-3.1. License Required. [2000 Code § 4-3.1]
A transient merchant or itinerant vendor as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 to 13
shall not engage in a merchandising business in the City with intent to close
out or discontinue such business within a period of one (1) year from the
date of commencement without a license.
§ 4-3.2. Statement. [2000 Code § 4-3.2]
A transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall, before offering for sale any
goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, make a declaration under
oath to the City Clerk of the number of days he/she proposes to engage in
such business, the location of personal property by street and number, and
whether such property is on the premises upon which they are to be sold or
in warehouses or storage.
§ 4-3.3. Fee. [2000 Code § 4-3.3]
A transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall, before offering for sale any
personal property, pay one thousand ($1,000) dollars to the City Clerk if the
regular license fee for other than transient merchants or itinerant vendors
is fifty ($50) dollars or over, and five hundred ($500) dollars if the regular
license fee for other than transient merchants or itinerant vendors is less
than fifty ($50) dollars. Upon payment of such sum, the merchant or vendor
may apply for and receive a license which shall be valid for a period of one
hundred eighty (180) days from the date of issuance.
§ 4-3.4. Application for License. [2000 Code § 4-3.4]
Application for a license under this section shall be sworn to and shall
disclose the name and residence of the owner or persons in whose interest
such business is conducted; and the average quantity, kind, and value of
the stock of goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock intended to be
sold or exposed for sale. The application shall also give the names and post
office addresses of the persons from whom the goods making up the stock
were or are to be purchased. The City Clerk, in arriving at the valuation,
may require the submission of bills or invoices of such goods. A separate
license shall be obtained for each separate place in which the business of a
transient merchant or itinerant vendor is carried on, and each license shall
authorize the licensee to carry on the business of a transient merchant or
itinerant vendor only at the location indicated in the license.
§ 4-2.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-3.5
1:167
§ 4-3.5. Bond. [2000 Code § 4-3.5]
Before a license is issued, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the
City Clerk a bond with good and sufficient surety, to be approved by the
Clerk, equal in the amount to twenty-five (25%) percent of the value of
the stock of goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, but in no event
shall the bond be less than one thousand ($1,000) dollars. The bond shall
remain in force for one (1) year, and be conditioned to indemnify and
pay the City any penalties or costs incurred in the enforcement of any
provisions of this section, and shall also be so conditioned to indemnify or
reimburse any purchaser of goods in a sum equal to at least the amount
of any payments such purchaser may have been induced to make through
misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of such goods, whether
the misrepresentations are made by the owner or his/her agent or
employee, either at the time of making the same or through any
advertisement printed or circulated with reference to the stock of goods.
§ 4-3.6. Service of Process. [2000 Code § 4-3.6]
Before a license is issued, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk an
instrument in writing nominating and appointing the City Clerk his/her true
and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service
or notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any
matters connected with or arising out of the license or the bond, or for any
breach thereof. The instrument shall contain recitals to the effect that the
applicant consents and agrees that service of any notice or process may be
made upon the agent and when so made shall be taken to be as valid as if
personally served upon the applicant according to the laws of New Jersey
or any other State, and waiving all claim or right of error by reason of such
acknowledgment of service or manner of service.
§ 4-3.7. Exceptions. [2000 Code § 4-3.7]
This section does not apply to any charitable or religious society that
conducts sales of goods, wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock when the
proceeds thereof are applied to the payment of the expenses of the sale and
to the charitable or religious object for which such charitable or religious
society exists.
§ 4-3.8. Revocation of License. [2000 Code § 4-3.8]
A license may be revoked by the City Clerk for violation of the terms of the
license, violation of this section, or falsification in applying for a license.
The licensed person shall be granted a hearing by the City Clerk after at
least three (3) days' notice. A license may be suspended for not more than
two (2) weeks by the issuing officer without a hearing, but no longer unless
consented to by the licensee.
§ 4-3.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-3.9
1:168
§ 4-3.9. Misrepresentation. [2000 Code § 4-3.9]
No person shall falsely represent by advertising or otherwise that the goods,
wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock he/she offers for sale are in whole or
in part damaged goods saved from fire or make any false statement as to
the previous history or character of such goods.
§ 4-4. GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES.
§ 4-4.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 4-4.1]
As used in this section:
CITY — shall mean the City of Asbury Park.
CITY LICENSE OFFICER — shall mean the Clerk of the City of Asbury Park.
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE — shall mean a sale held out in
such manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will
offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE — shall mean a sale held out in such
manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal
of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued
including but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's adjustment;
alteration; assignee's; bankrupt; benefit of administrator's; benefit of
creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor's
committee; creditor's; end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out
of business; insolvent's; last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease;
mortgage sale; receiver's; trustee's; quitting business.
Any person by his/her deviation from the customary methods of business
operations, such as the failure to order seasonal merchandise, failure to
renew lease, termination of employment of regular employees, employment
of special sales techniques and personnel or who shall conduct himself/
herself and the operation of his/her business in such a manner so as to give
reasonable cause to believe that upon the disposal of the stock or goods on
hand the business will cease and be discontinued, shall be deemed to be
going out of business.
GOODS — shall mean and include any goods, wares, merchandise or other
property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE — is a sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale
will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the
stock of the goods on hand and will then move to resume business at a new
location or will then continue business from other existing locations.
§ 4-4.2. License Required. [2000 Code § 4-4.2]
A license issued by the City License Officer, bearing a license number and
the date on which the license was issued, shall be obtained by any person
§ 4-3.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.2
1:169
before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held
out by any means to be one (1) of the following kinds, as herein defined:
§ 4-4.3. Application of Regulations. [2000 Code § 4-4.3]
a. Going-out-of-business sale.
b. Removal of business sale.
c. Fire and other altered goods sale.
a. Established Business Requisite. Any person who has not been the
owner of a business advertised or described in the application for a
license hereunder for a period of at least six (6) months prior to the date
of the proposed sale, shall not be granted a license, provided that upon
the death of a person doing business in the City, his/her heirs, devisees,
legatees or representatives shall have the right to apply at any time for
a license hereunder.
b. Interval Between Sales. Any person who has held a sale, as regulated
hereunder, at the location stated in the application, within one (1) year
past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license.
c. Restricted Location. Where a person applying for a license hereunder
operates more than one (1) place of business the license shall apply
only to the one (1) store or branch specified in the application and no
other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating
with it, or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the
store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that
any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any
way in the licensed sale.
d. Persons Exempted. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or
affect:
1. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
2. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials.
3. Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction.
4. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who,
in good faith publishes any advertisement without actual
knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or
without actual knowledge that the provisions of this Chapter have
not been complied with.
e. A person coming within the definition of "going-out-of-business" shall
not offer to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised unless the
advertisement shall clearly state the intent of the person that the
business will cease and be discontinued by a specific date.
§ 4-4.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-4.3
1:170
§ 4-4.4. Application Requirements; Fees. [2000 Code § 4-4.4]
f. Any person who intends to cease and discontinue the operation of his/
her business shall be required to secure a license and shall come within
the provisions of this section as amended and supplemented.
a. Written Information Required. A person desiring to conduct a sale
regulated by this section shall make a written application under oath to
the License Officer setting forth and containing the following
information:
1. The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be sold.
2. A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
3. The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
4. The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted.
5. A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of
goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted.
6. The means to be employed in advertising such sale together with
the proposed content of any advertisement.
7. A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such
sale as disclosed by applicant's records. The inventory shall contain
a clear description of each item to be sold with the brand name, if
any, total number of each item to be sold and the date each item
was purchased with invoice numbers for each item, the name of the
person from whom purchased, and if not purchased, the manner of
such acquisition. The inventory shall be attached to and become a
part of the application required under this section. The inventory
shall be signed by the person applying for the license or by an
authorized agent, and by affidavit at the foot thereof he/she or such
agent shall swear or affirm that the information therein given is
full, complete and true, and known by such affiant to be full,
complete and true. No goods other than that listed in the inventory
herein provided for shall be advertised or sold at any sale for which
a license is hereby required, and it shall be unlawful, for any person
to sell, offer, or expose for sale, or to list on such inventory, any
goods which are not the regular stock on hand at the store, the
goods of which are to be closed out or disposed of through such
sale, or to supplement, or to make any replenishments or additions
from any manufacturer, jobber, wholesaler, warehouse, storage
building or from any other premises, or from any source
whatsoever and during the time thereof to advertise or represent
the sale as being of the character for which a license is hereby
required. All goods included in such inventory shall have been
purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without
§ 4-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.4
1:171
§ 4-4.5. Effect of License; Renewal. [2000 Code § 4-4.5]
cancellation privileges and shall not comprise any goods purchased
on consignment. Such inventory shall not include goods ordered
in contemplation of or for the purpose of conducting any sale
regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase or additions to the
stock of goods of the applicant made within sixty (60) days before
the filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such
character.
8. All applications for license shall be kept on file by the License
Officer and a record shall be kept here of all licenses issued upon
such applications.
b. License Fee. Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the
License Officer with the application for license, a license fee, for a
period not exceeding ten (10) days—one hundred ($100) dollars; for a
period not exceeding twenty (20) days—two hundred ($200) dollars; for
a period not exceeding thirty (30) days—three hundred ($300) dollars.
Any applicant for renewal of any license granted hereunder shall
submit to the License Officer with his/her application for renewal, a
renewal license fee of one hundred ($100) dollars for an additional
period not exceeding ten (10) days.
a. License Period and Renewal Procedure. The license shall authorize the
sale described in the application for a period of not more than thirty
(30) consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excepted, following
the issuance thereof. The License Officer shall renew a license for one
(1) period of time only, such period to be in addition to the thirty (30)
days permitted in the original license and not to exceed ten (10)
consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excepted, when the License
Officer finds that facts exist justifying the license renewal; that the
licensee has filed a written application for the renewal; that the licensee
has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory
showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and
not listing any goods not included in the original application and
inventory. For the purposes of this subsection, any application for a
license under the provisions of this section covering goods previously
inventoried as required hereunder, shall be deemed to be an application
for renewal, whether presented by the original applicant, or by any
other person.
b. Nature of Sale. The license shall authorize only one (1) type of sale
described in the application at the location named therein.
c. Saleable Goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods
described in the inventory attached to the application.
d. Surrender of General License. Upon being issued a license hereunder
for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the
License Officer all other business licenses he/she may hold at the time
§ 4-4.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-4.5
1:172
§ 4-4.6. Duties of Licensee. [2000 Code § 4-4.6]
A licensee hereunder shall:
applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a
license under this section.
e. Nontransferability. Any license herein provided for shall not be
assignable or transferable.
f. Inspection of Licensing Officer. The City License Officer or any person
designated by him/her may in his/her discretion verify the details of any
inventory filed, for the purpose of determining the correctness of the
same, before issuing a "going-out-of-business sale license" or he/she
may check and verify the items of merchandise sold during the sale, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to whom such license has been
issued to fail or refuse to give the City License Officer or any person
designated by him/her for that purpose, all the facts connected with the
stock on hand or the proper information that he/she may require in
order to make a thorough investigation of all phases connected with the
sale.
a. Adhere to Inventory. Make no additions whatsoever during the period of
the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory
attached to the application for license.
b. Advertise Properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or
misleading advertising, and in any advertisement by handbills,
circulars, placards, signs, notices, newspapers or publication or other
advertising, include therein the number and date of the license issued
by the License Officer.
c. Adhere to Advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity
with any advertising or holding out incident thereto.
d. Keep Duplicate Inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate
of the inventory submitted with the application and present the same to
inspecting officials upon request.
e. Segregate Noninventoried Goods. Keep any other goods separate and
apart from the goods for sale and make such distinction clear to the
public.
f. Cease Business at Conclusion of Sale. The licensee of a going-out-ofbusiness
sale shall not continue the business beyond the date specified
for such sale and shall not upon conclusion of such sale, continue the
business under the same name or under a different name in the same
location or elsewhere in the City.
§ 4-4.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-4.7
1:173
§ 4-4.7. Additional Regulations. [2000 Code § 4-4.7]
The provisions of this section are in addition to the provisions of Section 4-1,
Business Licenses, fixing license fees for mercantile and other businesses
and things required to be licensed.
§ 4-5. LICENSING OF AMUSEMENT GAMES.
§ 4-5.1. Amusement Area Described. [2000 Code § 4-5.1]
It is hereby determined, declared and found that the City constitutes a
seashore resort with parts thereof customarily constituting an amusement
or entertainment area, according to the customary understanding of such
terms in the community, and which parts are more particularly described as
follows:
§ 4-5.2. License. [2000 Code § 4-5.2]
No person shall own or operate within the City any amusement games as
defined by the Amusement Games Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et seq.),
whether the game is of skill or chance or both, and whether the game is
played and operated with or without numbers, name or symbols, without
first obtaining a license from the Mayor and Council. Such license shall be
issued pursuant and subject to the Amusement Games Licensing Law, as
amended and supplemented.
§ 4-5.3. Application for License. [2000 Code § 4-5.3]
Each applicant for such a license shall file with the City Clerk a written
application, in such form as prescribed by and in accordance with the
Amusement Games Licensing Laws, as amended and supplemented, and
the rules and regulations promulgated by the Amusement Games Control
Commissioner of the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-5.4. Fees. [2000 Code § 4-5.4]
The fees for the type of licenses to be issued hereunder shall be as follows
and such fees shall accompany the application for the license:
a. All of that area east of Ocean Avenue commencing on the south at the
southerly line between Asbury Park and Ocean Grove and extending
northwardly to the City Line.
b. On the west side of Ocean Avenue extending to a depth of one hundred
fifty (150') feet from Asbury Avenue to Fifth Avenue.
c. All of that entire block bounded on the north by Cookman Avenue, on
the west by St. James Place, on the south by Lake Avenue and on the
east by Kingsley Street.
a. Games Permitted Under Category and Certification No. 1:
§ 4-4.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-5.4
1:174
1. Balloon game (individually operated) $50
2. Barrel games $100
3. Basketball game $50
4. Bear pitch game $250
5. Break the dish game $50
6. Bull pen ball game, per unit $10
7. Cigarette cork rifle game $150
8. Cigarette dart game $150
9. Cigarette toss game $250
10. Dart game (multiple 10¢ to play) $100
11. Dodgem game $50
12. Glass pitch game $250
13. Hoopla game $50
14. Milk bottle game $50
15. Milk can game $50
16. Penny pitch game $200
17. Pig slide game $100
18. Ping-pong ball game $250
19. Ring toss game $50
20. Shooting gallery game (with prizes) $100
21. Stuffed cat game $50
22. Over and under game $125
b. Games Permitted Under Category and Certification No. 2:
1. Arcade game (each 50 unit) (each additional
unit, $10 per unit)
$500
2. Arcade games (less than 50 units) $17/unit
3. Pokerino (each 50 units) (each additional
unit, $10 per unit)
$500
c. Games Permitted Under Category and Certification No. 3:
Non-draw raffle games:
1. Duck pond game $75
2. Fish pond game $75
3. Grab bag game $75
4. Pick the stick game $75
d. Games Permitted Under Category and Certification No. 4:
§ 4-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5.4
1:175
§ 4-5.5. Employees' Identification Cards. [2000 Code § 4-5.5]
Each applicant shall pay a fee of two ($2) dollars for fingerprinting and
issuance of identification cards for each employee of the licensee under
the rules and regulations promulgated by the Amusement Games Control
Commissioner.
§ 4-5.6. Supervision. [2000 Code § 4-5.6]
The Mayor and Council shall exercise control and supervision over all
amusement game held, operated or conducted under a license issued under
this section with all the powers authorized or granted to it under the
Amusement Games Licensing Law, and amendments and supplements
thereto, and the rules and regulations of the State Amusement Games
Control Commissioner.
Competitive games:
1. Bowlo games $500
2. Fascination game (50 units) $500
Over 50 units, per unit $10
3. Greyhound game (manually operated)
per unit
$15
4. Skilo game $500
5. Throw fascination game (50 units) $500
Over 50 units, per unit $10
e. Games Permitted Under Category and Certification No. 5:
Games of chance:
1. Stop and go $200
f. Games Permitted Under Category and Certification No. 6:
Guessing Games:
1. Guess your age game $50
2. Guess your weight game $50
g. Games Permitted Under Category and Certification No. 7:
1. High striker game $150
2. Ring the bell game $150
h. Any game not specifically mentioned in this
subsection but permissible under N.J.S.A. 5:8-78 et
seq.
$500
§ 4-5.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-5.7
1:176
§ 4-5.7. Suspension and Revocation; Hearing. [2000 Code § 4-5.7]
Disciplinary proceedings before the Mayor and Council on a complaint
made for a violation of the provisions of this section or of the Amusement
Games Licensing Law, as amended and supplemented, or of the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Commissioner of Amusement Games
Control, pursuant to such law, shall be made on charges preferred against
the licensee signed in the name of the Mayor and Council. No hearing
shall be held thereon until a five (5) days notice of the charges preferred
is given to the licensee personally or by mailing same by certified mail,
return receipt requested, addressed to him/her at the licensed premises,
and a reasonable opportunity to be heard thereon afforded to him/her. The
licensee may be represented by an attorney licensed in the State of New
Jersey at the hearing.
The Mayor and Council may suspend or revoke the license for proper cause
after a hearing on the charges or may dismiss the charges.
§ 4-5.8. Revocation; Additional Penalties. [2000 Code § 4-5.8]
If any licensee under this section violates any provision of this section or the
Amusement Games Licensing Law, or the rules and regulations promulgated
by the State Amusement Games Control Commissioner, or the terms of the
license, such licensee shall be a disorderly person, and if convicted as such
shall, in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, forfeit the
license issued to him/her under this section.
§ 4-6. POOL OR BILLIARD PARLORS.
§ 4-6.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 4-6.1]
As used in this section:
POOL or BILLIARD HALL or PARLOR and the words LICENSED PREMISES
— shall mean any place of public assemblage in which the games commonly
known as pool or billiards or games of similar nature are played.
§ 4-6.2. License Required. [2000 Code § 4-6.2]
No person shall operate or conduct a pool or billiard hall or parlor without
first having obtained from the City a license, and upon payment to the City
of an annual license fee as provided in § 4-1.4.
§ 4-6.3. Application. [2000 Code § 4-6.3]
Any person desiring to obtain such a license shall make application for the
same in writing to the City Clerk, as provided in the Business Licenses
regulations of the City as set forth in Section 4-1.
§ 4-5.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-6.4
1:177
§ 4-6.4. Regulations. [2000 Code § 4-6.4]
No licensee, nor any agent, servant, or employee of a licensee, shall allow,
suffer, or permit, or caused to be allowed, suffered or permitted:
§ 4-7. MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS.
Prior source history includes portions of the 1977 Code §§ 3-8.1 through
3-8.11.
§ 4-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2596; N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.]
As used in this section:
MASSAGE THERAPIST — shall mean a person licensed to practice massage
therapy pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 45:11-68 et al.
MASSAGE — shall mean the administration by any person of a method of
exerting or applying pressure, friction, moisture, heat, or cold to the human
body, or the rubbing, stroking, kneading, pounding or tapping of the human
body by any physical or mechanical means for any form of consideration and
includes the definitions as stated in N.J.S.A. 45:11-55.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — shall mean any establishment or operation
wherein a massage is administered, or is permitted to be administered,
when such massage is administered for any form of consideration.
§ 4-7.2. License for Establishment Required. [Ord. No. 2596]
No person shall operate any establishment or utilize any premises in the
City as or for a massage establishment unless or until there first has been
a. The licensed premises to be or remain open for business between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on a weekday, and between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on a Sunday.
b. A minor under the age of sixteen (16) years, unaccompanied by a parent
or guardian, to play in or at the licensed premises of the games
commonly known as pool or billiards or games of a similar nature, or to
frequent or lounge or congregate or gather therein or in or about the
front of the premises.
c. A minor over the age of sixteen (16) years and under the age of eighteen
(18) years to play in or at the licensed premises, after the hour of 7:00
p.m., the games commonly known as pool or billiards or games of a
similar nature, or to frequent or lounge or congregate therein.
d. Any gambling in any form in or at the licensed premises.
e. Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be employed in any
capacity in or at the licensed premises.
f. Any intoxicated or disorderly person to be admitted to the licensed
premises or to remain therein.
§ 4-6.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-7.2
1:178
obtained a license for such establishment or premises from the City Clerk
in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section.
§ 4-7.3. License for Massage Therapist. [Ord. No. 2596; N.J.S.A.
45:11-53 et seq.]
No person shall render or perform services as a massage therapist or
engage in the business of or be employed as a massage therapist unless and
until he or she has obtained a massage therapist license in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.
§ 4-7.4. Information Required. [Ord. No. 2596; N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et
seq.]
Each and every applicant for a massage establishment license shall set forth
the following information in writing on forms provided by the City Clerk:
§ 4-7.5. License Fee. [Ord. No. 2596; N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et seq.]
The applicant for a license for a massage establishment or premises shall
pay an annual license fee of one hundred ($100) dollars, which license fee
shall become due on January 1 of each year.
§ 4-7.6. Approval of License. [Ord. No. 2596; N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et
seq.]
Each application for a massage establishment license or the renewal
thereof, which is submitted to the City Clerk shall not be issued until
approval for same is received by the Police Chief. The Police Chief may
not approve such application if, on the basis of past criminal record of the
applicant or of the principals thereof, or on the basis of other evidence of
bad character or morals, it shall be determined by the Police Chief that
the granting or renewal of such license would tend to encourage or permit
criminal or immoral activities within the City. Any applicant denied a license
by the Police Chief shall have the right to appeal said decision to the Mayor
and Council.
§ 4-7.7. Restriction on Treatment of Persons. [Ord. No. 2596]
No person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age can be treated
without the presence of a parent or adult guardian.
a. The name and residence address of the applicant and all former
addresses for a period of three (3) years prior to making the
application.
b. The address of the establishment or premises to be used in the massage
business and a physical description of the property and facilities.
c. A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any officer or
director thereof, if a corporation, has ever been convicted of a crime in
this or any other State.
§ 4-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-7.8
1:179
§ 4-7.8. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2596]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to massage or physical therapy
treatments given by a R.M.T., L.M.T. or C.M.T.
§ 4-7.9. Violations. [Ord. No. 2596]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 4-7.10. Compliance with Laws. [Ord. No. 2596]
All massage establishments and massage therapists shall comply with all
other State laws and local ordinances of both the Board of Health and of the
Mayor and Council in the City.
§ 4-8. SALE OF MERCHANDISE IN DEMONSTRATION PLACES OR
SHOWROOMS.
§ 4-8.1. Preamble. [2000 Code § 4-8.1]
In recent years, there has gradually started on the boardwalk in Asbury
Park, a business which advertises itself as "demonstration places for the
sale of merchandise."
These stores or places of business further advertise that "this is not an
auction" and these places of business do not operate in the time-honored
sense like auction houses in that they operate by the demonstrator setting
the price of the article to be sold, and not the customer, with the sale to the
highest bidder.
These places of business and the manner in which the business has been
conducted have resulted in many complaints being made to the City
Manager and Mayor and Council of the City to the effect that the customers
of these establishments have allegedly not received that for which they
bargained and the Mayor and Council are of the opinion that places of
the nature set forth in this preamble, while strictly not auction houses,
operate in a manner that they should be regulated like an auction house;
and under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, Subsection 8, the Governing
Body of a municipality may make ordinances to "regulate the ringing of
bells and the crying of goods and other commodities for sale at auction
or otherwise, and to prevent disturbing noises." The Mayor and Council
are of the opinion that the business described is detrimental to the safety
a. In the office of a licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist.
b. In a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanitarium having
a staff, which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or
therapists.
c. By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his/her patient.
§ 4-7.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-8.1
1:180
and welfare of the Municipality and its inhabitants, and under the police
power of the Municipality, and the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, which
provides that a municipality may enact such ordinances not contrary to the
laws of the State of New Jersey or of the United States as it may deem
necessary and proper for the good government, order and protection of
persons and property and for the preservation of the public health, safety
and welfare; under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and 2, the City may fix
fees for licenses which may be imposed for revenue and prohibit unlicensed
businesses from being carried on.
The Mayor and Council of the City are of the opinion that this section is
necessary to be enacted for the public welfare, safety and to prevent fraud
and deception on the consumer public, and under the police power of the
City.
§ 4-8.2. License Required to Demonstrate Goods. [2000 Code
§ 4-8.2]
No person shall act as a demonstrator of goods or merchandise, and no
person shall engage in the business of demonstrating goods within the
limits of the City without first having had and obtained a "mercantile
license" as hereinafter provided.
§ 4-8.3. Application for License. [2000 Code § 4-8.3]
Before any license is granted, as set forth in § 4-8.2, the applicant shall
make application, in writing, on a form to be provided by the City Clerk, and
under oath; and file the same with the Clerk, where same shall be open for
inspection. The application shall state:
a. Full name of applicant.
b. His/her residential address.
c. Length of time of continuous bona fide residence in the County
immediately prior to making the application.
d. Places where applicant has resided for a period of three (3) years
immediately prior to making the application.
e. Whether any person or persons or corporation other than applicant has
any interest directly or indirectly in the license applied for or in the
business to be conducted and, if so, the name, residence and interest.
f. If the applicant is a corporation:
1. Location of registered office in New Jersey and name of registered
agent.
2. Date and State of incorporation.
3. The names and residences of all stockholders, directors and
officers.
§ 4-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8.3
1:181
§ 4-8.4. Investigation. [2000 Code § 4-8.4]
The City Clerk shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, each and every
applicant.
§ 4-8.5. Bond Required. [2000 Code § 4-8.5]
The City Clerk shall, as a condition precedent to the granting of the license
to engage in the business, require the applicant to enter into a bond to the
City of Asbury Park, executed by a surety company duly authorized to do
business under the laws of the State of New Jersey; the bond to be approved
by the City Clerk and to be in the sum of twenty-five hundred ($2,500)
dollars, conditioned for the due observance of all such ordinances of the
City, as are in force or may be passed respecting the conduct or operation
of the business, at any time during the continuance of such business, for the
performance of all duties, the rendition of all accounts and payment of all
moneys required by law to be paid, and also conditioned for the payment to
any person who shall be defrauded or suffer loss by reason of the violation
of such business owner or any employee thereof of any of the provisions
of this section, or State law, or any other ordinance that may hereafter be
required. The bond shall be for the protection of persons and property, and
g. Address of place of business.
h. Whether applicant has ever been convicted of a crime.
i. The experience applicant has had as a demonstrator or as a person
engaged in the business.
j. The place or places, and the time, that applicant has been so engaged.
k. The name of bonding company to furnish the bond as hereinafter
required.
l. The applicant shall also file with the City Clerk where same may be
open for inspection, but for the proper authorities only, certificates of
approval by no less than three (3) reputable citizens of Asbury Park,
each of whom shall certify that he or she has personally known the
applicant for a period of at least three (3) years prior to the filing of the
application; and that he or she has read such application, and has good
and sufficient reason to believe that each of the statements therein are
true; that the applicant is honest, of good character and competent to
conduct the business and that such person is not related to or
connected in a business way with the person so certifying. The
certificates of approval shall be signed and duly verified and
acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgments of
deeds.
m. Each applicant shall furnish a photograph of himself/herself taken
within one (1) year of the application, the photograph to be two (2)
inches by two (2) inches, and to be securely attached to the license, if
issued.
§ 4-8.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-8.5
1:182
for the preservation of the safety and property of the municipality and its
inhabitants, and as may now or hereafter be required by any State law or
Municipal ordinance or regulation.
§ 4-8.6. License Fee for Demonstration. [2000 Code § 4-8.6]
The annual license fee for each demonstrator of goods or merchandise
engaged to work in any "demonstration place" shall be fifty ($50) dollars.
§ 4-8.7. License Fee for Owners. [2000 Code § 4-8.7]
The annual license fee for a person owning an establishment for the
demonstration of goods or merchandise shall be one thousand ($1,000)
dollars, which may be imposed for revenue purposes under the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:52-2, in that the Mayor and City Council has found that this
type of business requires continued inspection and the hiring of additional
employees by the City to regulate the same.
§ 4-8.8. License Posted. [2000 Code § 4-8.8]
Licenses issued under subsections 4-8.6 and 4-8.7 shall be posted for public
inspection in a conspicuous place in the place of business of the licensee at
all times.
§ 4-8.9. Inventory Book Required. [2000 Code § 4-8.9]
Every individual or corporation operating a demonstration business shall
keep books in which shall be described and inventoried in a clear, legible
manner, all goods received at such establishment; the date of receipt; the
name and place of business of the person or concern on whose account
they are to be sold; the cost price to the licensee if purchased by him/her
or consigned to him/her for purposes of sale, together with the name and
addresses of the vendor, the names and addresses of the purchasers at the
demonstration sale, the dates sold and the prices paid by the purchasers,
together with a description of each article so sold. The books shall be open
to inspection, at all times, by the licensing authority, or its duly authorized
enforcement officers only.
§ 4-8.10. Tag Describing Materials. [2000 Code § 4-8.10]
In addition to the records required to be kept as provided in § 4-8.9,
every article offered for sale shall have securely attached a tag or label,
upon which shall be plainly written or printed in the English language,
a true and correct statement of the kind and quality of the material or
substance of which such article is made or composed, if the article be
one of those commonly classed as jewelry or articles commonly carried by
persons engaged in the jewelry business. The tag shall state the percentage
or carat of purity of such articles, in case the article be plated or overlaid,
a true statement of the kind of plate and the percentage of purity thereof,
and the kind of material or metal under the plating; if the article be one
commonly known as precious, semi-precious, synthetic or imitation stones,
§ 4-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8.10
1:183
then the true names, weight, quality and color of the stones must be shown;
if watches or clocks, the true name of the manufacturer, the number of
jewels and adjustments, the country of manufacture, and if any of such
articles or part thereof be used or secondhand or old works in new cases,
or the removal or substitution of works or any part has been made, such
information must be noted on the tag which in each and every case must
remain on the article until after same has been delivered and received by
the customer. It is the intent of this section that every article purchased
by a customer in a demonstration place or a place which demonstrates for
sale articles shall have thereon a written statement of what the purchaser
is obtaining and the price paid therefor.
§ 4-8.11. Bidding Regulation. [2000 Code § 4-8.11]
It shall be unlawful for any demonstrator to accept anything other than bona
fide bids.
§ 4-8.12. False Representation. [2000 Code § 4-8.12]
It shall be unlawful for any demonstrator, in describing goods that he/she
is offering to prospective purchasers at a price fixed by the demonstrator
to directly or indirectly by verbal or written statement or advertisement,
make any false representations as to the character, quality, condition, value
or ownership or manufacturer of the goods.
§ 4-8.13. Substitution of Merchandise. [2000 Code § 4-8.13]
It shall be unlawful to substitute another article for or in place of the article
sold to the purchaser, and all articles being sold must at all times be kept
within sight of the purchaser until delivered.
§ 4-8.14. Use of Sound Devices; Amplifiers. [2000 Code § 4-8.14]
It shall be unlawful for any demonstrator, the licensee or any employees of
the licensee to use any sound devices, microphone or amplifier, ring bells or
make any raucous noise which can be heard outside of the premises, which
noise disturbs neighbors or persons passing by and it shall be unlawful for
any licensee or any employee of a licensee to make or cry excessively by his/
her own voice or by sound producing devices which disturb persons outside
the premises and which are made to attract patrons, solicit business or call
forth or advertise their goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 4-8.15. Charges Against Licensee; Hearing; Revocation and
Suspension. [2000 Code § 4-8.15]
The City Clerk in charge of granting mercantile licenses may, upon his/her
own motion or upon the complaint in writing of any person, file written
charges against the licensee and hold a hearing on whether or not
disciplinary action, such as suspension or revocation of license, shall be the
penalty against the licensee. The charges must be served personally or by
certified mail upon the licensee, which charges shall include notice of a
§ 4-8.10 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-8.15
1:184
hearing to be held before the City Clerk, not more than twenty (20) or less
than ten (10) days from the date of service of the charges upon the licensee,
at which hearing the licensee shall have the right of having counsel and
produce witnesses in his/her behalf and to cross-examine witnesses against
him/her. The licensee may be penalized by suspension or revocation of the
license if, in the opinion of the City Clerk, based upon the greater weight of
the believable evidence, the licensee has been guilty of violating any statute
of the State of New Jersey or ordinance of the City, and the licensee, under
the provisions of this section shall be responsible for the actions of any and
all of his/her employees.
In addition to any penalty herein provided, any person, whether
demonstrator or licensee, employee or owner, may be prosecuted before the
Municipal Court of the City for violations of any provision of this section
and, upon conviction thereof for each offense, shall be liable to the penalty
as stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 4-8.16. Definitions. [2000 Code § 4-8.16]
PERSON or APPLICANT or LICENSEE — shall mean and include any
individual or individuals, copartners, corporation or associations; wherever
a statement or act is required to be made or done by a corporation the same
shall be effected by its duly authorized officers, the use of the singular shall
be deemed to include the plural, as well; the masculine shall be deemed to
apply also to the feminine.
§ 4-8.17. Refunds. [2000 Code § 4-8.17]
It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to refuse to refund or return
the money, check or other evidence of indebtedness to the person who has
purchased an article or merchandise from the licensee within twenty-four
(24) hours when demand has been made for the return of the money, check
or other evidence of indebtedness within seventy-two (72) hours after the
purchase, provided that the purchaser returns the article or merchandise to
the place of purchase in the same condition as it was in when purchased.
§ 4-8.18. Signs Posted Stating Refund Policy. [2000 Code § 4-8.18]
The licensee in the licensed premises must display, at all times, a sign on the
licensed premises of at least eighteen (18) inches by eighteen (18) inches
with large legible letters stating "Cash Refunds In Full Amount Of Purchase
Within 24 Hours Of Demand Made Within 72 Hours Of Purchase."
The printing on the sign must be one (1) inch in height and one (1) inch in
width for each letter.
The sign must be displayed for easy view by the public.
§ 4-8.19. Names of Licensees. [2000 Code § 4-8.19]
Every licensee, whether an employee, demonstrator under § 4-8.6 or an
owner under § 4-8.7, must have his/her name prominently displayed on or
§ 4-8.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-8.19
1:185
in the premises in print of at least four (4) inches in height so that the same
can be easily read by the customers.
§ 4-8.20. Minimum Distance Between Licensed Businesses. [2000
Code § 4-8.20]
No license shall be granted to any place demonstrating goods as set forth
herein that is located within eight hundred fifty (850) feet of any existing
place of business of the same type or kind for which a license has been
issued.
§ 4-9. DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE IN PUBLIC AREAS; OUTDOOR/
SIDEWALK CAFES.
Previous ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 2291 and 2875.
§ 4-9.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3071]
For the purpose of this section:
MERCHANT WARES — shall include, but not be limited to, merchandise,
chattels or other articles for sale to the public, along with accompanying
showcase(s), stand(s), sales counter(s), sales apparatus, cart(s), vehicle(s),
and/or other necessary items used for purposes of display.
OUTDOOR/SIDEWALK CAFE — shall mean an area adjacent to a restaurant,
bar, market or other commercial establishment that is intended to be
utilized for the purpose of outdoor dining, including the service of food and/
or beverages, and which is required to be licensed pursuant to this section.
PUBLIC AREA — shall include, but not be limited to, that portion of a public
sidewalk, public right-of-way, public plaza, public boardwalk, public park, or
public beach, which immediately abuts a commercial establishment.
REQUIRED PEDESTRIAN PASSAGEWAY — shall mean an area of sidewalk,
parallel to the principal façade and the curbline, at least five (5) feet wide
between the adjacent building and the adjacent curb, which are shall be
unobstructed by trees, tree wells, light poles, trash receptacles, sign poles
and posts, telephone booths and similar structures. The pathway shall not
meander around obstructions, and should be aligned via a constant offset
from the curbline as determined by the City.
§ 4-9.2. License Required. [Ord. No. 3071; Ord. No. 3079]
No person shall place or allow to be maintained in or upon any public
area as defined herein any merchant wares, nor shall a person establish,
maintain or operate an outdoor/sidewalk café or otherwise serve food or
beverages in any public area as defined herein without first obtaining a
license from the City Clerk or duly authorized representative of the Clerk.
§ 4-8.19 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-9.3
1:186
§ 4-9.3. Regulations. [Ord. No. 3071; Ord. No. 3079; Ord. No. 3091]
Any person who wishes to utilize a public area as defined herein in the
manner specified in this section and who obtains the proper license from
the City Clerk or duly authorized representative of the City Clerk is required
to adhere to the following regulations:
a. Merchant wares and/or outdoor/sidewalk cafés to be located in public
areas as defined herein must be placed in such a manner that the
displays or café is no further than sixty (60) feet from the commercial
establishment in any public area that is part of the public beach, nor
further than twenty (20) feet from the commercial establishment in any
public area that is part of the public boardwalk, nor further than fifteen
(15) feet from the commercial establishment in all other public areas.
Additionally, no furniture, apparatus, decoration or appurtenance used
in connection with the display of merchant wares or the operation of the
outdoor café shall be located in or project or protrude into any required
pedestrian passageway, and such encumbrances shall not pose a safety
hazard to the general public or be located in such a way as to impede
the safe and speedy ingress and egress to or from any building or
structure.
b. Merchant wares and outdoor/sidewalk cafés to be located in a public
area as defined herein must be placed and/or set up in a neat and
orderly fashion, and the area of use shall be clearly demarcated through
the placement of a temporary fence or other barricade which is
acceptable to the City. The design, type and placement of the temporary
fence or barricade must be reviewed and approved by the City before
the license is issued.
c. Merchant wares and outdoor/sidewalk cafés to be located in a public
area as defined herein shall be solely an extension of the permitted
business use within the adjacent building or storefront with frontage on
that public area. The exterior boundaries of the outdoor use shall be
determined by the interior walls of the building or storefront which
abuts the public area, and the exterior wall(s) of the barricade as
referenced in § 4-9.3b above.
d. Merchants are responsible for policing the public area which they
occupy and keeping it free of trash and debris. Merchants, and in
particular restaurants, sponsoring outdoor/sidewalk cafés in front of
their establishments, are responsible for providing their own trash
receptacles and shall not rely on City receptacles for the disposal of
refuse. These trash receptacles shall not be located within the public
areas. Recyclables shall be disposed of in accordance with City Code
and regulations.
e. All persons applying for a license must submit a general liability
insurance certificate covering bodily injury and property damage with a
minimum of one million ($1,000,000) dollars per person and one million
($1,000,000) dollars per accident or occurrence. The City of Asbury
§ 4-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-9.3
1:187
§ 4-9.4. Application: Investigation, Issuance or Denial. [Ord. No.
3071; Ord. No. 3079]
An application for a license to use a public area as defined herein in the
manner specified in this section shall be available on a form issued by the
City Clerk or duly authorized representative of the Clerk. Once a completed
application is received by the Clerk or duly authorized representative of the
Clerk with the required Insurance Certificate, Hold Harmless Agreement
and the licensing fee, it shall be reviewed by the Fire, Planning, and
Zoning Departments, and the Health Department, where necessary, and/
or their designee(s), which will conduct an investigation into the data
contained in the application. As part of their investigation, the aforesaid
City Departments shall take into consideration the proposed location of the
requested activity, potential interference of the activity with pedestrians
or vehicular traffic, appropriateness of design, the business record of the
applicant, and any public safety, health and welfare consideration. Upon
completion of their investigation, the aforesaid City Departments shall
forward their findings and recommendations to the City Clerk or duly
authorized representative of the Clerk, which may include conditions
intended to be attached to the license for the health, safety and welfare of
the public. The City Clerk or duly authorized representative of the Clerk,
after consideration of the application and the findings made by the aforesaid
City Departments, and in consultation with the City Manager, shall issue or
deny the license, with such conditions as may be required per the review
and recommendations of said Departments.
Park shall be named coinsured and the applicant shall also execute
a Hold Harmless Agreement, in a form provided by the City Clerk or
duly authorized representative of the Clerk and which is approved by
the City Attorney, between himself/herself and the City of Asbury Park.
The Certificate of Insurance and the Hold Harmless Agreement shall be
submitted at the time of application for a license.
f. All applicants shall also submit a site plan, sketch or other drawing
which depicts the area of proposed use, along with the location of all
tables, chairs, etc., which shall be placed within the area. The site plan
shall also show the location of any fire hydrant, plug or standpipe,
utility pole, parking meter station, bench, trash receptacle, tree,
telephone booth or other permanent fixture between the building and
the curb including a clear indication of the presence of any required
pedestrian passageway. The plan shall be drawn to scale, but need not
be professionally prepared.
g. All applicants shall be responsible for securing any and all other
licenses, permits and/or approvals which may be required pursuant to
State law or local ordinance in conjunction with their proposed use of
the public area for their specific purpose, including but not limited to
applicable Fire Code, liquor license or other requirements.
§ 4-9.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-9.5
1:188
§ 4-9.5. Annual Licensing Fees. [Ord. No. 3071; Ord. No. 2015-16;
Ord. No. 2016-49]
§ 4-9.6. Annual Renewal. [Ord. No. 3071; amended 12-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-53]
License fees shall be payable annually to the City Clerk or duly authorized
representative of the Clerk, on January 1 and licenses shall expire on the
following December 31. Year-round businesses shall pay the applicable fee
no later than March 1, or a late fee of $100 will be assessed. Seasonal
businesses (May 1 to September 30) shall pay the applicable fee no later
than June 1, or a late fee of $100 will be assessed.
§ 4-9.7. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. No. 3071]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 4-9.8. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 3071]
This section shall not apply to the following provided they do not
substantially inhibit the flow of pedestrian traffic.
§ 4-9.9. Conflicts with Regulations; Authority of City Manager and
Council. [Ord. No. 3071]
a. Public Areas on the Boardwalk or Beach. Any person submitting an
application to use a portion of the boardwalk or beach in the manner
specified in this section shall pay an annual licensing fee of fifty ($50)
dollars, plus four ($4) dollars per square foot of the boardwalk area or
six ($6) dollars per square foot of the beach area that they intend to
utilize.
b. Other Public Areas. Any person submitting an application to use public
areas as defined herein other than the boardwalk or beach in the
manner specified in this section shall pay an annual licensing fee of fifty
($50) dollars, plus four ($4) dollars per square foot of the public area
that they intend to utilize.
a. Flags.
b. Flowers, artificial or natural.
a. Should there be any conflict or inconsistency between this section and
any other section of the Code, this section shall control.
b. The City Manager, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall
have the authority to waive or modify the requirements set forth herein
in those circumstances where such a waiver or modification is
warranted and deemed to be in the best interests of the City.
§ 4-9.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10
1:189
§ 4-10. PERMITS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
Prior source history includes Ord. No. 2362; Ord. No. 2456; Ord. No. 2458;
Ord. No. 2477; Ord. No. 2489
§ 4-10.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 2760 § 4-10.1; Ord. No.
3005]
The purpose and intent of this section is to enable the City of Asbury
Park and its Governing Body to have control over the type and scope of
special events to be held within the confines of the City, while insuring
the protection of the interests of those in the community upon whom such
special events shall impact.
§ 4-10.2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2760 § 4-10.2; Ord. No. 3005]
Any person or organization desiring to hold any concert, race, walkathon,
fair, carnival, celebration, sporting event, show, or any event which involves
festival seating, or any other similar event in or upon any public grounds
or private property, beach, park or road of the City of Asbury Park, must
first apply for and obtain a special events permit in accordance with the
requirements of this section. The following shall be illustrative of, but not
limited to, the type of event requiring a permit: the closing of a public
street, the sale of merchandise, food or beverage on public property outside
of the central business district, or on private property where otherwise
prohibited by law, the installation of a stage, bandshell, trailer, van, portable
building, tent, grandstand or bleachers on public property, or private
property, or placement of temporary "No Parking" signs on a public right-ofway.
§ 4-10.3. Application. [Ord. No. 2760 § 4-10.3; Ord. No. 3005; Ord.
No. 2015-45]
a. A person or organization seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall
file an application with the City Manager or his or her designee, on a
form to be provided for that purpose, on which form the applicant shall
furnish pertinent information to include but not limited to the following:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons,
corporation, organization or association sponsoring the activity.
3. A detailed description of the proposed event and a sketch that
shows the area or route to be used, along with proposed structures,
tents, fences, barricades, signs, banners and restroom facilities,
more commonly referred to as a "footprint."
4. The date(s) and hours for which the permit is desired.
5. The location of the event for which the permit is desired, and
complete details as to how the applicant intends to provide for
§ 4-10 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-10.3
1:190
§ 4-10.4. Fees. [Ord. No. 2760 § 4-10.4; Ord. No. 3005; Ord. No.
2015-45; Ord. No. 2016-55]
All applicants for special events permits shall be required to pay a
nonrefundable application fee, as well as all other fees that are determined
to be necessary by the Mayor and City Council depending upon the nature
and extent of the proposed activity. The application fee shall be due and
payable at the time that an application is submitted. Other fees that may be
required include, but are not necessarily limited to: costs associated with
the provision of police and/or fire supervision, emergency services, staffing,
use of City owned property and/or use of City owned vehicles or equipment
and the creation and/or use of temporary parking areas. Applicants shall be
security, traffic control, site cleanup, separation of recyclables and
disposal of trash and debris and parking (and in particular, whether
any temporary parking areas will be required).
6. The number of attendees, participants, spectators, contestants
and/or other people that are reasonably anticipated to attend the
event.
7. A detailed description of the City's resources or services that shall
be required to be provided in connection with the event.
8. Any applicant claiming status as a nonprofit organization shall be
required to provide the necessary documentation to that effect.
b. Upon verification that the application is complete, the City Manager or
his or her designee shall refer the application to the Special Events
Review Board for preliminary review in accordance with this section.
The Special Events Review Board may require the applicant to
supplement its application with any pertinent documentation that may
be of assistance to the Board, and to the Mayor and City Council, in
their review of the application.
c. All completed applications must be submitted to the City Manager or
his or her designee at least forty-five (45) days prior to the desired
event, unless the applicant receives a waiver of this requirement from
the Mayor and City Council, or unless the application is for a special
event of the type covered by § d. below.
d. Permits for public gatherings and assemblies protected by the First
Amendment to the United States Constitution and the New Jersey State
Constitution (i.e., demonstrations, rallies, etc.), shall receive an
expedited review. Such permits shall be granted or denied by the City
Manager, acting on behalf of the Mayor and City Council, within three
(3) business days of receipt of a fully completed application. The City
Manager's granting of an approval may be with such conditions as are
deemed to be in the best interests of the City, upon consultation with
members of the Special Events Review Board, Police Chief, Fire Chief,
and any other relevant City officials.
§ 4-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.4
1:191
provided with an estimate of required fees by the City Manager or his or her
designee after the Special Events Review Board has reviewed the contents
of the application, pursuant to § 4-10.5 below. Final confirmation of the total
fee shall be made by the Mayor and City Council, upon recommendation
from the Special Events Review Board, during review of each specific
application. All required fees shall be due and payable at least ten (10)
days prior to the event. Any requests for reductions or waivers of fees must
be submitted in writing to, and approved by, the Mayor and City Council.
In addition to the fees payable prior to each event, the applicant shall be
required to pay for any and all additional or unanticipated expenses which
were occasioned or become necessary during or after the event, as a direct
result of the event.
a. Application Fee: (Nonrefundable).
$50 for non-profits
$250 for all other organizations or groups
$1,000 for events over 2,000
$5,000 for events over 15,000
b. Maintenance Personnel and Equipment Fees:
Putting up barricades- 1 man, 1 hour $50
Picking up barricades- 1 man, 1 hour $50
Putting up banner- 2 men, 1 hour $100
Taking down banner- 2 men, 1 hour $100
Use of pickup truck, per hour $40*
Use of dump truck $85*
Use of sweeper, per hour $75*
Use of front end loader, per hour $80*
Use of dozer, per hour $100*
Use of portable float (stage) and steps $250
Use of litter scooter, per hour $30*
Use of garbage truck, per hour $90*(plus tipping fees)
Use of bucket, per hour $75*
Ambulance $250*
Dumping fee $80 per ton
Fire Engine or Rescue Truck $500 per day*
Rack Body Flatbed Truck $55 per hour
Mason Dump Truck $55 per hour
§ 4-10.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-10.4
1:192
Items shown with an asterisk require an additional charge for the
operator of the vehicle or equipment, which shall be at the rate of $50
per hour. The above fees include delivery and pick-up during regular
working hours (7am-2pm). All charges shall be hourly (except for the
use of the portable float/stage and steps) and shall have a minimum
charge of one hour. For any increments into the following hours, a one
hour charge shall be incurred.
c. Public Parks:
Sunset $600 per day
Bradley $1,500 per day from one week prior to Memorial
Day through two weeks after Labor Day
Bradley $750 per day any other time
Atlantic $1,500 per day from one week prior to Memorial
Day through two weeks after Labor Day
Atlantic $750 per day off season any other time
Library $600 per day
Kennedy $100 per day
Merchants $100 per day
Springwood $100 per day
d. Boardwalk Fee: Daily fee of $250 per day per block
e. Beaches: Daily fee of $700 for use of the City's beaches in conjunction
with any special event within the City. All participants on the beach will
also be required to purchase a daily beach badge.
f. Transportation Center: $100 per day plus any maintenance fees
g. Council Chambers: $100 per day plus any maintenance fees
h. Large Beach or Park Event: Any event that is projected for 500
participants or more will be subject to a different fee structure to cover
added City expenses. The daily beach/park fee will vary according to
the type of event: Beach Fee: $2,500 Park Fee: $2,500.
In addition, a deposit will be required in the amount of $5,000 to cover
any expenses incurred by the City that are not covered by special event
fees.
For any event with 2,501 or more participants, user fees and deposits
will be set by the Asbury Park Special Events Committee and approved
by the Asbury Park City Council. A separate contract approved by the
City Council will govern the operation and fees of said event.
i. Street Blocking or Closing:
1. Non-Metered Streets: $250 daily fee per block for any non-metered
street blocking or closing.
§ 4-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.4
1:193
§ 4-10.5. Special Events Review Board. [Ord. No. 2760 § 4-10.5; Ord.
No. 3005; Ord. No. 2015-45]
2. Metered Streets: The daily charge per block for street blocking or
closing will be calculated by: taking the number of metered parking
spaces in that block x the current hourly rate in that block (for the
specific date of closure) x the daily number of hours the meters are
in operation = the daily rate for that block. Either the daily block
rate or a minimum of $250, whichever is greater, will be paid by the
applicant.
j. Off-Duty Police Officers: 8:00 a.m.-12:00 a.m. $75 per hour per officer/
12:00 a.m.- 8:00 a.m. $85 per hour per officer.
k. EMT/Fire: 8:00 a.m.-12:00 a.m. $75 per hour/12:00 a.m.-8:00 a.m. $85
per hour (Fire Inspector/Fire Official regular overtime receive rate).
l. Lifeguards: $65 per hour
m. Utility Fees: Any and all fees for actual water and electric consumption
shall be billed by the Director of Public Maintenance after the
conclusion of the event.
n. Electrician: $60 per hour
o. Sunset Sign Advertising. The weekly rate to create and post a message
for 7 days is $250. The rate for a single day special message (birthdays,
anniversaries, etc) is $50.
p. Returned Checks. $25 fee in addition to the reimbursement of the
original check amount.
a. Establishment; Purpose. There is hereby created a Special Events
Review Board within the City of Asbury Park. The purpose of the
Special Events Review Board shall be to review all special events
permit applications and to provide a written recommendation to the
Mayor and City Council, through the City Manager or his or her
designee, relative to each application.
b. Composition; Meetings. The Special Events Review Board shall consist
of the City Manager or his or her designee, the Director of Social
Services or his or her designee, the Police Chief or his or her designee,
the Fire Chief or his or her designee, the Director of Public Works or his
or her designee, and any other City Officials or employees as deemed
necessary by the City Manager in order to properly review each
application. The Special Events Review Board shall meet once per
month and shall report its findings and recommendations to the Mayor
and City Council for final approval of each special event. Unless
otherwise advised, all applicants shall be required to appear personally
before the Special Events Review Board, as well as before the Mayor
and City Council, in support of their application.
§ 4-10.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-10.6
1:194
§ 4-10.6. City Council Approval. [Ord. No. 2760 § 4-10.6; Ord. No.
3005]
Following receipt of a written report from the Special Events Review Board,
the Mayor and City Council shall make the final determination as to whether
to issue a Special Events Permit and the appropriate fee to be charged, by
affirmative action by majority vote. Issuance of a permit may be subject to
such conditions and restrictions as may be determined necessary by the
Mayor and City Council. The applicant shall be required to abide by all
conditions and restrictions imposed by the Mayor and Council.
In connection with the approval of any Special Events Permit, the Mayor
and City Council may authorize the provision of temporary parking areas,
after consultation with the Special Events Review Board, the Director of
Planning and Redevelopment, the Police Chief, and the City Engineer. Any
such temporary parking areas shall be subject to such conditions as deemed
necessary by the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-10.7. Standards. [Ord. No. 2760 § 4-10.7; Ord. No. 3005]
The standards for the issuance of a permit pursuant to this section shall
include but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following findings:
§ 4-10.8. Denial of Permit. [Ord. No. 2760 § 4-10.8; Ord. No. 3005]
The standards for denial of a permit pursuant to this section shall include
but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following:
a. That the proposed event will not unreasonably interfere with or detract
from the general public's enjoyment of public parks, beaches,
roadways, or facilities to be utilized.
b. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety, and
recreation.
c. That the proposed activity and uses that are reasonably anticipated will
not be likely to include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
d. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
date and hour requested in the application.
e. That the applicant will maintain premises in the same condition which
existed prior to the event.
a. That the proposed event will disrupt traffic within the City beyond
practical solutions.
b. That the location of the special event will cause undue hardship to
adjacent property owners.
§ 4-10.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.8
1:195
§ 4-10.9. Responsibility, Liability, Performance Guarantee/Security
Deposit, Insurance Coverage and Indemnification. [Ord. No. 2760
§ 4-10.9; Ord. No. 3005]
c. That the proposed event will require the diversion of so many public
employees that allowing the event would unreasonably deny service to,
or jeopardize the safety of, the remainder of the City's residents.
d. That the application contains incomplete or inaccurate information, or
that the applicant has filed or refuse to provide necessary information
upon request from the City.
e. That the application fails to comply with all terms of this section,
including the failure to remit all fees or deposits, or the failure to
provide proof of proper liability insurance coverage, or the failure to
execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement, or the failure
to provide a performance bond or cash security deposit when required
by the Mayor and City Council, or for any other violation of the terms
and conditions of this section.
a. Responsibility.
1. It shall be the permit applicant's responsibility to secure all
necessary other permits, licenses and/or approvals which may be
required (i.e., by State, local or other outside agencies), in
conjunction with the proposed event.
2. All permit applicants shall assume all risks associated with
premature advertisement of any event prior to the time of issuance
of a permit by the Mayor and City Council, as well as any and all
other costs which may have been expended prior to the time of
official approval of the application by the Mayor and City Council.
3. All permit holders shall be required to abide by all requirements set
forth in the permit, as well as all City Ordinances, State Statutes
(including but not limited to the New Jersey Riot Act, N.J.S.A.
2C:33-1 et seq.), and all other rules and regulations which may be
applicable to the event.
4. All permit holders shall be responsible for any and all additional
costs that are incurred as a result of the event, including costs
which may not have been foreseen at the time that the permit was
issued but which becomes necessary, such as costs associated with
additional resources provided by the City, including but not limited
to, manpower and/or equipment costs, police and/or fire
supervision, emergency services, cleanup activities, etc.
5. Any personnel provided by the City (i.e., police, fire, emergency,
public works or other City employees) in connection with any
special event sponsored by an outside party shall not be considered
employees or agents of the outside party. If emergency services are
§ 4-10.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-10.9
1:196
required for any special event, then only Asbury Park emergency
personnel may be utilized.
b. Liability; Performance Guarantees/Security Deposit.
1. All permit holders shall be liable for all losses, damages and/or
injuries sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of the event
or activities associated with the event.
2. The terms of this section shall not be construed as imposing upon
the City or its officers or employees any liability or responsibility
for any injury or damage to any person in any way connected to the
use for which the permit was issued. The City and its officials and
employees should not be deemed to have assumed any liability or
responsibility by reason of any inspections performed, the issuance
of any permits, or the approval for use of any City property in
connection with a permit issued hereunder.
3. All permit holders shall assume full responsibility for the acts and
conduct of all persons admitted to the event by or with the consent
of the permit holder, or of any person acting for or on behalf of the
permit holder.
4. If any portion of City property or other premises where the event is
held is damaged by the act or omission of the permit holder, or by
the permit holder's agents, employees, patrons, customers, guests,
invitees, or any other person admitted to the premises by the
permit holder, the permit holder shall be responsible for all costs
associated with restoration of the property or premises to the
condition that existed prior to the occurrence of such damage. The
amount of such damage shall be considered an additional fee.
5. A performance bond issued by a surety company acceptable to the
City or a cash security deposit sufficient to cover any damages
occasioned as a result of the special event may be required by the
Mayor and City Council. Additionally, a cash security deposit may
be required to ensure compliance with all terms and conditions
imposed by the Mayor and Council in connection with issuance of
the permit.
c. Insurance Coverage. All permit holders must submit minimum liability
insurance coverage in an amount to be determined by the Mayor and
City Council, depending upon the size and nature of the event planned.
The City of Asbury Park, its officers, employees, agents and
representatives must be named as additional insured parties on the
policy.
d. Indemnification. All permit holders shall defend, indemnify and hold the
City of Asbury Park, its officers, employees, contractors, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all liability for
claims, demands, damages, suits, judgments, fines, losses and
expenses, of any nature, which are sustained as a result of the event,
§ 4-10.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-10.9
1:197
§ 4-10.10. No Rights Conveyed; Revocation. [Ord. No. 2760
§ 4-10.10; Ord. No. 3005]
All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be temporary and do not
invest any permanent or continuing rights. No permit issued pursuant to
this section shall convey any right, interest or title in any City property
to the permit holder. Any permit may be revoked at any time by the City
Manager, acting on behalf of the Mayor and City Council, for violation of the
conditions for which the permit was issued, or for violation of any ordinance
which relates to the conducting of the event, or for violation of any of the
terms of this section, or when the event is found not to be in the best
interests of the City, or for other good cause shown.
§ 4-10.11. Offenses and Penalty. [Ord. No. 2760 § 4-10.11; Ord. No.
3005]
§ 4-11. PRECIOUS METALS AND PREVIOUSLY OWNED JEWELRY.
§ 4-11.1. License Required. [2000 Code § 4-11.1]
No person shall engage in the business of purchasing precious metals or
items comprised of same, gems and all forms of previously owned jewelry,
either as a primary business or in connection with another business, without
first having obtained a license from the City Clerk.
§ 4-11.2. Application; Investigation; Denial; Appeal. [2000 Code
§ 4-11.2]
An applicant for a license shall complete the application form available at
the office of the City Clerk who shall thereupon refer such application to
the Chief of Police who shall conduct such investigation of the applicant's
background as he/she deems necessary for the protection of the public
welfare. Upon the completion of the investigation, which in no event shall
and shall execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement in a
form acceptable to the City prior to the event.
a. Offenses. A person commits an offense if he or she:
1. Commences or conducts an event that is subject to the
requirements of this section without a permit, or;
2. Fails to comply with any condition, requirement or provision of the
permit, or otherwise violates any ordinance, rule or regulation that
is applicable to the event.
b. Penalty. A person who violates a provision of this section shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each day or part thereof during which the
violation is committed or continued and shall be liable, upon conviction,
to the penalty as stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5 of the City Code, or as
provided by State Statute.
§ 4-10.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-11.2
1:198
take more than ten (10) days, the Chief of Police shall return the application
or a copy thereof to the City Clerk, accompanied by his/her
recommendations as to whether or not the license should be issued or
denied. If the recommendation of the Chief of Police is to deny the license,
the grounds for such denial shall be stated. A recommendation of denial
shall be given if the applicant has been convicted of any offense involving
dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the City Clerk shall issue or deny the
license accordingly. Any applicant aggrieved by such denial may appeal to
the City Council, which shall hold a public hearing in connection therewith
within fourteen (14) days from said appeal and which may thereafter affirm
or reverse the denial.
§ 4-11.3. Identification; Information Required. [2000 Code § 4-11.3]
All persons regulated by § 4-11.1 hereof shall require of anyone offering
an item for sale as set forth therein, to produce two (2) different forms of
identification such as a driver's license, voter registration card or similar
identification and to sign a receipt for said item and shall obtain the
following information from each person offering an item for sale: name,
address, sex, date of birth, social security number if available, and physical
description. A prototype form for this purpose shall be available, if desired,
from the Department of Police of the City of Asbury Park. It shall be
unlawful, however, for previous metals or items described in § 4-11.1 to be
purchased from a minor under eighteen (18) years of age.
All items regulated by § 4-11.1 which the license has reason to believe
is valued in excess of one thousand ($1,000) dollars shall take a polaroid
picture of the seller and relinquish the picture upon request to a member of
the Police Department of the City.
§ 4-11.4. Records. [2000 Code § 4-11.4]
All persons regulated by § 4-11.1 hereof shall maintain records for each
sale which shall contain a description of the item purchased, any identifying
markings or numbers, a copy of the signed receipt and all information
required under § 4-11.3 hereof. The licensee shall be responsible for
delivery of aforementioned records to the Police Department in the City on
a biweekly basis. Each item purchased shall be held for thirty (30) days at
the licensed address submitted on the application.
§ 4-11.5. Fees. [2000 Code § 4-11.5]
The fee for the initial license application shall be the sum of two hundred
($200) dollars which shall cover the cost of processing the application. Each
annual renewal fee shall be the sum of twenty-five ($25) dollars.
§ 4-11.6. Violation and Penalty. [2000 Code § 4-11.6]
Any person violating any terms of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. Every day that a
§ 4-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-11.6
1:199
violation under this section shall continue, shall be deemed a separate
violation.
§ 4-12. GARAGE SALES.
§ 4-12.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 4-12.1]
As used in this section:
GARAGE SALES — shall mean and include all sales entitled "Garage Sale,"
"Lawn Sale," "Attic Sale," "Rummage Sale," or "Flea Market Sale" or any
similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any
means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.
PERSON — shall mean and include individuals and/or household entities,
partnerships, voluntary associations and corporations.
§ 4-12.2. Licenses; Number Restricted; Duration of Sale. [2000
Code § 4-12.2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the City
without first filing with the Health Officer, Code Enforcement Officer or his
or her designee the information herein specified and obtaining a license
known as a "garage sale license." A fee of five ($5) dollars shall be charged
for the license.
Such licenses shall be issued to any one (1) person only twice within a
twelve (12) month period, and no such license shall be issued for more
than three (3) consecutive calendar days. Charitable, religious and civic
organizations may be allowed more than two (2) licenses with the approval
of the City Council. Each license issued under which the garage sale is
conducted shall be posted throughout the entire period of the garage sale.
§ 4-12.3. Information to Be Filed. [2000 Code § 4-12.3]
The information to be filed with the Health Officer or Code Enforcement
Officer pursuant to this section shall be as follows:
a. Name of person conducting sale.
b. Name of the owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted
and consent of the owner if applicant is other than the owner.
c. Location at which sale is to be conducted.
d. Number of days of sale.
e. Date and nature of any past sale.
f. Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known by him/her to be
so.
§ 4-11.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-12.4
1:200
§ 4-12.4. Hours of Sales. [2000 Code § 4-12.4]
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.
§ 4-12.5. Signs. [2000 Code § 4-12.5]
All signs displayed in connection with garage sales are to be removed within
forty-eight (48) hours after the completion of the sale. No signs advertising
the sale shall be affixed to trees or utility poles.
§ 4-12.6. Exemptions. [2000 Code § 4-12.6]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 4-12.7. Placement and Display of Items for Sale Restricted. [2000
Code § 4-12.7]
No display of items for sale at any garage sale shall be displayed on the
sidewalk or in that area between the residence of the applicant and the
sidewalk, but shall be displayed behind the building line of the premises at
which the garage sale is to be held.
§ 4-12.8. Enforcement. [2000 Code § 4-12.8]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department, the Health Officer,
the Code Enforcement Officer or their designee or their agent of the City,
who shall investigate any violations of this section coming to their attention
whether by complaint or arising from their own personal knowledge and,
if a violation is found to exist, the appropriate City Official shall prosecute
a complaint before the local Municipal Court pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activities is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
the premises during all hours of the sale or activity. No such person shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the premises nor permit vehicles
to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such
premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable order of any member
a. Persons selling goods pursuant to any order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
b. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
c. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from, or at a place of business within a commercial zone
within the City.
§ 4-12.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-12.8
1:201
of the Police or Health Departments of the City in order to maintain the
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 4-12.9. Penalty. [2000 Code § 4-12.9]
Any person conducting any such sale or similar activity without being
properly licensed therefor, or who shall violate any of the other terms and
regulations of this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty
stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. Each day that such sale shall continue
without being duly licensed shall be considered a separate violation.
§ 4-13. (RESERVED)
§ 4-14. (RESERVED)
§ 4-15. STREET PERFORMERS.
§ 4-15.1. Definition. [Ord. No. 2985 § 4-13.1]
As used in this section:
STREET PERFORMER — shall mean any clown, mime, musician, magician,
or any other individual engaged in an artistic expressive activity in a public
area for the purpose of entertaining the general public.
§ 4-15.2. Permit Required; Fees; Background Check; Term; Appeal.
[Ord. No. 2985 § 4-13.2; Ord. No. 2015-17; amended 1-23-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-1]
a. Permit Required. No street performer shall conduct his or her
performance in the public areas of the City of Asbury Park, including
the boardwalk, without first obtaining a permit from the City Clerk.
Such permits shall be issued annually, on a first-come-first-served basis,
upon submission of an application in the form prescribed by the City
Clerk, presentation of a valid form of identification and compliance with
the provisions of below regarding payment of the required annual
application fee and submission to a criminal history background check
which produces satisfactory results.
b. Application Fee. The application must be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee of $25 to cover the cost of and processing
of the application.
c. Background Check; Disqualifying History. Every applicant for a permit
pursuant to this section shall be fingerprinted by Sagem Morpho, Inc.
To provide for a timely and efficient criminal history background review,
the City of Asbury Park will be utilizing the state-police-coordinated,
non-criminal-justice fingerprinting process known as "Live Scan." The
State of New Jersey has contracted with a vendor, Sagem Morpho, Inc.,
to perform this service. The company has established permanent sites
throughout the state as well as several mobile units available to meet its
§ 4-12.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-15.2
1:202
contractual agreement. Sagem Morpho, Inc. charges a fee for the
fingerprinting for which the applicant will be responsible. There will
be an additional fee of $20 payable to the City of Asbury Park, for
the processing of the fingerprint documentation required by Sagem
Morpho, Inc. The Chief of Police or his designee shall conduct a
criminal history background check upon any such applicant to
determine whether the applicant has been convicted, whether by trier
of fact or a plea of guilty, under the laws of the State of New Jersey of an
offense involving dishonesty or of a crime of the third degree or above,
pursuant to New Jersey law, or under the laws of another state of the
United States of an offense or a crime which, if committed in the State
of New Jersey, would be such an offense or crime. No permit shall be
issued to any applicant found to have a criminal history of conviction of
such offenses or crimes.
d. Fees. All fees referenced above shall be non-negotiable and
nonrefundable.
e. Term. All permits issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only
during the year in which they are issued.
f. Appeals of Permit Disqualification or Permit Revocation/Suspension.
1. Any applicant who feels aggrieved as a result of the denial of a
street performer permit due to the results of the criminal history
background check, as referenced above, or whose street performer
permit has been suspended or revoked, or who has been the
subject of any other adverse action taken by the City or its
representatives, may file an appeal to the City Manager or the City
Manager's assigned designee in accordance with the provisions set
forth below.
2. The appeal must be taken, in writing, within 10 days from the date
of the notice of the denial, suspension, revocation, decision, ruling
or action. A letter stating the desire to appeal shall suffice.
3. Upon the filing of an appeal, the City Manager or his/her designee
shall hold a hearing on the appeal as soon as practicable, providing
reasonable advance notice of the time and date of the hearing to
the appellant. At the hearing, the appellant shall be permitted to
provide information and/or testimony in support of his/her position.
4. If the appeal regards disqualification due to the results of the
criminal history background check, the City Manager or his/her
designee shall be permitted to consider whether the applicant has
affirmatively demonstrated clear and convincing evidence of his or
her rehabilitation. In determining whether an applicant has
affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation, the following factors
shall be considered:
(a) The nature and seriousness of the offense(s);
§ 4-15.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-15.2
1:203
§ 4-15.3. Performance Regulations. [Ord. No. 2985 § 4-13.3; Ord.
No. 2015-17]
This section regulates the manner in which street performers may perform
in the public areas of the City of Asbury Park, including the boardwalk.
(b) The circumstances under which the offense(s) occurred;
(c) The date(s) of the offense(s);
(d) The age of the person when the offense(s) was/were
committed;
(e) Whether the offense(s) represented an isolated or repeated
incident;
(f) Any evidence of rehabilitation; and
(g) Any other factors which are relevant in the discretion of the
City Manager or his/her designee.
5. As part of the hearing, the City Manager or his/her designee may
request guidance from any relevant City staff or legal consultant(s)
to make an informed decision on the appeal.
6. In all cases of appeal, the determination of the City Manager or his/
her designee shall be guided by the best interests of the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
7. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager or his/her
designee may affirm, modify or reverse the action of the City, and
shall advise the appellant in writing of the decision within seven
days of the conclusion of the hearing.
a. A street performer shall conduct his or her performance in a place and
manner so as to not restrict the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. If
performing upon the boardwalk, a performer shall be located on the
eastern side of the boardwalk and shall not be located within twentyfive
(25) feet of any entrance or exit to the beach or boardwalk, or
within twenty-five (25) feet of any business or public building.
b. Where two (2) or more street performers are present in a common area,
they shall be spaced no less than fifty (50) feet apart, unless engaged in
a joint performance. If a performer is located within fifty (50) feet of
another performer, or cannot conduct a performance in a location
without blocking the passage of the public, the street performer shall
leave the location upon notification by a Police Officer or other City
official. The performer may then move his or her performance to
another location in conformance with this section.
c. Street performers shall not remain in the same location for more than
three (3) hours. At the conclusion of a three (3) hour period, and at the
request of any law enforcement officer of the City of Asbury Park, street
§ 4-15.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-15.3
1:204
§ 4-15.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2985 § 4-13.4]
The provisions set forth in this section may be enforced by the City Manager
or his designee, the City Clerk or any member of the City's Police
Department.
§ 4-15.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2985 § 4-13.5]
performers shall move to a new location that is a minimum distance of
one hundred (100) feet from the immediately prior location. [Ord. No.
2015-17]
d. Street performers may conduct performances between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
e. Street performances are prohibited on the boardwalk during the July
4th weekend due to the extremely high volume of pedestrian traffic and
other activities historically encountered at the beachfront at such
times.
f. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection c. above, the City Council
may by a majority vote designate other times or dates during which
performances may be restricted or prohibited in order to protect the
public interest.
g. No street performer may sell any merchandise without first obtaining a
mercantile license for same pursuant to Section 4-1 of the City Code or,
if the proposed sales are intended to take place within the "boardwalk
vending area" (Section 4-14, as defined in Ordinance No. 2979, adopted
on May 18, 2011, or as defined in any successor Ordinance adopted
thereafter), obtaining a permit to engage in such boardwalk/beachfront
vending activities in accordance with the requirements set forth in
Section 4-14, or in accordance with the requirements set forth in any
successor ordinance adopted thereafter.
h. No street performer shall include any activity which is inimical to the
health, safety and welfare of the general public. Examples include but
are not limited to activities involving fire, flammable liquids, knives or
swords, or language or conduct that is likely to incite violence or a riot.
i. All street performers shall be required to have their permit on display in
public view at the site of the street performance at all times.
j. No street performer shall utilize amplifiers for music or other sounds
without first receiving appropriate approval(s) from the City's Special
Events Committee.
a. Any person violating or failing to comply with any other provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalties stated
in Chapter I, Section 1-5 of the City Code. The continuation of such
violation for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense,
and the person or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of
§ 4-15.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-15.5
1:205
§ 4-16. through § 4-17. (RESERVED)
§ 4-18. MURALS.
§ 4-18.1. Findings and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2914 § 4-13.1]
The Mayor and City Council, in their continuing efforts to rehabilitate and
revitalize the business community in the City have noted that murals can
provide an enhancement to the community and the quality of neighborhoods
within the City, provided that they do not cause distraction to motor vehicle
operators and are consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
§ 4-18.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2914 § 4-13.2]
As used in this section:
MURAL — shall mean a painting or illustration applied directly to a wall
of an independent structure within the City but shall not include (a) any
such painting or illustration requiring a separate foundation or footing; (b)
any depiction or contents of a commercial, trademarked, copyrighted, or
other licensed feature; (c) any message or advertisement for any individual,
group, or entity (whether or not commercial); or (d) any subjects or material
of a scandalous, libelous, or indecent nature as determined by
contemporary community standards.
STREETSCAPE — shall mean the overall arrangement and interaction of
signs, lighting, statuary, fountains, façade treatments (including murals),
landscaping, walkways, window treatments, and the like in view, primarily,
of pedestrians and motorists upon public or semi-public rights-of-way.
§ 4-18.3. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2914 § 4-13.3; Ord. No.
2017-44]
Any mural that is not the subject of land use approval to be erected,
painted, or otherwise installed within the City shall not be erected, painted
or installed without first obtaining approval from the Asbury Park Public Art
Commission and a permit from the City Clerk for the same. All requirements
concerning the establishment, composition and powers of the Public Art
Commission are set forth in Chapter II, Administration.
the violation may be punished as provided above for each separate
offense.
b. The City Council and/or the City Manager shall have the authority to
suspend or revoke a street performer permit upon a finding of violation
of any rule or ordinance or other law, or upon good cause shown, in
furtherance of the best interests of the health, safety and welfare of the
public. [Amended 1-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-1]
c. The violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to
abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 4-15.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-18.4
1:206
§ 4-18.4. Application and Fee for Mural Permit. [Ord. No. 2914
§ 4-13.4; Ord. No. 2017-44]
Application for a permit to erect, paint and/or install a mural within the
City shall be made on a form provided by the City Clerk or if no such
form has been prepared by a letter, signed by the property owner and the
applicant, and filed with the City Clerk containing or enclosing the following
information:
§ 4-18.5. Review of Mural Applications. [Ord. No. 2914 § 4-13.5;
Ord. No. 2017-44]
Upon the filing of an application, the City Clerk shall cause the application
to be forwarded to the Public Art Commission for review and consideration.
Upon receipt of the mural application, the Public Art Commission shall
schedule a hearing for the purpose of reviewing said application. The Public
Art Commission shall advise the applicant, in writing, at least fourteen (14)
days prior to the hearing, of the date, time and place of said hearing, and
shall ensure that a notice of the hearing is placed in the official newspaper
of the City at least seven (7), but not more than fourteen (14) days prior to
the hearing. The applicant shall be required to ensure that written notice is
mailed, by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least seven (7) days
prior to the hearing to the record owner(s) of the subject property if other
than the applicant, as well as to all property owners who owns property
located within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed mural location.
a. The owner of the property where the installation is to be made.
b. The street address and tax lot and block number of the property in
question.
c. A description of the subject matter of the mural or other feature, if
appropriate.
d. A sketch or other rendering showing the appearance of the mural or
other installation.
e. A precise description and visual rendering of the location and size of the
mural or other installation.
f. A general description of the color scheme of the installation.
g. A general description of the points from which the installation may be
viewed with particular attention to its visibility to motorists and its
proximity to intersections.
h. An application fee in the amount of twenty-five ($25) dollars.
i. Such other information as the Public Art Commission may reasonably
request.
§ 4-18.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-18.5
1:207
At the meeting, the Commission shall allow the applicant to be heard, as
well as any other interested parties who wish to address the proposed
application.
The Public Art Commission shall consider the application in light of the
proposed mural's compatibility with the neighborhood in which it is to be
located, its size in relation to surrounding features, whether it is likely
to cause a distraction or hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, its
compliance with the definitional provisions of this section, its compliance
with the design guidelines adopted by the Commission, and its overall
aesthetic impact on the neighborhood. The Commission shall also consider
the significance of the proposed project's location, the artist's ability to
complete the project in a timely manner, and the ability and willingness of
the property owner to maintain the mural. The Commission may reject any
application that is deemed not in the best interests of the community by
not enhancing the residents' quality of life and the City's commitment to a
clean, safe, healthy and diverse community. In considering the application,
the Commission may, in its discretion, seek the opinions of professionals
familiar with the subject or field involved, including but not limited to
historians, artists, sculptors or similar professionals.
§ 4-18.6. Requirements for Murals. [Ord. No. 2914 § 4-13.6; Ord.
No. 2017-44]
The following requirements shall apply to mural construction within the
City, which shall be duly considered by the Public Art Commission during
the review process:
§ 4-18.7. Issuance of Permit; Conditions; Expiration. [Ord. No. 2914
§ 4-13.7; Ord. No. 2017-44]
Final action on the application shall be made by way of a vote of the
Public Art Commission to issue or deny the permit for the proposed mural,
which shall be rendered within thirty (30) days of the submission of a
complete application, unless this time frame is extended by consent of the
applicant. An approval may be subject to any reasonable conditions deemed
appropriate by the Commission.
Upon positive action by the Public Art Commission, the City Clerk shall
promptly issue the permit, with a notation as to any required conditions
imposed. Permits shall expire one hundred eighty (180) days after the date
of issuance. Any approved project not installed within the one hundred
a. No more than two (2) square feet of the mural may contain the name of
the artist, sponsor and/or product likeness.
b. Murals may not be mere extensions or enlargements of an existing sign.
c. Murals shall become the property of the property owner following
construction.
§ 4-18.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-18.7
1:208
eighty (180) day time frame shall be required to re-apply and obtain a new
permit.
§ 4-18.8. Appeal. [Ord. No. 2914 § 4-13.8; Ord. No. 2017-44]
Any aggrieved party shall have the right to appeal any determination made
by the Public Art Commission to the Mayor and City Council within ten
(10) days following the City Clerk's issuance or denial of the permit. If an
appeal is filed, the Clerk shall cause the appeal to be placed on the next
conveniently available agenda for the consideration of the Mayor and City
Council.
§ 4-18.9. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 2914 § 4-13.9]
Maintenance of the mural shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
However, business owners, artists, sponsors and other interested parties
may reach private arrangements regarding maintenance.
All installations shall be maintained by the owner in good condition free
from chips, stains, graffiti, defacing, fading paint, and the like. Failure to
properly maintain an installation shall subject the property owner to the
penalties of this section.
§ 4-18.10. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2914
§ 4-13.10]
Violations of the provisions of this section shall subject the owner and/or
violator to a fine as specified in Chapter I, Section 1-5 of the City Code. Each
day or portion thereof shall be considered a separate violation.
§ 4-18.11. Applicability of Construction and Land Use Regulations.
[Ord. No. 2914 § 4-13.11]
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as a waiver, replacement, or
substitute for any installation that requires a Construction Code or Land
Use Approval under applicable provisions of any statute, ordinance, rule or
regulation.
§ 4-19. PERMITS FOR CHARTER BUSES.
§ 4-19.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 4-15.1]
As used in this section:
CHARTER AUTO BUS — shall mean a bus or other vehicle propelled by
motor power, operated by the person owning or leasing such bus or vehicle,
pursuant to a contract, agreement or arrangement to furnish an auto bus
or vehicle and a driver or drivers thereof to a person or organization for
a trip designated by such person or organization for a charge. The term
shall also include any such bus or vehicle used by the person owning
or leasing such bus or vehicle for the purpose of carrying passengers
§ 4-18.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-19.1
1:209
for hire, each passenger paying fixed charge for his/her carriage on a
special trip arranged and designated by such owner or lessee, which fixed
charge may or may not include meals, lodging, entertainment or other
fixed charges. The term does not apply to taxicabs, hotel buses, or buses
employed solely in transporting school children and school teachers to and
from schools in the City; or to auto buses operated wholly within the City
by virtue of a franchise from the City; or to auto buses which operate
within the City under Municipal consent over a regularly established route,
either intrastate or interstate between fixed terminals upon a regularly
established and published schedule; or to any excursion of charter buses
originating in the City and leaving for points elsewhere.
§ 4-19.2. Permit Required for Saturdays, Sundays and Holidays;
Exceptions; Fees. [2000 Code § 4-15.1]
The driver of a charter auto bus shall not enter into and load or unload
passengers on any Saturday, Sunday or holiday, without first obtaining
from the City Clerk a written permit authorizing the entry and loading
and unloading of the passengers of the charter auto bus on a certain and
specific date. No charter auto bus shall unload its passengers except during
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., unless unloading shall take place
at a particular hotel, motel, restaurant, theater or the like which is the
destination of the passengers. Any charter auto bus shall leave the City
before 11:00 p.m., unless it is carrying passengers from a particular hotel,
motel, restaurant, theater or the like. Every charter auto bus shall provide
a chaperone or attendant for every five (5) passengers under seventeen
(17) years of age. The application for the permit shall be made in writing
addressed to the City Clerk, stating the name and address of the person
or organization making the application and the address from which each
ride will originate, the number of persons expected, the number of persons
under the age of twenty-one (21), the number of buses to be used, the
date, the approximate time of arrival in the City, the specific point of
destination and the period of time during which the charter auto bus or
buses' passengers expect to remain in the City. The City shall issue a permit
for which there shall be a minimum fee of twenty ($20) dollars for each bus
entering on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday only; provided, however, that an
application for a permit shall be made but no fee shall be charged where
the destination of the charter auto bus is a bona fide church or synagogue
where the passengers intend to worship and no charge shall be made where
the passengers of the charter auto bus have confirmed reservations at a
hotel, motel, restaurant, theater or the like for a function or for a particular
period of time. The application must be submitted to the City Clerk within a
reasonable period of time before the date of arrival.
§ 4-19.3. Parking. [2000 Code § 4-15.1]
The driver of a charter auto bus shall not park the bus on any street at any
time. Arrangements for the parking of the charter auto bus shall be made
by the driver, owner or lessee directly with the owner, operator or lessee of
a duly licensed or authorized offstreet parking lot in the City.
§ 4-19.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-19.4
1:210
§ 4-19.4. Limit on Number of Buses. [2000 Code § 4-15.1]
The City Manager may limit the number of buses entering the City on any
certain date, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police.
§ 4-19.5. Locations for Loading or Unloading Passengers Restricted.
[2000 Code § 4-15.1]
No person shall load or unload passengers from any charter auto bus on
any street in the City, except that all loading or unloading shall be done at
the bus plaza located at Lake Avenue and Ocean Avenue, unless otherwise
specifically designated in the written permit.
§ 4-19.6. Parking on Private Property. [2000 Code § 4-15.1]
This section does not prohibit parking a charter auto bus or loading or
unloading passengers on any private property or in any established bus
terminal.
§ 4-19.7. Number of Passengers. [2000 Code § 4-15.1]
No person shall operate any charter auto bus carrying passengers in excess
of its rated seating capacity.
§ 4-19.8. Time Limit. [2000 Code § 4-15.1]
This section shall only be effective during the period from June 23 to Labor
Day, both inclusive, of each year.
§ 4-20. VENDING ON THE BEACHFRONT.
Source history includes 1977 Code § 3-1.8; Ord. No. 2689; Ord. No. 2785;
Ord. No. 2844; Ord. No. 2876; Ord. No. 2905; Ord. No. 2979
§ 4-20.1. Permitted with Certain Conditions. [Ord. No. 3046]
Vending on the beachfront within a "Boardwalk Vending Area," as defined
herein, shall be permitted under the terms and conditions contained in this
section.
§ 4-20.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3046]
BOARDWALK VENDING AREA — shall be defined as any lands or premises
east of Ocean Avenue to the edge of the easterly side of the boardwalk from
the northerly terminus of the boardwalk south to the Ocean Grove Border.
§ 4-20.3. Structures. [Ord. No. 3046]
Any structures used for such vending shall only be temporary in nature and
shall not constitute permanent "structures" as defined under the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 4-19.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-20.4
1:211
§ 4-20.4. Fees. [Ord. No. 3046]
There shall be a fee associated with such vending in accordance with the
regular fee schedule established by the City for vending, as set forth in the
City Code, and that all such fees shall be payable to the City.
§ 4-20.5. Approval of Permits. [Ord. No. 3046]
The Master Developer, or the Master Developer's assignee, shall have the
exclusive right to approve the issuance of permits for vending on the
beachfront, as authorized by this section and Ordinance No. 3046, with such
permits to be issued through the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after
the Master Developer or its assignee has provided its written approval to
a proposed vendor's application. The Madison Asbury Retail, LLC (MAR)
is Master Developer's approved assignee with respect to this section and
Ordinance No. 3046 pursuant to the Subsequent Developer Agreement
among the City, Master Developer and MAR dated May, 2010.
§ 4-20.6. Display of Permit. [Ord. No. 3046]
All vendors shall be required to have their vending permit on display in
public view at the site of vending at all times.
§ 4-20.7. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 3046]
The City shall enforce this section and take appropriate actions to prohibit
vendors on the beachfront who have not obtained permits in accordance
with this section.
§ 4-20.8. Denial of Permit; Hearing; Hearing Officer; Criteria for
Approval by Hearing Officer. [Ord. No. 3046]
a. Any person or entity who feels that they have been improperly denied
approval for a permit shall have the right to ask for a hearing before the
City Manager or his designee (the "hearing officer") upon three (3) days
notice, with a decision to be rendered by the hearing officer in writing
within twenty-four (24) hours of the hearing.
b. In the event the written determination of the hearing officer is that the
person or entity has been improperly denied approval for a permit
based upon the criteria set forth below, then the hearing officer is
hereby authorized to direct the City Clerk to issue the permit,
notwithstanding the position of the Master Developer, or the Master
Developer's assignee, as to such issuance.
c. The criteria of the hearing officer is to include but not be limited to the
following:
1. Good faith negotiations with the Master Developer, or the Master
Developer's assignee;
2. The number of other vendors;
§ 4-20.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-20.8
1:212
§ 4-21. through § 4-24. (RESERVED)
§ 4-25. LICENSING OF TOWING BUSINESSES.
§ 4-25.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3083]
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — shall mean any motor vehicle which is
in such defective condition as to be unable to be moved or moved safely
under its own power, is not licensed or inspected for the current year or is
stripped or junked, and is left on a public roadway within the municipality or
on public or private property without the approval of the owner for a period
of forty-eight (48) hours.
§ 4-25.2. Official Tow List. [2000 Code § 4-14.1]
Any licensed towing facility may elect to be listed if that business makes
application to the City Manager and agrees to provide the following
services.
§ 4-25.3. Establishment of List. [2000 Code § 4-14.2]
The Chief of Police of the City shall establish a list of persons or firms who
shall be utilized by the Police Department to provide towing and wrecking
services for abandoned, wrecked, or impounded vehicles. This list shall be
established based upon the filing of applications by those interested parties,
the application to be in a form as fully described in § 4-14.3.
3. Compliance with insurance requirements as determined to be
necessary by the City;
4. Financial ability;
5. Conflict or competition with existing retail and vendors;
6. Fast practices of the vendor (or is owner(s));
7. Residency;
8. Type of vending;
9. Compliance with standards applicable to other vendors;
10. Location of vending;
11. Willingness to pay a rental charge or fee similar to other vendors;
and
12. Other reasonable issues deemed appropriate under the
circumstances.
d. The hearing officer's determination shall be final; and
e. The hearing officer shall not make any decision respecting any
applicant without first having discussed the applicant with MAR.
§ 4-20.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-25.4
1:213
§ 4-25.4. Application for License. [2000 Code § 4-14.3; Ord. No.
2573; Ord. No. 3083; Ord. No. 2016-05]
An application for a license as a proprietor of a towing or wrecking business
to be placed upon the list to be utilized by the Police Department shall be
made by the person or firm engaged in operating a wrecker or wreckers.
The application shall be made on forms furnished by the Police Department
and specifically report the following facts:
a. The full name and address of the applicant. If the application is made
for a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of the officers
and directors thereof, its registered office and its resident agent.
b. The year, make and type of each wrecker used in the business, its serial
number, registration number and registered owner.
c. The address where the wrecker or wreckers shall be regularly garaged,
the telephone number available on a twenty-four (24) hour per day
basis and the names of all operators, their addresses and the serial
numbers of their New Jersey Motor Vehicle licenses.
d. Each authorized towing service shall secure and maintain the following
minimum insurance coverage with an insurance company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey:
1. Automotive liability in the amount of two million ($2,000,000)
dollars combined single limits.
2. Workers' Compensation as required by Statute.
3. Garage keepers liability in the amount of fifteen thousand
($15,000) dollars per available individual spaces, per a minimum of
twenty (20) spaces, totaling three hundred thousand ($300,000)
dollars.
4. Garage liability in the amount of one million ($1,000,000) dollars
combined single limit.
5. Miscellaneous coverage to provide complete protection to the
municipality against any and all risks of loss or liability, including
comprehensive general liability.
6. On-hook liability insurance.
The policies are to be endorsed to provide for collision coverage
for vehicles in tow. The City is to be listed as an additional insured.
Also, the policy is to provide for the indemnification of the City. The
insured's coverage must be for the entire term of the contract.
e. The application shall be filed with the City Clerk, who shall refer the
application for a license to the Police Department for a check of all
equipment, personnel and facilities of the applicant to determine the
ability of the applicant to perform the business herein regulated.
§ 4-25.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-25.4
1:214
f. The office, workshop and storage areas of the applicant shall be located
within a ten (10) mile radius of the center of the intersection of Main
Street (Highway 71) and Asbury Avenue. [Ord. No. 2016-05]
g. Each applicant providing towing service must show proof of ownership
or a lease agreement for a proper land area to store a minimum of
twenty (20) cars.
Adequate lighting, shielded from abutting premises, shall be
maintained during night hours and a security fence of at least six (6)
feet in height shall be maintained.
h. Each wrecker must meet all of the requirements of Title 39 of the New
Jersey Statutes "Motor Vehicles Rules and Regulations," and must have
a lifting capacity of at least four (4) tons. In addition, each wrecker must
have the following equipment:
1. One (1) large broom and shovel;
2. At least one (1) set of dolly wheels;
3. Steering wheel lock for towing vehicles from the rear;
4. Tow sling type tow bar to prevent any part of crane metal from
touching towed vehicles;
5. Emergency warning lights;
6. Portable safety lights to be installed on rear of towed vehicle if
necessary;
7. Safety flares for night work;
8. At least fifty (50) feet of adequate size cable or chain to be used
when winching is necessary;
9. Snatch block to be used for winching.
i. After the application has been submitted and has been reviewed by the
Police Department, the Chief of Police will determine whether to
approve or disapprove the application. Such approval or disapproval
shall be dependent on both the applicant's technical ability to perform
requested tasks, as outlined above, and upon the applicant's personal
fitness to engage in a business regulated in the public interest. Factors
which the Chief of Police may determine as disqualifying for reasons of
personal fitness shall include:
1. Conviction of an indictable offense;
2. Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude;
3. Conviction of a crime involving the use or possession of a controlled
dangerous substance.
§ 4-25.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-25.4
1:215
§ 4-25.5. License Fee; Term; Renewal. [2000 Code § 4-14.4]
The fee for the license issued under this section shall be one hundred fifty
($150) dollars paid on receipt of the license from the City Clerk. The license
shall remain valid from January 1 to December 31 of each year. It may be
renewed annually by the operator paying a fee of one hundred fifty ($150)
dollars, provided that the operator continues to comply with all the terms
and conditions of this chapter.
§ 4-25.6. Employees Registered; Towing Personnel. [2000 Code
§ 4-14.5]
§ 4-25.7. Necessary Licenses Required for Operation. [2000 Code
§ 4-14.6]
Towing service must have all necessary licenses for the operation of its
facilities and vehicles.
§ 4-25.8. Satisfactory Business Bureau Report. [2000 Code § 4-14.7]
Towing services must obtain a satisfactory Better Business Bureau report.
§ 4-25.9. Periodic Inspections. [2000 Code § 4-14.8]
The Police Department may conduct periodic inspections of a towing
service's facilities and motor vehicles.
§ 4-25.10. Towing and Storage Fees and Charges. [2000 Code
§ 4-14.9; Ord. No. 2782; Ord. No. 2981; Ord. No. 3083; Ord. No.
2016-05; Ord. No. 2018-12]
Towing fees and charges shall be as follows:
j. No license for a tower or wrecker license shall be granted unless and
until the number of licenses issued and outstanding shall be less than
six (6).
a. Each authorized towing service must register with the Police
Department all personnel who are authorized to perform all towing
services for their firm. This registration must include for each person:
1. Name, residence and telephone number;
2. New Jersey Driver's License number and expiration date;
3. Such other information as experience may require.
b. Additionally, the Police Department may obtain updated reports on the
drivers from the Motor Vehicle Commission.
a. Passenger vehicles, including mopeds and motorcycles, weighing up to
eight thousand five hundred (8,500) pounds, adjacent to the confines of
§ 4-25.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-25.10
1:216
§ 4-25.11. Disabled Vehicle Storage. [2000 Code § 4-14.10]
Each authorized towing service must operate a suitable and secure vehicle
storage yard, located within the City, having a capacity of at least ten
(10) standard size automobiles for each district serviced. The yard must
be adjacent to or part of the bidder's regular commercial business, which
is in operation at least six (6) days a week. The storage yard and the
commercial business must satisfy the applicable City ordinances in all
respects. Authorized personnel of the Police Department shall have twentythe
roadway, from any point in the City at any time day or night: one
hundred five ($105) dollars.
b. Any vehicle over eight thousand five hundred (8,500) pounds registered
gross weight, from any point within the City, at any time day or night:
one hundred ten ($110) dollars.
c. When the winching of any vehicle or the recovery of any vehicle is
required, within twenty (20) feet from the roadway, an additional fee of
twenty-five ($25) dollars shall be charged. For any vehicle that is more
than twenty (20) feet from the roadway, an additional fee of twenty-five
($25) dollars shall be charged, plus one and one-half ($1.50) dollars for
every foot of cable used.
d. Where passenger vehicles, including mopeds and motorcycles, are
stored prior to reclamation by the owner, a fee of thirty ($30) dollars
per day shall be charged within the first 24 hours. After 24 hours the
tow vendor will charge thirty ($30) dollars per calendar day. At no time
is the Towing Service required to charge for a partial day. For such
vehicles stored inside, storage shall be a fee of thirty-five ($35) dollars
per day.
e. Where there is a moderate amount of debris and up to one (1) gallon of
fluids for roadway clean-up, a fee of twenty ($20) dollars shall be
charged. Where there is excessive clean-up and more than one (1)
gallon of fluid, the clean-up fee shall increase accordingly, i.e. an
additional ten ($10) dollar fee for roadway clean-up shall be charged
per bag of speedy-dry use.
f. There shall be an administrative fee of twenty ($20) dollars per motor
vehicle in all police-requested tows, to be paid by the licensee. This fee
shall be due and payable upon the release of the vehicle to its owner
within thirty (30) days, payable to the municipality. In the event that the
vehicle is sold at public auction by the Police Department, the
administrative fee will be due and payable at that time.
g. When assistance is required for service or tow of City emergency
vehicles, a fee of twenty ($20) dollars shall be charged. The billing of
the service shall be provided to the Police Department within five (5)
business days from the end of the billing month. [Ord. No. 2016-05]
§ 4-25.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-25.11
1:217
four (24) hours, seven (7) days a week, access to vehicles within the
authorized towing service storage yard.
§ 4-25.12. Response Time Within Districts. [2000 Code § 4-14.11;
Ord. No. 2016-05]
Each towing service must guarantee the following response time within
each district:
§ 4-25.13. Performance Standards. [2000 Code § 4-14.12; Ord. No.
2016-05]
Each towing service authorized by the City will be responsible for and will
guarantee the following response performance standards:
a. Day (7:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m., seven days a week). Response:
Fifteen (15) minutes. [Ord. No. 2016-05]
b. Night (7:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m., seven days a week). Response:
Twenty (20) minutes. [Ord. No. 2016-05]
c. Large Vehicle Storage Response. Normal day or night response plus
thirty (30) minutes.
Response time determination is to be initiated when the Police call
requesting towing is completed. In no case will the Police wait more
than thirty (30) seconds for connection. Where the Police cannot reach
the authorized service for that district, an adequate authorized service
will be called and the incomplete call will be charged against the ten
(10%) percent delay service performance category.
a. Ninety (90%) percent of all calls referred to will be answered (towing
vehicle reaches scene) within the response time limit specified in §
4-25.11.
b. Not more than ten (10%) percent of the calls will be answered within an
additional ten (10) minutes, day or night.
c. No response will be later than twenty-five (25) minutes, whether day or
night.
d. The owner/proprietor of any City contracted tow service shall ensure
that owners of stored vehicles have access to retrieve stored vehicles
Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
and Saturday between 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2016-05]
The performance standards will be reviewed periodically. Failure to
comply with the performance standards will result in a hearing before
the Mayor and Council, at which time the license can be suspended or
revoked.
§ 4-25.11 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-25.14
1:218
§ 4-25.14. Responsibilities of Tower or Wrecker. [2000 Code
§ 4-14.13]
By making application to be utilized as a tower or wrecker by the Police
Department and by accepting such employment, the person or firm agrees
to:
§ 4-25.15. Special Services. [2000 Code § 4-14.14]
If special service is required, the tower or wrecker must notify the vehicle
owner, in writing, in advance of the service required and of the contract
hourly service rate. In the event the owner is incapacitated and unable to
act on his/her own behalf, the tower or wrecker must file the written notice
of charge with the Traffic Bureau of the Police Department during the next
business day after the service is rendered.
§ 4-25.16. Revolving List; Alphabetical Order. [2000 Code § 4-14.15;
Ord. No. 3083]
a. Clean all debris at the accident site emanating from the accident;
b. Provide the Police Department with the following information on
vehicles unclaimed over twenty (20) days:
1. Year, make, color and vehicle identification number;
2. Owner's name and address, if available;
c. Maintain a ledger of all towing or wrecking jobs handled, the name of
the owner or operator, if known, the charges made for the service and
the date and amount of payments;
d. Comply with all other terms and conditions of this section;
e. Comply with O.S.H.A. standards;
f. Provide the City with a written agreement to indemnify and hold the
City harmless against any claims arising out of the towing operator's
work which may be found to be negligently performed. The agreement
shall also include indemnification for any legal fees and costs and
expenses incurred by the City;
g. Any vehicle impounded by the Police Department shall not be released
without proper authorization from same.
a. The Police Department shall maintain a revolving list of licensed
wreckers to provide service where needed and instruct all duty officers
to call those listed in alphabetical order on a rotational basis. All owners
or operators of disabled vehicles shall retain the right to direct the
towing vehicle to remove the damaged vehicle to a garage or workshop
of their own choosing.
§ 4-25.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-25.16
1:219
§ 4-25.17. Authorized Towing Service Receipt Forms. [2000 Code
§ 4-14.16]
Each authorized towing service will complete and promptly file an
authorized towing service receipt for every vehicle serviced on City
assignment. The pre-printed form used will be supplied by the service and
will include the following information:
§ 4-25.18. Towing Log. [2000 Code § 4-14.17]
The towing facility shall maintain a log during all periods of time during
which the facility is designated as the official towing service. The log, which
shall be kept for a period of five (5) years, shall contain the following
information with respect to each vehicle towed: the date of towing, the
location from which the vehicle was towed, the color, make, model, year,
vehicle identification number, and license plate number and State, the
b. No subcontracting of towing services shall be permitted. Only licensed
vendors employing approved operators and utilizing inspected and
approved vendor equipment will be permitted.
a. Towing and service fee schedule.
b. Authorized service's business name, address and telephone number.
c. Time, location and identification of accident.
d. Towing service representative's signature.
e. Service charge and fees when paid.
f. The receipts will be prepared initially in five (5) parts and be issued as
follows:
1. Original. Issued immediately to vehicle owner upon completion of
service and payment of bill.
2. Police Report. Issued monthly to the Police Department upon
completion of services and payment of bill.
3. Owner's Accident Receipt. Issued at the accident site to the owner
prior to the removal of the vehicle. In the event the owner is
incapacitated or disputes the assignment of the service without
arranging for the timely removal of the vehicle himself/herself, this
receipt may be issued to the Police Department. The receipt issued
at the accident must record:
(a) Towed vehicle's license number;
(b) Date of assignment (accident);
(c) Tow operator's initials.
4. Two (2) towing service copies.
§ 4-25.16 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-25.18
1:220
condition of the vehicle, the contents of the vehicle, and pictures of the
vehicle. The log may contain any other information that may be helpful to
the owner of the vehicle towed or to the City.
§ 4-25.19. Cruising, Soliciting, Gratuities Prohibited. [2000 Code
§ 4-14.18]
The practice of cruising with a wrecker or tow truck is forbidden.
Furthermore, no person shall pay any emolument to any third person not
involved in the accident or to any Police Officer for information as to
the location of any accident or soliciting the employment of the licensee's
service, nor give any gratuities, fees or other compensation or gifts to any
members of the Police Department.
§ 4-25.20. Authority of Police Department. [2000 Code § 4-14.19]
The Police Department is hereby given the authority to promulgate rules
and regulations necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this
section, subject to approval by resolution by the Mayor and Council. The
Police Department is hereby given the authority to suspend or revoke
the right of any person or firm which is on the authorized list if the
person or firm violates any of the terms and conditions of this section. Any
person or firm aggrieved by any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Police Department or by a suspension or revocation made by the Police
Department shall be given a hearing by the City Council within fifteen (15)
days of the filing with the City Clerk of a request for a hearing.
§ 4-25.21. Penalty. [2000 Code § 4-14.20]
Each and every person or entity violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I,
Section 1-5.
§ 4-26. POLICE AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 4-26.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-24 § 39-1]
The purpose of this section is to provide for the establishment and
maintenance of an efficient, effective and uniform Police and fire alarm
system within the City and to provide standards and regulations for alarm
equipment, devices or systems to be installed or connected with or to the
Police panel alarm system at Police Headquarters in the City, or otherwise
installed or connected so as to elicit a response by the City Police
Department or, through the Police Department, the Fire Department or
other municipal agency.
§ 4-26.2. Scope. [Ord. No. 2016-24 § 39-2]
The provisions of this section shall apply to any person or business who
installs, connects, operates, maintains, services or owns any alarm
equipment, device or system, including local and central station alarms,
§ 4-25.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26.2
1:221
designed to summon the Police Department or, through the Police
Department, the Fire Department, or the Fire Department directly, or other
municipal agency to any location within the City in response to any type of
call, signal, alarm or preprogrammed, prerecorded message.
§ 4-26.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-24 § 39-3]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CENTRAL STATION ALARM — means any type of equipment, device or
system which is connected to a private alarm company monitoring station
which monitors alarm activations at their subscribers' locations. Upon
alarm activation, and in the event that no person can be reached at the
location or the person reached fails to respond with the correct code word
or number, such company will contact the Police to respond to the location.
(See § 4-26.5, Types of Alarms.)
COMMON ANNUNCIATOR LICENSE — means the license issued by the
City Clerk to install and connect and to operate, control and maintain the
Police panel alarm system and to make all subscriber installations and
connections thereto.
DIGITAL DIALER SYSTEM — means any type of equipment, device or
system using telephone wires to activate an audible alarm at the Police
communication desk and provide both an information readout and a
printout.
FALSE ALARM — means any activation of an alarm system, whether
intentional or unintentional, by failure, malfunction, accidental tripping,
misoperation, misuse, inadvertence or negligence by the subscribers or
their employees or agents.
INSTALLER'S LICENSE — means the license issued by the Chief of Police
of the City permitting a person to engage in, manage, conduct or carry
on the business of installing, leasing, connecting, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, arranging, adjusting, replacing, moving and programming, in any
building, place or premises in the City, any alarm, equipment or device
designed to summon the Police Department or, through the Police
Department, the Fire Department or other municipal agency.
LOCAL ALARM — means any type of equipment, device or system which,
when actuated, produces a signal or alarm not connected to the Police
panel alarm system, such as a store, burglar or intrusion alarm actuating
a bell, horn or other sounding device, for the purpose of summoning the
Police Department or, through the Police Department, the Fire Department
or other municipal agency to the location thereof and in response thereto.
POLICE PANEL ALARM SYSTEM — means that system giving a visual or
audio response, or both, on the control panel of the Police console located
within the confines of the Police Department of the City, monitored by
the Police Department, and which includes the subscriber modules, the
§ 4-26.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-26.3
1:222
control modules, the control cabinets, the energy pack, and all necessary
and accessory equipment, wires and connections therein and thereto.
TAPE DIAL ALARM — means any type of equipment, device or system,
preprogrammed or automatic, using telephone wires to transmit any alarm,
message, signal or report directly through or to the Police Department
switchboard for the purpose of summoning the Police Department or other
municipal agency to any location within the City in response thereto.
§ 4-26.4. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-24 § 39-4]
Any person found guilty in the Municipal Court of the City for violation of
the terms of this section shall be subject to punishment as describe herein:
§ 4-26.5. Types of Alarms. [Ord. No. 2016-24 § 39-5]
a. 1st Summons: $50
b. 2nd Summons: $100
c. 3rd Summons: $200
d. 4th Summons or more: To be determined by the Judge of the Municipal
Court.
Alarm owners will not be held accountable for false alarms triggered
by severe weather conditions, electrical malfunctions or phone line
problems. A property owner shall have two "free" false alarms before
summons are issued.
a. Central Station Alarm.
The installed alarm system is connected to a private alarm company
which monitors alarm activations at the subscriber's location. When
the alarm is activated, a signal is transmitted — usually over telephone
lines — to the monitoring company which then calls the subscriber to
verify the signal. If there is no answer or if the person who answers the
telephone fails to respond with the correct code word or number, the
monitoring company contacts the Police who, in turn, respond to the
location.
b. Local Alarm.
When activated, this type of alarm system produces an audible or
visual signal to alert occupants, neighbors or passers-by to a detected
condition but it is not connected to a monitoring company.
c. Tape Dial Alarm.
When activated, a pre-recorded message is transmitted by telephone
directly to the Police Department. Use of this type of alarm is
prohibited.
d. Police Panel Alarm.
§ 4-26.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26.5
1:223
§ 4-26.6. Alarm System Permit or Registration Required. [Ord. No.
2016-24 § 39-6]
This type of alarm reports directly to the Police and is connected to
the control panel of the Police console located within the department.
Such systems usually do not incorporate verification capabilities to
permit screening of false alarms prior to dispatch procedures being
initiated. Consequently, the City of Asbury Park Police Department does
not operate a Police panel for direct connection of alarm systems.
a. No person shall install, connect or maintain, or cause to be installed,
connected or maintained, any Police alarm equipment, device or system
in or to the Police Headquarters in the City for the purpose of
transmitting a signal or alarm or reporting a signal, alarm or
prerecorded message to the attention of the Police Department for the
purpose of summoning the police department or, through the Police
Department, the Fire Department or other municipal agency in
response thereto, without first having made application and been
issued a permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this
section and the rules, regulations and procedures established and
provided under this section.
b. No person shall install, connect or maintain, or cause to be installed,
connected or maintained, any local or central station alarm without first
having registered the alarm with the Chief of Police as provided in this
section.
c. All applications for the issuance of a permit required under this section
shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police on a form provided
therefor, and shall be accompanied by the current application and
processing fee.
d. The application, among other information which may, from time to time,
be required or prescribed by the Chief of Police, shall contain the name,
address and telephone number of the applicant, the name, address and
telephone number of each of the premises and customers or persons to
be served by the proposed installation or connection, the location of the
device, alarm equipment or system, the name of the installer, the type
of device, alarm equipment or system, provisions relating to false
alarms and testing procedures, and a list of persons to be contacted in
the event of an alarm.
e. Upon application for a permit, the Chief of Police shall cause an
investigation and records to be made, and, thereafter, provided the
applicant has complied with all of the terms of this section and the rules
and regulations made, promulgated and adopted pursuant thereto,
shall issue the permit.
f. Permit fees for present subscribers to the existing alarm system shall
be waived or those with existing alarm systems.
§ 4-26.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-26.6
1:224
§ 4-26.7. Information to Be Kept Current; Penalties. [Ord. No.
2016-24 § 39-7]
Once the alarm system is registered, information on record with the Police
Department must be up-to-date. Businesses must ensure that their
emergency contact information is always correct. Failure to keep the alarm
system registration current will result in penalties as found in § 4-26.4,
Penalties.
§ 4-26.8. Conditions of Permits. [Ord. No. 2016-24 § 39-8]
No permit shall be granted under this section except upon the following
terms and conditions:
§ 4-26.9. Suspension or Revocation of Permit. [Ord. No. 2016-24
§ 39-9]
g. Effective August 1, 2016, the permit fee for new applications shall be a
non-refundable fee of fifty ($50) dollars.
a. The applicant shall furnish and complete all information required
relating to the application and the alarm, equipment, device or system
to be installed or connected, and data relating to prevention of false
alarms and testing procedures.
b. No person other than the applicant and the agent and employees shall
exercise the privileges under the permit.
c. The applicant shall maintain the equipment in good condition and
repair.
d. No permit shall be transferred or assigned in any manner.
e. The permit is accepted upon the express condition the permittee shall
indemnify and hold the City harmless from and on account of any and
all damages arising out of the activities of the permittee, its alarm
contractor, or the common annunciator licensee of the City.
f. Each separate building, store, premises, place or location shall require
a separate permit and a separate installation or connection to the Police
panel alarm system.
g. The applicant or permittee, upon acceptance of such permit, thereby
agrees to hold and save harmless the City and its agents or employees
from any liability whatsoever in connection with any such alarm,
equipment, device or system, or the operation and maintenance of the
alarm, equipment, device or system, which shall be the sole
responsibility of the person having had the alarm, equipment, device or
system installed or connected.
a. Any permit issued under the provisions of this section may be
suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police for any violation of or
§ 4-26.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26.9
1:225
§ 4-26.10. Tape Dial Alarm Devices Prohibited and Older Systems.
[Ord. No. 2016-24 § 39-10]
§ 4-26.11. Local and Central Station Alarms. [Ord. No. 2016-24
§ 39-11]
All local and central station devices, alarms, equipment or systems shall be
registered with the Chief of Police, and all information required with respect
to such registration shall be provided and kept current by the registrant.
§ 4-26.12. Limitations of Obligations of City. [Ord. No. 2016-24
§ 39-12]
failure to comply with the provisions of this section or any rule or
regulation promulgated by the Chief of Police and approved by the City
Council pursuant to this section, including the following:
1. The permittee, agent or employee willfully failed to and did not
comply with a request by a member of the Police Department to
proceed immediately to the location of the permittee's alarm and
render necessary services.
2. The permittee, agents or employees knowingly installed or
maintained a faulty alarm device. An inordinate number of false
alarms shall be prima facie evidence that such alarm device is
knowingly a faulty device.
3. The permittee has breached the terms and conditions of the permit.
b. No permit shall be revoked or suspended without giving the permittee
thirty (30) days' notice in writing of such action and an opportunity to
show cause before the Chief of Police why such action should not be
taken. Any person aggrieved by the action or determination of the Chief
of Police in the denial of a permit or in the suspension or revocation of
any permit provided for in this section may appeal to the City Manager.
a. No permit shall be issued for the installation, connection, operation,
maintenance, service or ownership of any tape dial alarm, equipment or
device. Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief
of Police or the designated representative for noncompliance with this
section. Any person installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment
shall be prosecuted for violation of this section, and each day the
equipment is in operation shall be considered a separate violation.
b. Older systems that cannot communicate with the Police Department do
not need to be upgraded.
a. The City shall be under no duty or obligation to any permittee under
this section, the common annunciator licensee or any other licensee
under this section for any of the Police panel alarm system equipment
or any other equipment, device or system connected thereto, such
equipment and system being maintained at will and subject to
§ 4-26.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-26.12
1:226
§ 4-26.13. False Alarms. [Ord. No. 2016-24 § 39-14]
termination at any time by cancellation of the system by resolution duly
adopted by the City Council. However, the common annunciator license
provided for in this section shall not be revoked except upon good cause
by the City Council. Any individual permit or license issued may be
revoked at any time by the Chief of Police as provided in this section.
b. Notwithstanding payment of any fees or the receiving or issuance of
any permit or registrations as required under this section, the Police
Department of the City shall not be under any obligation whatsoever
concerning the installation or connection or adequacy, operation or
maintenance of the alarm, equipment, device or system so installed or
connected, and the City and its authorized agents hereby assume no
liability whatsoever for any failure of such alarm, equipment, device or
system, failure to respond to any such alarm or transmittals or for any
act of omission or commission as a result of any such alarm equipment,
device or system; and the obligation for the maintenance and upkeep of
such alarm equipment, device and system, except for the equipment
installed in Police headquarters, shall be the sole responsibility of the
person having had the equipment, device or system installed or
connected.
a. The subscriber shall be accountable for false alarms caused by
equipment failure or malfunction of the alarm system installed by the
subscriber's alarm installer or the subscriber's alarm maintenance
company.
b. A subscriber shall not be held accountable for false alarms caused by
severe weather conditions, electrical malfunctions, malfunctions of the
alarm console located at Police headquarters, or malfunction of
telephone lines used to transport the alarm signal over which the
subscriber or the subscriber's alarm installer or maintenance company
have no control.
c. In the case of a false alarm by any type of device regulated in this
section, including local and central station alarms, any person having
knowledge thereof shall immediately notify the Police Department in a
manner to be prescribed by rules and regulations made under this
section. In addition, in the case of a false alarm, the Chief of Police shall
cause an investigation to be made and keep a record of such false
alarms on file. For such false alarms, the following penalties are
prescribed:
For the first and second false alarm in any given calendar year a
warning shall be issued. For the third false alarm and each additional
false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine shall be paid to the City as
found in § 4-26.4, Penalties. The third false alarm shall begin at the 1st
Summons level.
§ 4-26.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26.13
1:227
§ 4-26.14. Unauthorized Connections; Inspections. [Ord. No.
2016-24 § 39-15]
Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of Police
or designated representative for noncompliance with this section, and any
person installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be
prosecuted for violation of this section, and each and every day such
equipment is in operation shall be considered a separate violation. Any
permittee shall, by acceptance of the permit, be deemed to have consented
to inspection of the premises on which the alarm devices are installed at
reasonable hours by the Chief of Police or designated representative.
§ 4-26.15. Alarm Installer's License. [Ord. No. 2016-24 § 39-16]
Where an alarm device is connected to the Police panel alarm system
and the investigation of the Police Department discloses continued
abuse of the privilege of such connection and a disregard of the
permittee for taking remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the City
Council reserves the right to require disconnection from the Police
panel alarm system for a limited or permanent time, provided that no
such permit shall be revoked or suspended without giving the permittee
an opportunity to show cause before the Chief of Police why such action
should not be taken.
d. The permittee shall take all necessary steps to immediately ascertain
the cause of any false alarm and shall alleviate the problem within 72
hours or show cause before the Chief of Police why the malfunction
cannot be remedied within that time period. The Chief shall have the
discretion to grant an additional period of time within which to make
the repair.
a. Required. No person shall engage in, manage, conduct or carry on the
business of installing, leasing, connecting, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, arranging, adjusting, altering, replacing, moving,
programming, in or on any building, place or premises in the City, any
Police, fire, burglar, dial, telephone, local or automatic alarm
equipment, device or system which is equipped to report or to attract
the attention of the Police Department or Fire Department in order to
secure a response thereto without having applied for and received from
the Chief of Police of the City an annual license therefor. Licensed
electricians, electrical contractors and their employees shall not be
exempt from the provisions of this section as hereinafter set forth.
b. Fee; term; renewal. Upon the initial filing of an application for an
installer's license referred to in Subsection a. above, the applicant shall
pay unto the Chief of Police a fee to defray the costs of investigation,
inspections, maintaining records and other administrative expenses.
Each year thereafter, such installer's license may be renewed, upon the
request of such licensee, at an annual renewal fee. All installer's
licenses hereunder shall expire on December 31 of the year in which
§ 4-26.13 ASBURY PARK CODE § 4-26.15
1:228
§ 4-26.16. Additional Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2016-24
§ 39-17]
issued, and all licenses for renewal thereof must be submitted in
writing to the Chief of Police on or before January 31 of the succeeding
year, together with the aforesaid renewal fee. The fee for the initial
application and the fee for the renewal of an alarm installer's license
shall be fifty ($50) dollars.
c. Application. Upon filing an application for a license, the applicant shall
complete a form provided therefor by the Chief of Police, which form
shall include the name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
the name and type of equipment, device or system to be installed and
utilized; the brand name or manufacturer of the equipment, device or
system; the serial number of such equipment, device or system; the
person from whom the equipment, device or system was purchased; the
nature of installation; the method of operation; the location of
installation; and such other information as may be required from time
to time under the rules and regulations promulgated by the Chief of
Police.
d. Investigation. The Police Chief shall cause an investigation to be made
of the applicant for an installer's license to determine the qualifications,
responsibility and reliability of such applicant and the quality and
reliability of equipment, devices or systems to be installed or connected
by the installer, as well as the ability of such installer to comply with the
rules and regulations made and promulgated by the Police Chief and
adopted by the City Council.
e. Records; Compliance with Rules and Regulations. Licensed electrical
contractors and their employees and installer licensees under this
section shall be required to maintain complete and accurate records of
all such alarm equipment, devices or systems installed, connected,
maintained, leased or serviced within the City, and shall notify the
Police Chief of such installation, connection or maintenance, and all
installations and connections and all alarm equipment devices and
systems shall conform to the rules and regulations made and
promulgated pursuant to this section by the Police Chief and approved
by the City Council.
a. The Chief of Police may make, prescribe and promulgate
supplementary rules and regulations for the installation and connection
of alarm equipment, devices or systems covered by the terms of this
section, and for the performance, maintenance and operation of alarm
equipment, devices or systems as may be reasonably necessary to fulfill
the purposes of this section.
b. Such rules and regulations shall be made, prescribed and promulgated
to sufficiently promote and ensure an effective and uniform Police and
fire alarm system, and proper installation and connection; provide for
maintenance of records and efficient management of the alarm system,
§ 4-26.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-26.16
1:229
Chapter 5
BEACH, BOARDWALK AND BEACHFRONT REGULATIONS
§ 5-1. DESIGNATION OF BEACH SEASON. [2000 Code § 5-1; New]
§ 5-2. REGISTRATION AND ADMISSION TO BEACHES.
§ 5-2.1. Issuance of Badges. [2000 Code § 5-2.2; New]
Every person over the age of twelve (12) years entering the beach shall be
furnished with a badge, check, coupon book or other insignia, which shall
be numbered or marked for identification purposes, and those which can be
displayed shall be worn conspicuously and shall be visible at all times, and
shall be exhibited on demand to the beach inspectors, the gate tenders or
the Police of the City.
the speedy and accurate operation and reporting of alarms, minimizing
mechanical failure, and minimizing false alarms and the consequential
dangers of false alarms to citizens of the City; the proper monitoring
of alarms, and prompt response to such alarms; and the prevention
of jamming of the switchboard and the creation of nuisances or other
interference or hindrance with the proper operation of duties of the
Police Department and dispatchers.
c. The rules and regulations and all changes thereof shall be subject to the
approval of the City council.
d. The rules and regulations shall be in writing and shall be given to each
permittee or licensee at the time of the application for or issuance of
the permit or license or at the time of the promulgation or amendment
of such rules and regulations.
a. For the protection of the general public and for the control of the
beachfront of the City, the Mayor and Council shall by resolution each
year designate a date for the opening of the beach season at the
beachfront to the general public and residents of the City. The beach
season shall commence and extend until a date set forth in the same
resolution. The City shall adopt daily and seasonal beach pass fees as
well as other rental fees by ordinance as required by law.
b. No person is permitted upon the beachfront of the City during the times
that the beach season is in operation except upon payment of the fees
established by the Mayor and Council for a daily or seasonal beach
pass.
c. By resolution the Mayor and Council shall designate the protected
bathing beaches where ropes, buoys, boats and lifeguards are to be
provided by the City, and from which beaches persons shall bathe, swim
or surf.
§ 4-26.16 ASBURY PARK CODE § 5-2.2
1:230
§ 5-2.2. Transferability. [2000 Code § 5-2.3; New]
All badges, or other insignia issued shall be for the exclusive use of the
badge holder, and shall not be loaned, given, sold or transferred to any other
person, and shall be used only by the person to whom originally issued.
§ 5-2.3. Seasonal Rates and Fees. [2000 Code § 5-3.1; New]
During the beach season there shall be a charge for a seasonal badge.
Fees and hours and dates of operation of the beaches are set each year by
ordinance. A schedule of those fees and times are available at the office of
the City Clerk.
§ 5-2.4. Loss of Badge or Check. [2000 Code § 5-9]
Any person losing his badge, check, coupon book or other insignia shall lose
his rights and privileges and shall apply for a new badge, check, coupon
book or other insignia, paying the necessary monthly, seasonal or daily fee
as the case may be. No replacement badges shall be issued.
§ 5-2.5. Badges Not Required for Children Twelve (12) and Under;
Adult Must Accompany Persons 12 and Under. [2000 Code § 5-3.3;
New]
There shall be no charge for children the age of twelve (12) years and under
for use of the bathing beaches. All children twelve (12) years and under
must be accompanied by an adult.
§ 5-2.7. Hotels, Motels and Rooming Houses. [2000 Code § 5-3.4;
New]
The City of Asbury Park shall make available to operators of any hotel,
motel or rooming house laminated beach badges which will permit guests
admittance during the beach season with the following provisions and rates:
§ 5-2.8. Use of Fees. [2000 Code § 5-5; New]
The charges for the use of the beaches are made for the purpose of
providing revenue to improve, maintain and police the beachfront; to
provide bathing beaches, lifeguards, boats, ropes and other facilities,
safeguards and equipment for public bathing and recreation, and to provide
for all equipment for the protection and safety of bathers and swimmers
a. Upon application at the beachfront office, seasonal beach badges may
be purchased at the rate established by ordinance of the City. The beach
badge shall admit the bearer to any beach within the City. It shall be the
responsibility of the hotel, motel or rooming house operator to regulate
and control the use of the beach badge.
b. Should a beach badge be lost or stolen, it shall be replaced for a fee as
established by the City. All rights and privileges of the lost or stolen
beach badge shall be void.
§ 5-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-2.8
1:231
using the beachfront, and provide funds to protect the beach from erosion,
encroachment and damage by the sea or otherwise. Fee revenues shall
also be applied for litter collection and disposal, boardwalk repair, beach
cleaning, street sweeping and those expenses approved by the Division of
Local Government Services.
§ 5-3. EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONNEL. [2000 Code § 5-6]
The Mayor and Council may employ registrars, cashiers, inspectors,
gatemen, lifeguards and such other employees as shall be necessary to
enforce the provisions of this chapter, and to purchase books, stationery,
badges, checks, coupon books or other insignia and such other supplies and
materials as may be necessary.
§ 5-4. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 5-4.1. Power to Make Additional Rules and Regulations. [2000
Code § 5-7.1]
In addition to the rules and regulations hereinafter enumerated governing
the beachfront, the Mayor and Council may adopt by resolution such other
rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper control and
regulation of the beachfront and waters adjacent thereto.
§ 5-4.2. Swimming Areas. [2000 Code § 5-7.2]
No person shall bathe or swim from the beachfront except from the
protected bathing beaches where ropes, buoys, boats and lifeguards are
provided by the City and only at such times as the lifeguards are on duty.
No person shall bathe or swim in the Atlantic Ocean from the Asbury Park
beach at a distance greater than that which the lifeguards in charge shall
deem safe.
§ 5-4.3. Tampering with Equipment. [2000 Code § 5-7.3]
No person shall use or tamper with any boat, buoy or lifeguard equipment
without the permission of the Beachfront Director, the Captain of the
lifeguards, or such other officials designated by the Mayor and Council to
have authority in these instances.
§ 5-4.4. Lifeguards; Closing of Beach During Dangerous Conditions.
[2000 Code § 5-7.4; New]
Lifeguards shall be maintained on duty at the protected bathing beaches
herein established, between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily during the beach
season, except at such times when bathing or swimming shall be deemed
dangerous or hazardous by the Beach Safety Supervisor, the lifeguards in
charge of the beach, or other official designated by the Mayor and Council.
When such dangerous conditions exist, a sign shall be displayed indicating
that the beach is closed to bathing or swimming, and no person shall bathe
or swim in waters adjacent to the beach, whether protected or not, at any
§ 5-2.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 5-4.4
1:232
time until the signs are removed. Lifeguards shall have charge and control
and supervision of the bathing, swimming and surfing at the respective
beaches where they are stationed.
§ 5-4.5. Fishing. [2000 Code § 5-7.5]
No person shall engage in surf fishing in the bathing area during bathing
hours.
§ 5-4.6. Playing Games. [2000 Code § 5-7.6; New]
No person shall engage in kite flying and/or athletic activities unless in
areas designated by lifeguards or the special events supervisor.
§ 5-4.7. Disrobing. [2000 Code § 5-7.7]
No person shall disrobe or undress or dress on the beachfront or in the
water adjacent thereto, or on a public street, or in a public place, or in
a vehicle on a street, or on the boardwalk immediately adjacent to the
beachfront.
§ 5-4.8. Refuse. [2000 Code § 5-7.8]
No person shall throw bottles, cans, paper, or other refuse upon the
beachfront or the waters adjacent thereto. All refuse, paper and litter shall
be placed in receptacles provided therefor.
§ 5-4.9. Bicycles, Skateboards and Rollerblades. [2000 Code
§ 5-7.10; Ord. No. 2797; Ord. No. 2909; Ord. No. 2018-17]
No person shall ride and/or use a bicycle, skateboard, rollerskates, sled,
toboggan, and/or similar items, on the boardwalk or any of the arcades,
public walks, ramps and public sidewalks adjacent thereto or any portion
of the beachfront, except that bicycle riding shall be permitted between the
hours of 12:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. No bicycle riding shall, however, be
permitted at any time on any portion of the boardwalk located north of Sixth
Avenue.
§ 5-4.10. Parking of Bicycles, Carriages and Carts. [2000 Code
§ 5-7.19]
No person shall place bicycles, baby carriages or any other vehicles or
carts upon the beachfront or boardwalk within fifteen (15) feet of a publicly
designated entrance to the beachfront.
§ 5-4.11. Use of Designated Entrance Required. [2000 Code
§ 5-7.12]
No person shall enter the beachfront or beach area, or bring any article
or object upon the beachfront or beach area, except through a designated
entrance.
§ 5-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4.12
1:233
§ 5-4.12. Damaging or Climbing on Structures; Removal of Sand
Prohibited. [2000 Code § 5-7.11]
No person shall climb over, break, damage or deface any fence, railing,
enclosure or other Municipal property on the boardwalk or the beachfront.
No person shall take or haul any beach sand or soil from the beachfront.
§ 5-4.13. Vehicles Prohibited on Boardwalk and East of Ocean
Avenue. [2000 Code § 5-12]
No person shall drive a vehicle on the boardwalk or park a vehicle east
of the east line of Ocean Avenue without a written permit from the City
Manager
§ 5-4.14. Digging of Holes in Sand Restricted. [2000 Code § 5-7.15]
No hole shall be dug in the beachfront in such a manner as to leave a
depression more than twelve (12) inches deep in the surface of the land.
§ 5-4.15. Use of Surfboards and Rafts. [2000 Code § 5-7.16; New]
No persons shall use surf boards or rafts or other appliances which might
cause injury to bathers or swimmers upon the beach sand or the beachfront
or in the waters adjacent thereto, unless in areas approved and designated
by lifeguards.
§ 5-4.16. Annoying of Lifeguards. [2000 Code § 5-7.17]
No person shall enter into the designated lifeguard area without the
permission of the lifeguard in charge and no person shall molest or bother
or annoy the lifeguards in the performance of their duties.
§ 5-4.17. Fires Prohibited; Exception with Permission. [2000 Code
§ 5-7.18]
No person shall start a fire on the beachfront, except with the written
permission of the Beach Director or such other official designated by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 5-4.18. Alcoholic Beverages. [2000 Code § 5-7.14; Ord. No. 2882]
No person shall bring or consume any beer, wine, whiskey or other alcoholic
beverages on the beachfront or in the waters or on the boardwalk adjacent
thereto, except for those areas of the boardwalk, or other public areas,
for which appropriate approvals have been granted by the City, including
but not necessarily limited to the issuance of a license for café purposes
pursuant to Chapter IV, General Licensing, along with the approval of an
extension of an existing liquor license by the Mayor and Council acting
as the local issuing authority of the State Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
§ 5-4.12 ASBURY PARK CODE § 5-4.19
1:234
§ 5-4.19. Disorderly Conduct. [2000 Code § 5-7.20]
No person shall, while on or using any portion of the beachfront, or while
bathing or swimming in the waters of the ocean adjacent thereto, annoy or
molest any other person or utter any offensive or indecent language or in
any way act in a disorderly manner.
§ 5-4.20. Motor Boats. [2000 Code § 5-7.21]
§ 5-4.21. Construction Prohibited During Certain Times East of
Ocean Avenue. [2000 Code § 5-11; New]
No construction shall be permitted east of Ocean Avenue on the Asbury Park
boardwalk during the months of June, July, August and September of each
year. Any construction commenced during the balance of the year shall be
completed before June 1 of the following year. Repairs of a safety nature
shall be exempt from this restriction.
§ 5-4.22. No Smoking or Littering of Tobacco Products on Public
Beaches. [Ord. No. 3018]
a. The owner, driver or occupant of any motor boat, launch or other power
boat shall not operate or propel the same upon any lake or waters
within the jurisdiction of the City without first providing same with a
device which shall effectively muffle and silence the sound of the
exhaust and noise from the engine or motor, nor operate what is known
as a muffler cut-out upon any such motor boat, launch or other power
boat while driven or propelled upon any lake or waters within the
jurisdiction of the City.
b. No person shall operate or propel any motor boat, launch, or other boat
upon any lake or waters within the jurisdiction of the City at a rate of
speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour.
a. Smoking Prohibited on Certain Beaches. No person shall smoke any
cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products at any time on those public
beaches as per Senate Bill 2534 introduced May 18, 2018, and effective
January 16, 2019. [Amended 7-10-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-24]
b. Discarding of Cigarette Butts and Tobacco Products. No person shall
throw or discard any cigarette butts, cigar butts, and/or any other
tobacco products at any time on those public beaches which have been
designated as smoke-free beaches by the Mayor and Council on a list to
be established annually by resolution.
c. Smoke-Free Zone Signs. The City shall attach or erect appropriate
signage indicating "City of Asbury Park Smoke-Free Zone" to all such
public beaches designated as smoke-free by the Mayor and Council.
d. Penalties. The penalty for violation of this section shall, upon
conviction, be two hundred fifty ($250) dollars for the first offense, five
§ 5-4.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4.22
1:235
§ 5-4.23. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2018-17]
The provisions set forth in this section shall be enforced by the Asbury Park
Police. Failure to comply with any of the rules and regulations set forth in
this section may result in the issuance of a summons.
Fines shall be based upon the penalties found in Chapter I, Section 1-5,
General Penalty.
§ 5-5. DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS ON THE BEACH, BOARDWALK
AND BEACHFRONT.
Source history includes Ord. No. 2847; Ord. No. 2850 and Ord. No. 2856
§ 5-5.1. Dogs Permitted in Certain Areas at Certain Times. [Ord. No.
2917; Ord. No. 2933; Ord. No. 3019]
Dogs on Surfing Beach and Boardwalk. Properly licensed dogs shall be
permitted on the City's beachfront and boardwalk, and in adjacent areas, in
accordance with the following restrictions:
hundred ($500) dollars for the second offense, and one thousand
($1,000) dollars for each subsequent offense.
a. During the applicable time period specified in Subsection d. below,
properly licensed dogs shall be permitted to run unleashed on that
portion of the City's beachfront which is commonly known as the
surfing beach or to wade in the water areas located adjacent thereto, in
accordance with all requirements set forth herein. The surfing beach is
defined as that portion of the City's beachfront which extends from the
northerly terminus of Asbury Park (boundary with Loch Arbour) and
running thence south to the southerly edge of the Eighth Avenue jetty.
b. During the applicable time period specified in Subsection d. below,
properly licensed dogs shall also be permitted to utilize and cross over
those portions of the boardwalk which are located immediately adjacent
to the surfing beach solely for the purpose of gaining access to and from
the surfing beach. All dogs must be taken directly onto or off of the
surfing beach and shall not be permitted to remain idle on the
boardwalk areas for any extended period of time. Dogs must be leashed
at all times while on the boardwalk areas.
c. During the time period from September 15th through May 15th of each
year, properly licensed dogs shall be permitted on all areas of the
boardwalk, at any time of the day or evening, pursuant to the following
conditions:
1. All dogs must possess a current license tag issued by a
governmental authority which represents that the dog has a valid,
unexpired rabies inoculation.
§ 5-4.22 ASBURY PARK CODE § 5-5.1
1:236
§ 5-5.2. Dogs to Be Accompanied by Adult; Possession of Container
for Cleanup Required; Responsibility of Owner. [Ord. No. 2917; Ord.
No. 2933]
While on the permitted areas referenced in this section and during the
permitted time periods, all dogs must be accompanied at all times by an
adult who is in possession of a bag or other container or device appropriate
for the purpose of cleaning up after the dogs and who shall be responsible
for completely and immediately removing and properly disposing of the
dog's fecal droppings, and who shall also be responsible for controlling the
dog and complying with all other applicable laws and regulations.
§ 5-5.3. Dogs Prohibited on Beachfront, Boardwalk and Water at
Certain Times. [Ord. No. 2917; Ord. No. 2933]
No dogs shall be permitted on or in any areas of the beachfront, boardwalk
or water areas other than those specified in this section at any time.
§ 5-5.4. Rules and Regulations for Use of Beachfront. [Ord. No.
2917; Ord. No. 2933]
The following additional rules and regulations shall apply to dogs that are
utilizing the City's beachfront areas pursuant to this section:
2. All dogs must wear collars with valid dog licenses. No choke collars
or prong collars shall be permitted.
3. All dogs must be on a leash that is no longer than six (6) feet in
length and which is not retractable.
4. All dog handlers must remain with their dogs and supervise their
dogs at all times. Dogs may never be left unattended (i.e., as in tied
up to a rail or other object while the handler shops, eats, bathes in
ocean, etc.)
5. All dog handlers shall always and immediately clean up after their
dogs.
6. All dog handlers shall be strictly liable for any incidents that occur
involving their dogs.
d. The provisions set forth in paragraphs a. and b. above shall be effective
as follows:
1. From September 15th through May 15th of each year: Any time of
the day or evening; and
2. From May 16th through September 14th of each year: 6:00 p.m.
through 8:30 a.m.
a. All dogs must possess a current licenses tag issued by a governmental
authority which represents that the dog has a valid, unexpired rabies
inoculation.
§ 5-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-5.4
1:237
§ 5-5.5. Exception. [Ord. No. 2917; Ord. No. 2933]
The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to Seeing Eye or
Guide Dogs.
§ 5-5.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2917; Ord. No. 2933]
The provisions set forth in this section shall be enforced by the Asbury Park
Police and Animal Control Officers. Failure to comply with any of the rules
and regulations set forth in this section may result in the issuance of a
summons.
§ 5-5.7. Signs Posted; Emergencies. [Ord. No. 2917; Ord. No. 2933]
The City of Asbury Park shall ensure the erection of appropriate signage
in order to alert the public to those matters set forth in this section. Such
signage shall include the posting of an emergency number which may be
called in case of any problems or emergencies encountered regarding the
presence of dogs on the City's beach and boardwalk areas pursuant to this
section.
§ 5-5.8. Other Animals. [Ord. No. 2917; Ord. No. 2933]
No animals other than dogs shall be permitted on any area of the City's
boardwalk or beachfront, or in the waters adjacent thereto, or upon any
public walk contained on the beachfront, at any time.
§ 5-6. CANCELLATION OF PRIVILEGES. [2000 Code § 5-8]
The Mayor and Council reserve the right to cancel forthwith any privilege,
beach tag, insignia or check granted or extended to any person violating
any provision of this Chapter.
b. All dogs must wear collars with valid dog licenses. No choke collars or
prong collars shall be permitted.
c. Dogs that become aggressive or uncontrollable must be immediately
leashed and removed from the off-leash areas referenced in Subsection
1 above.
d. Female dogs in heat and dogs under four (4) months of age are
prohibited and are not permitted to run off the leash in the areas
referenced in Subsection 1 above.
e. All dog handlers must remain with their dogs and supervise their dogs
at all times.
f. All dog handlers shall always and immediately clean up after their dogs.
g. All dog handlers shall be strictly liable for any incidents that occur
involving their dogs.
§ 5-5.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 5-6
1:238
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [2000 Code § 6-1]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the City in accordance with the provisions of an Act of the
Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning Alcoholic
Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its supplements
and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [2000 Code § 6-2]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [2000 Code § 6-3.1]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the Act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [2000 Code § 6-3.2]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Mayor and
Council, which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [2000 Code § 6-3.3]
No person shall sell, serve or distribute alcoholic beverages within the City
without obtaining a license in accordance with the N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
referred to in Section 6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees. [2000 Code § 6-3.4; Ord. No. 2575; Ord. No.
2629; Ord. No. 2779; Ord. No. 2855; Ord. No. 2974; Ord. No.
2015-44]
The annual license fees for alcoholic beverages in the City shall be as
follows:
Class of License Annual License Fee
Plenary Retail Consumption License $2,500.00
Plenary Retail Distribution $2,500.00
§ 5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-3.4
1:239
Class of License Annual License Fee
Club License $188.00
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation of the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
License fees shall be paid in cash, money order or certified check.
Licenses shall expire annually on June 30.
§ 6-4. REGULATION OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale.
§ 6-4.2. Closing Provision. [2000 Code § 6-4.2]
Patrons shall be off the premises by 2:30 a.m. and may be permitted
to consume alcoholic beverages purchased before 2:00 a.m., but nothing
herein shall permit any sale or service or delivery of the alcoholic beverages
after 2:00 a.m. Except as hereinabove provided, all licensed premises,
except hotels, restaurants, drugstores and other establishments where the
principal business is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall be
closed during the hours that sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited.
During the hours that sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, all
licensed premises shall be open to the public view from a public
thoroughfare or other place to which the public has free access, and no
blind, screen partition, curtain or other article shall be so left or placed as
to prevent an unobstructed view of the premises during such hours. This
provision does not apply to guest houses and private dining rooms in hotels.
§ 6-4.3. Sundays. [2000 Code § 6-4.3; Ord. No. 2930; Ord. No. 2951]
The provisions of subsection 6.4-1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sundays,
no alcoholic beverages may be sold, served or delivered to the licensed
premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. for food serving
establishments, or between 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon for all other licenses
premises. The sale of alcoholic packaged goods for off-premises
a. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered, or served in any
licensed premises on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m. except Sundays and New Year's Day each year as hereinafter
provided. [2000 Code § 6-4.1; Ord. No. 2951]
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a. above, no retail
distribution licensed premises (commonly referred to as "liquor stores")
may sell alcoholic beverages in original containers (commonly referred
to as "package goods") before 9:00 a.m. on any day of the week, except
for Sundays and New Year's Day each year as hereinafter provided.
[Ord. No. 3052]
§ 6-3.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 6-4.3
1:240
consumption shall be and is herewith permitted on Sundays between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. only.
§ 6-4.4. New Year's Day. [2000 Code § 6-4.4; Ord. No. 3004]
The provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that day
alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the
licensed premises throughout the whole day unless January 1 is a Sunday,
in which case no alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered to
or consumed in the licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and
10:00 a.m. for food serving establishments, or between 5:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon for all other licensed premises.
§ 6-4.5. Sales to Certain Persons. [2000 Code § 6-4.5]
No licensee or any employee of a licensee shall sell to or offer any alcoholic
beverages to any policeman or fireman while in uniform, or to any person
under the legal drinking age as defined in N.J.S.A. Title 33, or to any person
actually or apparently intoxicated.
§ 6-4.6. Density Restrictions. [2000 Code § 2-4.6]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered to, or consumed in,
or allowed to be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in any room or area
in any licensed premises in which the number of persons in the room is
greater than one (1) person for each seven (7) square feet of floor space of
the room which is not covered by bar or working space. Each licensee shall
submit to the Fire Chief of the City a floor plan of the licensed premises.
The Fire Chief shall review each floor plan and shall thereafter issue a
placard or sign, which shall state the total number of persons permitted in
the licensed premises.
The licensee shall post the placard or sign on the premises in a conspicuous
place and manner.
§ 6-4.7. Hours of Sale in Club Licensed Premises. [2000 Code
§ 6-4.7; Ord. No. 2877]
Hours of sale for Club licensed premises shall be the same as the hours
stated for Plenary Retail Consumption licensed premises as stated in this
section.
§ 6-5. (RESERVED)
§ 6-6. REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
§ 6-6.1. Suspension or Revocation. [2000 Code § 6-6.1]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
§ 6-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-6.1
1:241
applicable Statute or any of the rules and regulations of the State Director
of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-6.2. Proceedings. [2000 Code § 6-6.2]
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31, by service of a five (5) day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-7. EMPLOYEES OF LICENSED PREMISES; I.D. CARD
REQUIRED.
§ 6-7.1. Submission of Employee Information to Police Department.
[2000 Code § 6-8.1]
Every person, partnership, or corporation holding any plenary retail
consumption license or any retail distribution license issued or to be issued
in the City shall furnish to the Police Department the name and address
of each employee of the licensee who sells, solicits the sale of, mixes,
processes or prepares any alcoholic beverage at or from any bar or
establishment selling alcoholic beverages in an original package or
container. The name and address of employees shall be furnished to the
Police Department within twenty-four (24) hours after the commencement
of such employment.
§ 6-7.2. Registration with Police Required; Exceptions. [2000 Code
§ 6-8.2; Ord. No. 2016-03]
a. Plenary Retail Consumption and Plenary Retail Distribution License
Personnel. Any person who sells, serves or solicits the sale of alcoholic
beverages at, or in connection with, any premises that holds a plenary
retail consumption license or plenary retail distribution license within
the City, or who is involved in the management of any premises that has
received a plenary retail consumption license or plenary retail
distribution license within the City, or who provides security or
entrance admission services at or to any such licensed premises on
more than twenty (20) working days in any one (1) calendar year, must
first obtain a City-issued ABC Card from the Police Department.
b. Club License Employees. All persons who shall sell, serve, solicit the
sale of, mix, process, or prepare any alcoholic beverage at or from
original package or container under a club license where such person's
employment exceeds ten (10) working days in any one (1) calendar year
and the person receives regular recurring monetary remuneration in
connection with the employment, shall register with the Police
Department.
§ 6-6.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 6-7.3
1:242
§ 6-7.3. Application; Fingerprints and Photographs. [2000 Code
§ 6-8.3]
Registration with the Police Department shall be accomplished by
completing or furnishing the following:
§ 6-7.4. Possession of Identification Card. [Ord. No. 2384]
All persons required to register under subsection 6-7.2 shall be required to
have in their possession, at all times when in or about the licensed premises,
an identification card on a form furnished by the Police Department, which
shall contain such information as name, address, specifics of personal
identification, and such other information as deemed necessary and proper
by the Chief of Police to aid and assist in proper enforcement of the law. An
owner or licensee shall be required to register and obtain an identification
card, although such person may not be personally engaged in the sale,
mixing, processing or preparation of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-7.5. Term of Identification Card; Fees. [2000 Code § 6-8.5; Ord.
No. 2935; Ord. No. 2960]
§ 6-8. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-8.1. Entering Premises. [N.J.S.A. 33:1-81a]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic
beverages to enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or having served or delivered to
him or her, any alcoholic beverage.
a. An application for identification card, which application shall contain
such information as the usual specifics of personal identification, date
and place of birth, address, other employment, and such other
information as deemed necessary and proper by the Police Chief to aid
and assist in proper enforcement of the law.
b. A set of fingerprints and a photograph to be taken by or under
supervision of the Police Department.
a. At the discretion of the applicant, identification cards shall be valid for
one (1) year or three (3) years from the date of issue thereof.
b. The following fees shall be imposed for the issuance of each
identification card:
1. For each original card: the sum of twenty-five ($25.00) for a one
year term and seventy-five ($75.00) dollars for a three (3) year
term.
2. For each renewal of an original card: the sum of thirty ($30.00)
dollars.
§ 6-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8.2
1:243
§ 6-8.2. Consumption, Purchase or Attempt to Purchase Alcoholic
Beverages. [N.J.S.A. 33:1-81b]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic
beverages to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the
retail sale of alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or
have another purchase for him any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-8.3. Misrepresentation of Age. [N.J.S.A. 33:1-81c]
It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent or misstate his age, or
the age of any other person for the purpose of inducing any licensee or any
employee of any licensee, to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to
a person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-8.4. Purchase of Alcoholic Beverages for Persons Under the
Legal Age. [N.J.S.A. 33:1-81d]
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter any premises licensed for
the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or to
purchase alcoholic beverages, for another person who does not because of
his age have the right to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-8.5. Presence. [2000 Code § 6-5.1]
No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be allowed in any premises
where alcoholic beverages are sold or served for consumption on the
premises unless (1) accompanied by his parents or guardian twenty-one
(21) years of age or older; or (2) the licensed premises is a restaurant
licensed for said purpose as provided for by law that constitutes an
establishment regularly and principally used for the purposes of providing
meals to the public, having an adequate kitchen and dining room equipped
for the preparing, cooking and serving of food for its customers and in
which no other business, except such as is incidental to such establishment
is conducted; or (3) employed at any such premises as is permitted by law.
§ 6-8.6. Presumption. [2000 Code § 6-5.5]
Any parent or guardian of a person under the legal age who accompanies
such person under the legal age into a premises in which alcoholic
beverages are served and who permits the person under the legal age
to possess or consume alcoholic beverages shall be presumed to have
misrepresented the age of a person under the legal age.
§ 6-8.7. Employment of Persons Under Eighteen Years of Age. [2000
Code § 6-5.7]
No licensee shall have in his/her employ anyone under the age of eighteen
(18) years, except with the approval of the State Commissioner of Alcoholic
Beverage Control. Such employee shall not serve or handle or sell or solicit
§ 6-8.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 6-8.7
1:244
the sale or participate in the manufacture, rectification, blending, treating,
fortification, mixing, processing or bottling of an alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-8.8. Violations and Penalties. [2000 Code § 6-5.8: N.J.S.A.
33:1-81]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred ($500.00)
dollars. In addition, the court shall suspend or postpone the person's license
to operate a motor vehicle for six (6) months.
Upon the conviction of any person under this section, the court shall
forward a report to the Motor Vehicle Commission stating the first and
last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court
pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a
sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement,
including a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a
motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and
shall run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid driver's
license issued by this State, the court shall immediately collect the license
and forward it to the Motor Vehicle Commission along with the report. If
for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the
person as well as the first and last date of the license suspension period
imposed by the court.
The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to acknowledge receipt
of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive a written notice or failure
to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a written notice shall not be a
defense to a subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident, the
court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate given the age at the time
of sentencing, the non-resident driving privilege of the person and submit
to the Motor Vehicle Commission the required report. The court shall not
collect the license of a non-resident convicted under this section. Upon
receipt of a report by the court, the Motor Vehicle Commission shall notify
the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
In addition to the general penalties prescribed for an offense, the court may
require any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages
who violates this act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment
program authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed
§ 6-8.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-8.8
1:245
the maximum period of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for
which the individual has been convicted.
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [2000 Code § 7-1.1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [2000 Code § 7-1.2]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET.
§ 7-2.1. Authority to Close Streets. [2000 Code § 7-2.1]
§ 7-2.2. Authorization for School Street Closing. [2000 Code § 7-2.2]
a. The City Manager or, in his/her absence, disability or inability to act,
the Mayor, and, in the event of his/her absence or disability or inability
to act, the Chief of Police or his/her designee is hereby authorized to
provide by regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof to
motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during specified hours on any
day or days whenever he/she finds that such closing is necessary for the
preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated in accordance with Subsection a. above,
shall provide for the posting of proper warning signs of such closing on
any street or portion thereof during the time the same is closed in
pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed fifty ($50) dollars.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours shall not become
effective unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
a. Hours Established for Street Closings. Where the City Manager shall
find that a safety problem exists with respect to ingress or egress from
§ 6-8.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-2.2
1:246
any public or private school or with respect to recreational facilities
for children attending such school due to a lack of a suitable area
surrounding such school, or both, he/she is hereby authorized to close,
by regulation, any portion of any street within the block upon which
such school is located, to the use of through traffic during the time
he/she shall determine, not to exceed one (1) hour between 7:00 a.m.
and 10:00 a.m., two (2) hours between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., and
one (1) hour between 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., on any days when such
school is in session and to permit the use of the portion of the street,
during the hours, for ingress to and egress from such school, and for
the use by pupils of such school for recreational purposes under proper
supervision.
b. Supervision Provided. The City Manager shall provide adequate police
and police facilities for such supervision and for the control of traffic
upon such portion of the street.
c. Warning Signs Posted. There shall be posted on the street a warning
sign indicating that the street is closed and the purpose thereof during
the time the street is so closed.
d. General Procedures for Street Closings. No person shall cause a street
to be closed for any reason other than as provided in this subsection
until the following procedure has been followed to the satisfaction of
the City Manager or his/her designated officer:
1. A request shall be made in writing to the City Manager as he/she
shall designate, fully describing the street or street segment to be
closed, the duration of the proposed street closing and the purpose
for such street closing.
2. A diagram of the street or street segment to be closed shall be
submitted, showing the proposed locations of signage warning the
public that the street is closed and the purpose of the closing. The
requester shall place warning signs at locations specified by the
Police Department, if deemed necessary by that Department or the
City Manager.
3. The Director of Public Works may, upon notifying the Police
Department, Fire Department and the City Manager, close any
street or public place or section thereof to public traffic for the
purpose of repairing, constructing or reconstructing the same, or
for any other public purpose. Warning signs shall be posted as
provided in Subsection c. above.
e. Penalty. Any person violating any terms of this section or any regulation
promulgated thereunder shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty
stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 7-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:247
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [2000 Code § 7-3]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any Police
Officer may provide for the removal of that vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-4. PENALTIES. [2000 Code § 7-4]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute or in
this chapter, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than fifty ($50) dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding fifteen (15)
days or both.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [2000 Code § 7-5]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 7-6. (RESERVED)
§ 7-7. PARKING.
§ 7-7.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [2000 Code § 7-7.1]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-7.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [2000 Code
§ 7-2.2]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence,
the ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
§ 7-3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-7.2
1:248
§ 7-7.3. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and Snow
Removal. [2000 Code § 7-7.3; Ord. No. 2662; Ord. No. 3007]
c. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal, before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
a. Whenever a snow state of emergency has been declared by the
Emergency Management Coordinator, an emergency shall exist and no
vehicles shall be parked on the following streets or highways or
portions thereof listed below and as identified on the "Snow Route/
Emergency Evacuation Route Map" (the "Map"), as prepared by the
City Engineer, dated July 26, 2010, which is incorporated herein and
made a part hereof by reference. The Map shall be retained on file in
the City Clerk's Office and in the City Police and Fire Departments.
The parking prohibitions listed below shall remain in effect after the
snow has ceased, until the streets have been plowed significantly, and
to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law.
d. Unless other penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to the penalties stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
A penalty of not more than fifty ($50) dollars or imprisonment for a term
not exceeding fifteen (15) days or both.
Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and Snow
Removal—Snow Routes.
Name of
Street Sides Location
Asbury Avenue Both From Ocean Avenue to City Border
(western border with Neptune Township)
Bangs Avenue Both From Cookman Avenue to City border
(100' + west of Ridge Avenue)
§ 7-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.3
1:249
Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and Snow
Removal—Snow Routes.
Name of
Street Sides Location
Bond Street Both Between Munroe Avenue and Summerfield
Avenue
Comstock
Street
a. Both From Sunset Drive to the end of Comstock
Street (dead end)
b. Both Between 2nd Avenue and 3rd Avenue
Cookman
Avenue
Both From Wesley Lake Drive to Asbury Avenue
Deal Lake
Drive
Both From Main Street to City Border (with
Loch Arbor)
Dewitt Avenue Both Between Mattison Avenue and Bangs
Avenue
Emory Street Both Between Munroe Avenue and Summerfield
Avenue
Kingsley Street Both From Asbury Avenue to Deal Lake Drive
Lake Avenue Both From Wesley Lake Drive to Main Street
Main Street Both From Deal Lake Drive to City Border
(southern border with Neptune Township)
Mattison
Avenue
Both From Borden Avenue to the end of
Mattison Avenue (dead end)
Pine Street Both Between 2nd Avenue and 3rd Avenue
Ridge Avenue (One)
(To be
determined)
From Northern Border (with Ocean
Township) to Southern Border (with
Neptune Township)
Second Avenue North North side at 1100 Block of Second
Avenue beginning at Pine Street and
ending 150 feet east of Pine Street
Sixth Avenue Both
(North
and
South -
both
sides of
traffic
island)
Between Kingsley Street and Webb Street
Springwood
Avenue
Both From Main Street to Neptune Border (150
feet + west of Ridge Avenue)
§ 7-7.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-7.3
1:250
§ 7-7.4. Snow Route/Emergency Evacuation Route Map. [Ord. No.
3007]
The City of Asbury Park hereby approves and adopts a "Snow Route/
Emergency Evacuation Route Map" (the "Map"), as prepared by the City
Engineer, dated July 26, 2010, to depict the City's officially designated
Snow Routes and Emergency Evacuation Routes, which Map is hereby
incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference. The Map shall
be retained on file in the City Clerk's Office and in the City Police and Fire
Departments.
§ 7-7.5. General Provisions. [Ord. No. 2017-41]
Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and Snow
Removal—Snow Routes.
Name of
Street Sides Location
Sunset Avenue Both From Ocean Avenue to Bridge Street
Sunset Drive Both Between Sunset Avenue and Comstock
Street
Third Avenue Both From Kingsley Street to Asbury Avenue
Webb Street East Between Sunset Avenue and Deal Lake
Drive
Wesley Lake
Drive
Both From Lake Avenue to Cookman Avenue
a. The following emergency evacuation routes are hereby established:
Emergency Evacuation Routes
Name of
Street Sides Location
Asbury Avenue Both From Ocean Avenue to City Border
(western border with Neptune Township)
Main Street Both From Sunset Avenue to City Border
(southern border with Neptune Township)
Sunset Avenue Both From Ocean Avenue to Main Street
Asbury Avenue (Memorial Drive—Neptune Border) requires
concurrence from Monmouth County (County Route 16).
Main Street (entire length) and Deal Lake Drive (Main Street—Park
Avenue) requires State of New Jersey concurrence (State Route 71).
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.6, the permissible distance a person may
park a motor vehicle from a "stop" sign is twenty-five (25) feet except
when the intersection is located in a school zone, in which case the
§ 7-7.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-7.5
1:251
§ 7-8. CONSTRUCTION ZONE: TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET
AND HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATION
AND ADOPTION OF MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. (Municipal Roads Only)
§ 7-8.1. Controls Established for Construction Zone. [2000 Code
§ 7-8.1]
The City Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur and traffic must be moved through or around street construction,
maintenance operations, and utility work, above and below ground which
requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal flow of traffic;
and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly
controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety, peace and
welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations directed to
the safety and expeditious movement of traffic through construction and
maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work force performing
these operations.
The City of Asbury Park, in the County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance
operations of utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor, or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D.
while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 7-8.2. Preconstruction Meetings. [2000 Code § 7-8.2]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under a public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Police
Department in order to arrange a pre-construction meeting in order to
submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
mandated parking distance is fifty (50) feet, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-138(h). All intersections otherwise posted prior to the adoption
of this chapter shall remain in effect. Only the Municipal Engineer, or
designee, shall reserve the right to modify the distance at any of these
locations.
b. Vehicles shall at all times comply with all other parking regulations,
including but not limited to regulations on parking permits, street
cleaning, and parking along emergency snow routes.
c. The City of Asbury Park shall not be required to install or maintain any
markings, signs or other indications for permissible parking distances;
it shall be incumbent upon the driver to ensure that no vehicle is parked
within the permissible parking distances at any time.
d. All other provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 shall apply.
§ 7-7.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-8.2
1:252
construction work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with
this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not approved
by the Police Department is in violation of this section.
§ 7-8.3. Hazardous Conditions. [2000 Code § 7-8.3]
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two (2) emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case
of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to
the start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be
reached, or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call
from the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the City may
respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for such
emergency service by the City shall be charged to the person, contractor, or
utility for such condition.
§ 7-8.4. Hours. [2000 Code § 7-8.4]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on
any roadway in the City before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. This
time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. by the Officer in charge of the Police Department. If it is determined by
the Officer in charge that the construction or maintenance operations prior
to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a
safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 7-8.5. Road Closing and Detours. [2000 Code § 7-8.5]
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Police Department.
§ 7-8.6. Traffic Directors. [2000 Code § 7-8.6]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Police Department that same is necessary to
provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 7-8.7. Stop Work. [2000 Code § 7-8.7]
The Police Department shall have the authority to stop work, including
the removal of equipment, vehicles and stored material within the street
right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other related work, in
order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this
section.
§ 7-8.8. Site Preparation. [2000 Code § 7-8.8]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicle or equipment
are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk or until all construction, signs,
lights, devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 7-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8.9
1:253
§ 7-8.9. Violations and Penalties. [2000 Code § 7-8.9]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less than
one hundred ($100) dollars nor more than five hundred ($500) dollars and/
or be imprisoned in the County Jail for a term not exceeding ninety (90)
days. For a second offense, the person, contractor or utility shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than two hundred fifty ($250)
dollars and/or be imprisoned in the County Jail for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-9. (RESERVED)
§ 7-10. STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED.
§ 7-10.1. Stopping or Standing Prohibited at All Times. [2000 Code
§ 7-10; Ord. No. 2244 § 1; Ord. No. 2946]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described, except where other parking regulations have
been provided for.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Kingsley Street East All Asbury Avenue to Ocean Avenue
Langford Street
[Ord. No. 2946]
West All Beginning at Second Avenue and
extending to a point 130 feet north
therefrom
§ 7-10.2. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets. [2000 Code § 7-10]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described, except where other
parking regulations have been provided for.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-11. TIME LIMIT PARKING.
§ 7-11.1. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [2000 Code
§ 7-11.1; Ord. No. 1168 § 2; Ord. No. 2027 § 2; Ord. No. 2043 § 1;
Ord. No. 2075 § 1; Ord. No. 2094 § 1; Ord. No. 2122 § 1; Ord. No.
2129 § 1; Ord. No. 2204 § 1; Ord. No. 2289 § 1; Ord. No. 2352 § 1;
Ord. No. 2376; Ord. No. 2605; Ord. No. 2874; Ord. No. 2906; Ord.
No. 2936; Ord. No. 2982; Ord. No. 3001; Ord. No. 2015-15; Ord. No.
§ 7-8.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-11.1
1:254
2015-20; Ord. No. 2015-51; Ord. No. 2017-14; Ord. No. 2017-26;
Ord. No. 2017-42; Ord. No. 2018-23; Ord. No. 2018-28]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides Hours
Time
Limit Location
Asbury Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Both 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
(Monday -
Friday)
2 Hours Between Memorial Drive
and Main Street
Bangs Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Both 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
(Monday -
Friday)
2 Hours Between Memorial Drive
and Main Street
First Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Both 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
(Monday -
Friday)
2 Hours Between Memorial Drive
and Main Street
Fourth Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Both 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
(Monday -
Friday)
2 Hours Between Memorial Drive
and Main Street
Fourth Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-26]
North 7:00 a.m.
- 6:00
p.m.
15
minutes
Beginning at a point 125
feet from the westerly
curbline of Main Street
and extending to a point
20 feet westerly
therefrom
Fifth Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-26]
South 7:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
15
minutes
Beginning at a point 25
feet from the westerly
curbline of Main Street
and extending to a point
18 feet therefrom
Fifth Avenue
[Ord. No.
2018-23]
South 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
(Monday -
Friday)
2 Hours Between Seiner Place and
Main Street
§ 7-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11.1
1:255
Name of Street Sides Hours
Time
Limit Location
Grand Avenue
[Ord. No.
2018-28]
West 8:30 a.m. -
3:30 p.m.
15
minutes
Beginning at a point 25
feet north of the
northwest corner of
Grand Avenue and Sewall
Avenue and extending
north 65 feet along with
west curb line
Memorial Drive
[Added
3-13-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-5]
West 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
2 Hours a. Between Fifth Avenue
and Sunset Avenue
b. Between Asbury
Avenue and Monroe
Avenue
Second Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Both 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
(Monday -
Friday)
2 Hours Between Memorial Drive
and Main Street
Springwood
Avenue [Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Both 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
(Monday -
Friday)
2 Hours Between Memorial Drive
and Main Street
Summerfield
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-14;
Ord. No.
2017-26]
South 7:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
15
minutes
Beginning at a point 25
feet from the easterly
curbline of Main Street
and extending to a point
44 feet easterly
therefrom
Third Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Both 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
(Monday -
Friday)
2 Hours Between Memorial Drive
and Main Street
Locations for parking time limited on certain streets may be found on file
in the City Offices.
§ 7-11.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-11.2
1:256
§ 7-11.2. Time Limit Parking (Metered Parking). [2000 Code
§ 7-11.2 Schedule A; Ord. No. 2027 § 1; Ord. No. 2244 § 1; Ord. No.
2286 § 1; Ord. No. 2454 § 1; Ord. No. 2601; Ord. No. 2704; Ord. No.
2727; Ord. No. 2874; Ord. No. 2906; Ord. No. 2936; Ord. No. 2982;
Ord. No. 2015-11; Ord. No. 2015-25]
Locations for time limit parking (metered parking) may be found in Section
7-41, Metered Parking.
§ 7-12. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING. [2000
Code 7-12; Ord. No. 2702; Ord. No. 2823; New]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Sides
Hours and
Days Location
Asbury Avenue North 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Mondays
Memorial Drive to Neptune
Township
9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
[Added 5-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
South 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Fridays
Memorial Drive to Neptune
Township
9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Thursdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
[Added 5-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
Bangs Avenue North a. 9:00
a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Mondays
Neptune Border to Memorial
Drive
b. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Mondays
Main Street to Cookman
Avenue
South a. 9:00
a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Fridays
Prospect Avenue to Memorial
Drive
b. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Fridays
Main Street to Cookman
Avenue
Bond Street West a. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Lake Avenue to Summerfield
Avenue
b. 11:00
a.m.-1:00 p.m.
Tuesdays
Sunset Avenue to Seventh
Avenue
c. 9:00 a.m. -
11:00 a.m.
Thursdays
Monroe Avenue to Fifth
Avenue [Added 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
§ 7-11.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-12
1:257
Name of Street Sides
Hours and
Days Location
East a. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Thursdays
Lake Avenue to Summerfield
Avenue
b. 11:00
a.m.-1:00 p.m.
Thursdays
Sunset Avenue to Seventh
Avenue
c. 9:00 a.m. -
11:00 a.m.
Tuesdays
Monroe Avenue to Fifth
Avenue [Added 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
Comstock Street West 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Mondays
Mattison Avenue to Asbury
Avenue
East 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Fridays
Mattison Avenue to Asbury
Avenue
Cookman
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Mondays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Mondays
Langford Street to Memorial
Drive [Added 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
South 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Fridays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Fridays
Langford Street to Memorial
Drive [Added 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
Eighth Avenue North 11:00 a.m. - 1:00
p.m. Tuesdays
Deal Lake Drive to Webb
Street
South 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Thursdays
Deal Lake Drive to Webb
Street
Emory Street West a. 11:00
a.m.-1:00 p.m.
Tuesdays
Sunset Avenue to Deal Lake
Drive
b. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Summerfield Avenue to Press
Plaza
c. 9:00 a.m. -
11:00 a.m.
Thursdays
Monroe Avenue to Fifth
Avenue [Added 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
East a. 11:00
a.m.-1:00 p.m.
Thursdays
Sunset Avenue to Deal Lake
Drive
b. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Thursdays
Summerfield Avenue to Press
Plaza
§ 7-12 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-12
1:258
Name of Street Sides
Hours and
Days Location
c. 9:00 a.m. -
11:00 a.m.
Tuesdays
Monroe Avenue to Fifth
Avenue [Added 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
Fifth Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
North 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Bridge Street to Webb Street
South 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Thursdays
Bridge Street to Webb Street
First Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
North 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
South 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Thursdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
Fourth Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
North 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Bridge Street to Memorial
Drive, Main Street to Grand
Avenue
South 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Thursdays
Bridge Street to Memorial
Drive, Main Street to Grand
Avenue
Grand Avenue East 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Thursdays
Sunset Avenue to Deal Lake
Drive
9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Summerfield Avenue to Fifth
Avenue [Added 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
West 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Tuesdays
Sunset Avenue to Deal Lake
Drive
9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Thursdays
Summerfield Avenue to Fifth
Avenue [Added 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-18]
Lake Avenue
[Amended
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
North 7:00 a.m.-8:00
a.m. Mondays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
§ 7-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-12
1:259
Name of Street Sides
Hours and
Days Location
South 7:00 a.m.-8:00
a.m. Fridays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
Langford Street
[Amended
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
West 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Mondays
Prospect Avenue to Asbury
Avenue
East 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Fridays
Prospect Avenue to Asbury
Avenue
Main Street East 7:00 a.m. — 8:00
a.m. Tuesdays
and Thursdays
Southern City Line through
the 1500 block of Main Street
West 7:00 a.m. — 8:00
a.m. Mondays
and Fridays
From the 1500 block of Main
Street to the Southern City
Line
Mattison Avenue North a. 9:00
a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Mondays
Prospect Avenue to Memorial
Drive
b. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Mondays
Main Street to Press Plaza
South a. 9:00
a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Fridays
Prospect Avenue to Memorial
Drive
b. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Fridays
Main Street to Press Plaza
Monroe Avenue
[Amended
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
North a. 9:00
a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Mondays
Pine Street to Memorial
Drive
b. 9:00
a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Mondays
Prospect Avenue to Neptune
Township
c. 9:00 a.m. -
11:00 a.m.
Tuesdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
South a. 9:00
a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Fridays
Pine Street to Memorial
Drive
§ 7-12 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-12
1:260
Name of Street Sides
Hours and
Days Location
b. 9:00
a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Fridays
Prospect Avenue to Neptune
Township
c. 9:00 a.m. -
11:00 a.m.
Thursdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
Park Avenue West 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Tuesdays
Sunset Avenue to Deal Lake
Drive
East 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Thursdays
Sunset Avenue to Deal Lake
Drive
Ridge Avenue West 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Mondays
Neptune Border to Asbury
Avenue
East 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Fridays
Neptune Border to Asbury
Park
Second Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
North 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
South 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Thursdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
Seventh Avenue North 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Tuesdays
Steiner Place to Webb Street
South 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Thursdays
Steiner Place to Webb Street
Sewall Avenue North 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Mondays
Neptune Border to Prospect
Avenue Pine Street to
Memorial Drive
9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
[Added 5-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
South 9:00 a.m.-11:00
a.m. Fridays
Neptune Border to Prospect
Avenue Pine Street to
Memorial Drive
9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Thursdays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
[Added 5-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-18]
Sixth Avenue North 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Tuesdays
Steiner Place to Webb Street
§ 7-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-12
1:261
Name of Street Sides
Hours and
Days Location
South 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Thursdays
Steiner Place to Webb Street
Summerfield
Avenue
North a. 9:00
a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Mondays
Prospect Avenue to Memorial
Drive
b. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Mondays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
South a. 9:00 a.m.
-11:00 a.m.
Fridays
Prospect Avenue to Memorial
Drive
b. 8:00 a.m.-9:00
a.m. Fridays
Main Street to Grand Avenue
Sunset Avenue North 11:00 a.m.-1:00
p.m. Tuesdays
Bridge Street to Webb Street
South a. 11:00
a.m.-1:00 p.m.
Thursdays
Bridge Street to Webb Street
Third Avenue
[Added
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
North 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Tuesdays
Bridge Street to Pine Street,
Comstock Street to Memorial
Drive, Main Street to Grand
Avenue
South 9:00 a.m. - 11:00
a.m. Thursday
Bridge Street to Memorial
Drive, Main Street to Grand
Avenue
§ 7-13. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [2000 Code § 7-13; Ord. No. 2121 § 1; Ord. No. 2185 § 1;
Ord. No. 2320 § 1; Ord. No. 2368; Ord. No. 2449 § 1; Ord. No. 2460
§ 1; Ord. No. 2476 § 1; Ord. No. 2517; Ord. No. 2665; Ord. No.
2015--28; Ord. No. 2017-42; Ord. No. 2018-38]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described, except where other parking regulations have been provided for.
Name of
Street Sides Location
Adams Street North Sylvan Avenue to Avenue "A"
Asbury Avenue North Beginning at the northwest corner of
Asbury Avenue and Pine Street and
extending westerly 113 feet therefrom
Atkins Avenue Both Adams Street to Lake Avenue
§ 7-12 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-13
1:262
Name of
Street Sides Location
Bangs Avenue a. South From the westerly City line to
Prospect Avenue
b. South
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Bond Street
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Boston Way a. North Atkins Avenue to Sylvan Way
b. North 350 feet east of intersection of Sylvan
Way to Memorial Drive
c. North Beginning at a point 35 feet west of
the westerly curbline of Memorial
Drive and extending 225 feet west
d. South Memorial Drive to Atkins Avenue
Cookman
Avenue
North Main Street to New York and Long
Branch Railroad tracks
Dewitt Avenue East Bangs Avenue to Mattison Avenue
Drummond
Court
North From the westerly side of Drummond
Avenue to the most westerly point of
Drummond Court
Emory Street
[Ord. No.
2017-42]
West Beginning at a point 48 feet from the
southwest corner of Monroe Avenue
and Emory Street and extending 70
feet southerly on Emory Street
Heck Street
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Jersey Street Both Monroe Avenue to Washington Avenue
Lake Avenue a. Both Main Street to Bond Street
b. Both From the Railroad tracks to Memorial
Drive
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13
1:263
Name of
Street Sides Location
c. South
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
d. South
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Mattison
Avenue
a. North From the easterly curbline of Dewitt
Avenue to a point 300 feet east
b. North Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
westerly curbline of Emory Street and
extending 75 feet west
c. South Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
northerly curbline of Cookman Avenue
and extending 40 feet west
Memorial Drive a. Both Monroe Avenue to Lake Avenue
b. East From the north boundary line of the
City to the south boundary line of the
City
Monroe Avenue a. North Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
westerly curbline of Prospect Avenue
and extending 285 feet west
b. South From the easterly curbline of Bond
Street to a point 200 feet east
c. South Beginning at a point 125 feet from the
southeast corner of Monroe Avenue
and Bond Street and extending 168
feet easterly on Monroe Avenue
d. South Beginning at a point 44 feet from the
southwest corner of Monroe Avenue
and Emory Street and extending 65
feet westerly on Monroe Avenue
e. North Beginning at the northeastern corner
of the intersection of Monroe Avenue
and Ridge Avenue, continuing easterly
142 feet along the north (westbound)
curbline [Ord. No. 2015-28]
§ 7-13 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-13
1:264
Name of
Street Sides Location
f. North [Ord.
No. 2018-38]
Beginning at the northwestern corner
of the intersection of Monroe Avenue
and Prospect Avenue, continuing
westerly 125 feet along the north
(westbound) curbline
Ocean Avenue
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Pine Street a. East Asbury Avenue to First Avenue
b. East From the southerly curbline of Third
Avenue to a point 200 feet south
Plaza Court
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Prospect
Avenue
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Sewall Avenue
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
St. James Place
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Steiner Place West Sixth Avenue to Seventh Avenue
Summerfield
Avenue
[Amended
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
a. South Prospect Avenue to Ridge Avenue
Sylvan Avenue Both Lake Avenue to Boston Way
§ 7-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-13
1:265
Name of
Street Sides Location
Third Avenue
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
Washington
Avenue
[Repealed
5-8-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-18]
§ 7-14. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN STREETS. [2000 Code § 7-14; Ord. No. 1197 § 1; Ord. No.
2012 § 1; Ord. No. 2062 § 1; Ord. No. 2243 § 1; Ord. No. 2253 § 1;
Ord. No. 2299 § 1; Ord. No. 2320 § 1; Ord. No. 2342 § 1; Ord. No.
3057; Ord. No. 3058; Ord. No. 2018-19; Ord. No. 2018-28; 5-8-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-18]
No person shall park or stand a vehicle between the hours specified any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets described,
except where other parking regulations have been provided for.
Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
(Reserved)
Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
(Reserved)
Tuesdays
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
(Reserved)
Thursdays
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-13 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-14
1:266
Monday Through Friday
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Alley All 7:45 am to
9:15 am and
2:00 p.m. to
3:15 pm
Between Comstock Street and
Pine Street adjacent to Bradley
School
Third Avenue South 7:45 pm to
3:15 pm
Comstock Street west to Pine
Street
Grand Avenue
and Sewall
Avenue
West 8:30 a.m. to
9:30 a.m.
and 2:30
p.m. to 3:30
p.m.
Beginning at a point 25 feet
north of the northwest corner
of Grand Avenue and Sewall
Avenue and extending north 65
feet along with west curb line
Grand Avenue
and Monroe
Avenue
West 7:00 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.
and 2:30
p.m. to 3:30
p.m.
Beginning at a point 25 feet
north of the northwest corner
of Grand Avenue and Monroe
Avenue and extending north
148 feet along with west curb
line
Monroe Avenue
[Ord. No.
2018-28]
North 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 25 feet
east of the northeast corner of
Main Street and Monroe
Avenue and extending east 25
feet along the northern curb
line
Third Avenue
[Ord. No.
2018-19]
South 7:30 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.;
and 3:30
p.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 25 feet
west of the Southwest corner
of Third Avenue and Grand
Avenue, and extending in a
westerly direction to a point
185 feet west therefrom.
§ 7-15. PARKING OF TRUCKS, TRAILERS, BUSES, "VACATION" OR
MOBILE HOMES, HOUSES, "VACATION" OR CAMP TRAILERS,
"PICK-UPS," COACHES OR SIMILAR VEHICLES, BOATS AND BOAT
TRAILERS IN EXCESS OF SIX THOUSAND (6,000) POUNDS
REGISTERED GROSS WEIGHT PROHIBITED. [2000 Code § 7-15;
Ord. No. 2166 § 1]
a. Vehicles Over 6,000 Pounds. No truck, bus, tractor trailer or trailer
body of any kind, vacation house or camper trailer, pickup, coach or
similar vehicle of any kind, weighing six thousand (6,000) pounds
registered gross weight or more, or any boat or boat trailer of any size
shall be parked on any street in any zone except while actually loading
or unloading or making pickups and deliveries, and except as otherwise
provided herein. This prohibition shall not apply to properly registered
§ 7-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-15
1:267
§ 7-16. ANGLE PARKING. [2000 Code § 7-16; Ord. No. 2461 § 1; Ord.
No. 2778; Ord. No. 2983; Ord. No. 2016-31; Ord. No. 2017-14; Ord.
No. 2017-26; Ord. No. 2017-42]
No angle parking shall be permitted in the City of Asbury Park except at the
locations described below that are designated for angle parking at an angle
so indicated.
Angle Parking at a 45° Angle:
Name of Street Side Location
Deal Lake Drive
[Ord. No.
2016-31]
Westbound (along
north side curb
line)
Kingsley Street to NJ DOT Right-Of-
Way
Eighth Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
South (Reverse
angle)
Webb Street to Kingsley Street
Fifth Avenue South Main Street to Memorial Drive
pickup trucks or vans which do not exceed nineteen (19) feet in overall
length.
b. Construction trailers, upon approval of the Construction Official, may
be permitted to be parked on any street in any zone after issuance of a
Building Permit for and during the construction of the principal
structure therein, but shall be removed prior to the issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy for the principal structure in residential zones
and within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the Certificate of
Occupancy for the principal structure in all other zones.
c. This prohibition shall not apply to trucks, tractor trailers, buses or
similar vehicles which are used as motor vehicles to transport goods or
materials in connection with the business conducted on premises
located in business, commercial and industrial zones only, provided that
all such vehicles are properly registered and kept in good repair.
d. This prohibition shall not apply to service vehicles parked in residential
areas during the performance of services.
e. Signs shall be erected giving notice of the prohibitions set forth herein.
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
All All All Entire length
§ 7-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-16
1:268
Angle Parking at a 45° Angle:
Name of Street Side Location
First Avenue a. On both sides
of the north
roadway on each
of the portions of
the named
streets, lying
between the
north curb and
the north line of
the parkway in
the centers of the
streets
Ocean Avenue to Kingsley Street
b. On both sides
of the south
roadway on each
of the named
streets, lying
between the
south curb and
the south line of
the parkway in
the centers of the
streets
Fourth Avenue a. On both sides
of the north
roadway on each
of the portions of
the named
streets, lying
between the
north curb and
the north line of
the parkway in
the centers of the
streets
Ocean Avenue to Kingsley Street
§ 7-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16
1:269
Angle Parking at a 45° Angle:
Name of Street Side Location
b. On both sides
of the south
roadway on each
of the named
streets, lying
between the
south curb and
the south line of
the parkway in
the centers of the
streets
Grand Avenue West Cookman Avenue to Lake Avenue
Lake Avenue South a. Emory Street to St. James Place
b. From Wesley Lake Drive to Bond
Street [Ord. No. 2983]
Lake Avenue
[Ord. No.
2983]
North Grand Avenue to Bond Street
Mattison Avenue
[Ord. No.
2983]
South Main Street to Cookman Avenue
(compact cars only)
Memorial Drive West Fifth Avenue to Sunset Avenue
Plaza Place East Entire length
Second Avenue a. On both sides
of the north
roadway on each
of the portions of
the named
streets, lying
between the
north curb and
the north line of
the parkway in
the centers of the
streets
Ocean Avenue to Kingsley Street
§ 7-16 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-16
1:270
Angle Parking at a 45° Angle:
Name of Street Side Location
b. On both sides
of the south
roadway on each
of the named
streets, lying
between the
south curb and
the south line of
the parkway in
the centers of the
streets
Seventh Avenue On both sides of
the center island
of each street
Ocean Avenue to Kingsley Street
Sixth Avenue On both sides of
the center island
of each street
Ocean Avenue to Kingsley Street
Summerfield
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-42]
Both Main Street to Steiner Place
Sunset Avenue North Ocean Avenue to Kingsley Street
Third Avenue a. On both sides
of the north
roadway on each
of the portions of
the named
streets, lying
between the
north curb and
the north line of
the parkway in
the centers of the
streets
Ocean Avenue to Kingsley Street
b. On both sides
of the south
roadway, on each
of the named
streets, lying
between the
south curb and
the south line of
the parkway in
the centers of the
streets
§ 7-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16
1:271
Angle Parking at a 45° Angle:
Name of Street Side Location
Angle Parking at a 90° Angle:
Atlantic Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-26]
Eastbound (along
south side
curbline)
Beginning at a point 25 feet west of
easterly curbline of Union Avenue
and extending to a point 51 feet
therefrom
§ 7-17. (RESERVED) [2000 Code §§ 7-17.1–7-17.9; Ord. No. 2335;
Ord. No. 2874; Ord. No. 2906; Ord. No. 2936; Ord. No. 2982; deleted
by Ord. No. 2017-14]
§ 7-18. VEHICLES OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT EXCLUDED FROM
CERTAIN STREETS.
§ 7-19. ROUTES FOR TRUCKS OVER FOUR (4) TONS. [2000 Code
§ 7-19]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as routes for vehicles over four (4) tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of four (4) tons shall be excluded from all streets, except for those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will
be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pickup and delivery of
materials.
a. Trucks over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pickup and delivery
of materials on such streets. [2000 Code § 7-18; Ord. No. 2331 § 1]
Schedule A
Name of
Street Weight Location
Fourth Avenue 4 tons Memorial Drive to Ridge Avenue
Third Avenue 4 tons Memorial Drive to Ridge Avenue
b. All trucks and buses, except school buses, over four (4) tons gross
weight are hereby excluded from the following described streets or
parts of streets except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such
streets.
Schedule B
Name of
Street Weight Location
Prospect
Avenue
4 tons Bangs Avenue to Asbury Avenue
§ 7-16 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-19
1:272
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-20. ONE-WAY STREETS.
§ 7-20.1. Designated. [2000 Code § 7-20.1; Ord. No. 2189 § 1; Ord.
No. 2199 § 1; Ord. No. 2244 § 1; Ord. No. 2290 § 1; Ord. No. 2314
§ 1; Ord. No. 2307 § 1; Ord. No. 2318 § 1; Ord. No. 2452 § 1; Ord. No.
2516; Ord. No. 2527; Ord. No. 2665; Ord. No. 2939; Ord. No. 2957;
Ord. No. 2990; Ord. No. 2015-47; Ord. No. 2016-11; Ord. No.
2016-27; Ord. No. 2017-34; Ord. No. 2017-42]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking Permitted
Asbury Avenue East Kingsley Street to
Ocean Avenue
Bergh Street North Asbury Avenue to
Fifth Avenue
Bond Street a. South Between Seventh
Avenue and
Cookman Avenue
Both sides
b. North Between Cookman
Avenue and Lake
Avenue
Both sides. 4-hour time
limit parking 8:00 a.m.
to 4:00 p.m. except Sat.
and Sun.
Boston Way West Memorial Drive to
Atkins Avenue
Drummond
Court
West The westerly end
of Drummond
Avenue to the
westerly end of
Drummond Court
at Fourth Avenue
Drury Lane South Sixth Avenue to
Sunset Avenue
Elizabeth
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2990]
South Mattison Avenue to
Springwood
Avenue
Emory Street North Mattison Avenue to
Fifth Avenue
§ 7-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-20.1
1:273
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking Permitted
Emory Street
[Ord. No. 2939;
Ord. No. 2957]
North Mattison Avenue to
Bangs Avenue
Both Sides
Fifth Avenue
[Ord. No.
2016-11; Ord.
No. 2016-27]
East Between Ocean
Avenue and Webb
Street (Eastbound)
Both Sides
Fourth Avenue West Ocean Avenue to
Kingsley Street
Heck Street
[Ord. No.
2017-34]
South Fifth Avenue to
Lake Avenue
Hope Way [Ord.
No. 2990]
West From Avenue A to
Elizabeth Avenue
Jersey Street South Monroe Avenue to
Washington
Avenue
Kingsley Street South Cookman Avenue
to Lake Avenue
Lake Avenue East Kingsley Street to
Ocean Avenue
Mattison Avenue East Main Street to
Emory Street
McKinley Place
[Ord. No.
2990]
East From Elizabeth
Avenue to DeWitt
Avenue
Monroe Avenue Southeast Cookman Avenue
to Lake Avenue
Ocean Avenue North Asbury Avenue to
Seventh Avenue
Park Hall Place
[Ord. No.
2015-47]
North Summerfield
Avenue to Monroe
Avenue
East Side (Northbound)
Pine Street South Asbury Avenue to
Sewall Avenue
Plaza Court Southeast Kingsley Street to
Lake Avenue
Seventh Avenue West Main Street to
Steiner Avenue
St. James Place North Lake Avenue to
Asbury Avenue
§ 7-20.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-20.1
1:274
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking Permitted
Steiner Place South Seventh Avenue to
Sixth Avenue
Summerfield
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-42]
West Main Street to
Steiner Place
Both sides
Sunset Avenue
[Ord. No.
2016-11; Ord.
No. 2016-27]
West Between Ocean
Avenue and Webb
Street
Both Sides
Sylvan Avenue South Lake Avenue to
Boston Way
Third Avenue East Kingsley Street to
Ocean Avenue
Unnamed Street
South of Tax
Block 4401
[Ord. No.
2015-47]
East North of 1701
Ocean Avenue
Both sides
Washington
Avenue
West Prospect Avenue to
Ridge Avenue
Webb Street North Sunset Avenue to
Deal Lake Drive
§ 7-20.2. Emergency Situations. [2000 Code § 7-20.2; Ord. No.
2524]
The City Manager and the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall have the
power to change traffic routing, specifically by creating one-way streets in
streets that are presently two-way streets, when emergent situations arise
requiring such action. The City Manager and the Chief of Police or his/
her designee shall determine when such an emergent situation exists in
his/her sole discretion. However, under no circumstances shall a change in
traffic routing undertaken by the City Manager and the Chief of Police or
his/her designee pursuant to this section last longer than seventy-two (72)
hours, unless there is action by the Council of the City of Asbury Park to
leave the emergency traffic routing in place longer than it is necessary to
remediate the emergent situation and/or the expiration of seventy-two (72)
hours, whichever occurs first.
§ 7-21. THROUGH STREETS. [2000 Code § 7-21; Ord. No. 2189 § 1;
Ord. No. 2199 § 1; Ord. No. 2452; Ord. No. 2496; Ord. No. 2509;
Ord. No. 2570]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or part of streets
described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be
§ 7-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-21
1:275
installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the Through
Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Asbury Avenue a. Ocean Avenue to Main Street
b. Main Street to the Asbury Park-Township of
Neptune Line
Bangs Avenue a. Between Cookman Avenue and N.J. Route 71
b. Between N.J. Route 71 and the Asbury Park-
Township of Neptune Line
Central Avenue Between Asbury Avenue and Third Avenue
Fifth Avenue a. Kingsley Street to Grand Avenue
b. Grand Avenue to Main Street
c. Memorial Drive to Locust Drive
First Avenue a. Kingsley Street to Grand Avenue
b. Grand Avenue to Main Street
c. Memorial Drive to Central Avenue
Fourth Avenue a. Kingsley Street to Grand Avenue
b. Grand Avenue to Main Street
c. Memorial Drive to Ridge Avenue
Grand Avenue a. Cookman Avenue to Asbury Avenue
b. Asbury Avenue to Deal Lake Drive
Kingsley Street a. Cookman Avenue to Ocean Avenue
b. Asbury Avenue to Deal Lake Drive
Memorial Drive Monroe Avenue to Sunset Avenue
Monroe Avenue a. Grand Avenue to Main Street
b. Main Street to Prospect Avenue
Park Avenue Sixth Avenue to Deal Lake Drive
Prospect Avenue a. Lake Avenue to Bangs Avenue
b. Between Bangs Avenue and Asbury Avenue
Second Avenue a. Between Route N.J. 71 and Grand Avenue
b. Grand Avenue to Kingsley Street
c. Kingsley Street to Grand Avenue
d. Grand Avenue to Main Street
e. Memorial Drive to Central Avenue
Sixth Avenue a. Kingsley Street to Park Avenue
b. Grand Avenue to Main Street
§ 7-21 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-21
1:276
Name of Street Limits
Summerfield Avenue a. Grand Avenue to Main Street
b. Between Main Street and Prospect Avenue
Sunset Avenue a. Kingsley Street to Grand Avenue
b. Grand Avenue to Main Street
c. Memorial Drive to a point 50 feet west of Bridge
Street
Third Avenue a. Main Street to Ridge Avenue
b. Between Route N.J. 71 and Grand Avenue
c. Between Grand Avenue and Kingsley Street
§ 7-22. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [2000 Code § 7-22; Ord. No. 2023
§ 1; Ord. No. 2189 § 1; Ord. No. 2199 § 1; Ord. No. 2217 § 1; Ord. No.
2244 § 1; Ord. No. 2250 § 1; Ord. No. 2263 § 1; Ord. No. 2367; Ord.
No. 2273 § 1; Ord. No. 2389 § 1; Ord. No. 2461 § 1; Ord. No. 2559;
Ord. No. 2570; Ord. No. 2665; Ord. No. 2675; Ord. No. 2871; Ord.
No. 2883; Ord. No. 2888; Ord. No. 2015-32]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop sign(s) on
Avenue A and
Springwood Avenue
Avenue A-North [Ord. No. 2883]
Bangs Avenue and
Cookman Avenue
Bangs Avenue
Bond Street and Bangs
Avenue
Bond Street
Bond Street and Fourth
Avenue
Bond Street
Bond Street and
Mattison Avenue
Bond Street
Bond Street and Sewall
Avenue
Bond Street
Bond Street and Sixth
Avenue
Bond Street [Ord. No. 2883]
Bond Street and Sunset
Avenue
Bond Street [Ord. No. 2883]
Borden Avenue and
Springwood Avenue
(Lake Avenue)
Borden Avenue
§ 7-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-22
1:277
Intersection Stop sign(s) on
Bridge Street and Fifth
Avenue
Bridge Street
Bridge Street and Fourth
Avenue
Bridge Street
Comstock Street and
Fifth Avenue
Comstock Street
Comstock Street and
First Avenue
Comstock Street
Comstock Street and
Fourth Avenue
Comstock Street
Comstock Street and
Second Avenue
Comstock Street
Comstock Street and
Sewall Avenue
Comstock Street
Deal Lake Drive and
Kingsley Street
Deal Lake Drive (Facing eastbound traffic)
Dewitt Avenue and
Springwood Avenue
Dewitt Avenue
Eighth Avenue and
Kingsley Street
Eighth Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue and
Springwood Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue-South [Ord. No. 2883]
Emery Street and Eighth
Avenue
Emery Street
Emory Street and First
Avenue
Emory Street
Emory Street and Fourth
Avenue
Emory Street
Emory Street and
Seventh Avenue
Emory Street
Emory Street and Sixth
Avenue
Emory Street
Emory Street and Sunset
Avenue
Emory Street
Fifth Avenue and Locust
Drive
Fifth Avenue
Fifth Avenue and
Memorial Drive
Fifth Avenue
First Avenue and Grand
Avenue
First Avenue [Ord. No. 2888]
§ 7-22 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-22
1:278
Intersection Stop sign(s) on
First Avenue and
Memorial Drive
First Avenue
Fourth Avenue and
Grand Avenue
Fourth Avenue [Ord. No. 2888]
Fourth Avenue and Ridge
Avenue
Fourth Avenue-West [Ord. No. 2883]
Heck Street and Sewall
Avenue
Heck Street
Jeffrey Street and Fourth
Avenue
Jeffrey Street [Ord. No. 2883]
Kingsley Street and Deal
Lake Drive
Kingsley Street
Langford Street and
First Avenue
Langford Street
Langford Street and
Fourth Avenue
Langford Street [Ord. No. 2871]
Langford Street and
Mattison Avenue
Langford Street
Langford Street and
Second Avenue
Langford Street
Langford Street and
Sewall Avenue
Langford Street
Mattison Avenue and
Dewitt Avenue
Mattison Avenue
Memorial Drive and
Fourth Avenue
Memorial Drive
Memorial Drive and
Sixth Avenue [Added
3-13-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-5]
Memorial Drive
Memorial Drive and
Sunset Avenue
Memorial Drive
Ocean Avenue and
Kingsley Street
Northbound side of Ocean Avenue
Pine Street and Fifth
Avenue
Pine Street
Pine Street and First
Avenue
Pine Street
Pine Street and Fourth
Avenue
Pine Street
§ 7-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-22
1:279
Intersection Stop sign(s) on
Pine Street and Second
Avenue
Pine Street
Second Avenue and
Grand Avenue
Second Avenue [Ord. No. 2888]
Second Avenue and
Memorial Drive
Second Avenue
Sewall Avenue and Ridge
Avenue
Sewall Avenue
Sixth Avenue and Grand
Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Ord. No. 2888]
Sixth Avenue and
Kingsley Street
Sixth Avenue
Sixth Avenue and Park
Avenue
Sixth Avenue [Ord. No. 2888]
St. James Place and
Cookman Avenue
St. James Place
Steiner Place and Fifth
Avenue
Steiner Place [Ord. No. 2883]
Steiner Place and Fourth
Avenue
Steiner Place-South [Ord. No. 2883]
Steiner Place and Sixth
Avenue
Steiner Place [Ord. No. 2883]
Steiner Place and Sunset
Avenue
Steiner Place [Ord. No. 2883]
Summerfield Avenue and
Ridge Avenue
Summerfield Avenue
Sunset Avenue and
Memorial Drive
Sunset Avenue-for eastbound traffic [Ord. No.
2015-32]
Third Avenue and Grand
Avenue
Third Avenue [Ord. No. 2888]
Third Avenue and Ocean
Avenue
Third Avenue
Third Avenue and Ridge
Avenue
Third Avenue
Union Avenue and
Springwood Avenue
Union Avenue-South [Ord. No. 2883]
Webb Street and Eighth
Avenue
Webb Street
Webb Street and Seventh
Avenue
Webb Street
§ 7-22 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-22
1:280
Intersection Stop sign(s) on
Webb Street and Sixth
Avenue
Webb Street
Webb Street and Sunset
Avenue
Webb Street
§ 7-23. FOUR-WAY STOPS. [2000 Code § 7-23]
The following intersections are hereby designated as Four-Way Stops.
Intersection Stop Sign On
(Reserved)
§ 7-24. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [2000 Code § 7-24; Ord. No. 2314
§ 1; Ord. No. 2665; Ord. No. 2871; Ord. No. 2883]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Signs On
Memorial Drive and
Sixth Avenue [Repealed
3-13-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-5]
§ 7-25. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [2000 Code § 7-25; Ord. No. 2192
§ 1; Ord. No. 2244 § 1; Ord. No. 2386]
No person shall turn at any location listed in the manner described.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Cookman Avenue
and Asbury Avenue
Left Eastbound on Cookman Avenue to
westbound on Asbury Avenue
SBD exit driveway of
Railroad Plaza and
Springwood Avenue
Left Southbound on driveway to EBD on
Springwood Avenue
§ 7-26. NO TURN ON RED. [2000 Code § 7-26]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed
below:
a. Asbury Avenue to Kingsley Street.
From eastbound on Asbury Avenue to southbound on Kingsley Street at
all times daily.
§ 7-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-26
1:281
b. Bangs Avenue to Prospect Avenue.
From westbound on Bangs Avenue to northbound on Prospect Avenue
on Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m. from September 1 each year to June 30 the following year.
c. Comstock Street and Sunset Avenue.
From all approaches at the intersection of Comstock Street and Sunset
Avenue on Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 3:00 p.m. from September 1 of each year to June 30 the following
year.
d. Bond Street to Cookman Avenue.
From southbound on Bond Street to westbound on Cookman Avenue at
all times daily.
e. Cookman Avenue and Mattison Avenue and Press Plaza.
From all approaches at the intersection of Cookman Avenue and
Mattison Avenue and Press Plaza at all times daily.
f. Cookman Avenue and Monroe Avenue and Heck Street.
From all approaches at the intersection of Cookman Avenue, Monroe
Avenue and Heck Street at all times daily.
g. (Reserved)5
h. Monroe Avenue and Ridge Avenue.
From all approaches at the intersection of Monroe Avenue and Ridge
Avenue at all times daily.
i. Pine Street to Third Avenue.
From north on Pine Street to east on Third Avenue on Monday through
Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.; 11:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. and 2:30
p.m. to 3:30 p.m. from September 1 each year to June 30 of the
following year.
j. Pine Street to Third Avenue.
From southbound on Pine Street to westbound on Third Avenue at all
times daily.
k. Prospect Avenue to Bangs Avenue.
From southbound on Prospect Avenue to westbound on Bangs Avenue
on Monday through Friday from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m. from September 1 each year to June 30 the following year.
5. Editor's Note: Former Subsection g, Kingsley Street to Lake Avenue, was repealed
3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-5.
§ 7-26 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-26
1:282
§ 7-27. LOADING ZONES. [2000 Code § 7-27; Ord. No. 2244 § 1;
Ord. No. 2334 § 1; Ord. No. 3086; Ord. No. 2015-03]
Editor's Note: Minimum length for all Loading Zones is 50 feet. No Loading
Zone may be established in any area where it is prohibited to stop, stand or
park by N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in these locations during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of
Street Side Location
Bangs Avenue a. North Beginning at a point 45 feet from the
northerly curbline of Cookman Avenue and
extending to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
b. North Beginning at a point 35 feet west from the
westerly curbline of Bond Street and
extending to a point 60 feet westerly
therefrom
l. Prospect Avenue to Monroe Avenue.
From southbound on Prospect Avenue to westbound on Monroe Avenue
at all times daily.
m. Sunset Avenue and Comstock Street
From all approaches at the intersection of Sunset Avenue and Comstock
Street on Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 2:00
p.m. to 3:00 p.m. [Amended 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-5]
n. Third Avenue and Pine Street.
From eastbound on Third Avenue to southbound on Pine Street on
Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.; 11:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. from September 1 each year to June 30
the following year.
o. Third Avenue to Pine Street.
From westbound on Third Avenue to northbound on Pine Street on
Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.; 11:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. from September 1 each year to June 30
the following year.6
6. Editor's Note: Former Subsection p, Fifth Avenue to Kingsley Street, was repealed
3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-5.
§ 7-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-27
1:283
Name of
Street Side Location
Bond Street East Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
northerly curbline of Monroe Avenue and
extending 50 feet northerly therefrom
Cookman
Avenue
a. North Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
westerly curbline of Bond Street and
extending to a point 60 feet westerly
therefrom
b. North Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
westerly curbline of Press Plaza and
extending to a point 60 feet westerly
therefrom
c. South Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
easterly curbline of Bond Street and
extending to a point 50 feet easterly
therefrom
d. South Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
westerly curbline of Bond Street and
extending to a point 60 feet westerly
therefrom
e. South Beginning at a point 225 feet from the
westerly curbline of Grand Avenue and
extending to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
Emory Street a. East Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
southerly curbline of Bangs Avenue and
extending to a point 125 feet southerly
therefrom
b. West Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
southerly curbline of Sewall Avenue and
extending 50 feet southerly therefrom
Monroe Avenue a. North Beginning at a point 100 feet from the
westerly curbline of Main Street and
extending to a point 50 feet westerly
therefrom
b. North Beginning at a point 100 feet from the
westerly curbline of Heck Street and
extending to a point 65 feet westerly
therefrom
c. South Beginning at a point 75 feet from the
easterly curbline of Ridge Avenue and
extending to a point 60 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 7-27 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-27
1:284
Name of
Street Side Location
Ocean Avenue a. Both Beginning at the southerly curb of Fifth
Avenue and extending south to Fourth
Avenue
b. East Beginning at the northerly curb of Second
Avenue and extending north to Third
Avenue
Summerfield
Avenue
North Beginning at a point 144 feet from the
westerly curbline on Grand Avenue and
extending to a point 30 feet west, ending at
a point 261 feet from the easterly curbline
of Emory Street.
Webb Street
[Ord. No.
2015-03]
East 10 minutes: beginning at a point 95 feet
north of the northeastern curbline of
Eighth Avenue and extending to a point 20
feet north therefrom.
§ 7-28. BUS STOPS. [2000 Code § 7-28; Ord. No. 2232 § 1; amended
3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-5]
The locations described are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus which is picking up or discharging passengers shall
be permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Name of Street Side Location Hours
Asbury Avenue North Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Langford Street
and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
All
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Comstock Street
and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
All
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Central Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Ridge Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
All
§ 7-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-28
1:285
Name of Street Side Location Hours
Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Main Street and
extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom [Added 5-8-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-18]
All
South Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Ridge Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Pine Street and
extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Comstock Street
and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
All
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Langford Street
and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
All
Cookman
Avenue
North Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Heck Street and
extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Emory Street and
extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Asbury Avenue and
extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
All
South Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Grand Avenue and
extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Heck Street and
extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
All
§ 7-28 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-28
1:286
Name of Street Side Location Hours
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Wesley Lake Drive
and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
All
Kingsley Street East Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Fourth Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Sixth Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Eighth Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
All
West Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Eighth Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Sunset Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Fourth Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
All
Main Street
(Route 71)
East Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly
therefrom
All
§ 7-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-28
1:287
Name of Street Side Location Hours
Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Fifth Avenue and
extending 150 feet northerly
therefrom
All
West Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Asbury Avenue and
extending 150 feet southerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Fifth Avenue and
extending 150 feet northerly
therefrom
All
Ocean Avenue East Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Fourth Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom
All
West Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Fourth Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom
All
Springwood
Avenue
North Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Union Avenue and
extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
All
South Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Sylvan Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
All
Sunset Avenue North Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Steiner Place and
extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Comstock Street
and extending 100 feet
easterly therefrom
All
§ 7-28 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-28
1:288
Name of Street Side Location Hours
Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Bridge Street and
extending 100 feet easterly
therefrom
All
South Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Pine Street and
extending 100 feet westerly
therefrom
All
Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Comstock Street
and extending 100 feet
westerly therefrom
All
Transportation
Center
N/A Between Cookman Avenue and
Springwood Avenue (midblock)
All
Note: Below are minimum standards for bus stop length which are based on
recommendations of the Institute of Transportation Engineers and studies
conducted by the Bureau of Traffic Engineering and Safety programs. These
standards include minimum lengths required for Bus Stops in order that
buses may leave moving traffic lanes safely. Keep in mind that buses must
stop alongside the curb within six (6) inches thereof as provided by State
Law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-135. These minimums are as follows:
FAR-SIDE — (AFTER BUS MAKES RIGHT TURN) — Minimum acceptable
length is 150 feet. An additional 45 feet of length should be provided for
each additional bus expected to stop simultaneously.
FAR SIDE — 85 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the end of the
curb return, property line or crosswalk approximately 105 feet to 120 feet.
Minimum acceptable length is 105 feet.
MID-BLOCK — No intersection on either side of roadway: minimum
acceptable length is 135 feet.
NEAR SIDE — 90 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the end of the
curb return, property line or crosswalk approximately 105 feet to 120 feet.
Minimum acceptable length is 105 feet.
§ 7-29. TAXI STANDS. [2000 Code § 7-29]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the
times indicated.
§ 7-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-29
1:289
Name of Street Location Hours
Atkins Avenue Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
northerly curbline of Lake Avenue and
extending 115 feet north therefrom
All
Cookman
Avenue
a. Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
easterly curbline of Emory Street and
extending to a point 25 feet east
therefrom
All
b. Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
westerly curbline of Main Street which
would terminate at a point 35 feet east
from the easterly curbline of Park Hall
Place
All
Heck Street Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
northerly curbline of Lake Avenue and
extending to a point 65 feet north
therefrom
All
Lake Avenue a. Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
easterly curbline of Heck Street and
extending to a point 65 feet east
therefrom
All
b. Beginning at a point 35 feet from the
easterly curbline of Kingsley Street and
extending 50 feet east therefrom
All
Main Street East side-beginning at a point 35 feet from
the southerly curbline of Asbury Avenue
and extending to a point 35 feet south.
West side-beginning at a point 35 feet
north of the northerly curbline of Second
Avenue and extending to a point 75 feet
north.
Press Plaza Beginning at a point 35 feet south from
the southerly curbline of Cookman Avenue
and extending to a point 25 feet south
therefrom
All
Note: Minimum length of taxi stand near intersection is twenty-five (25)
feet. Adding the sidewalk area of about ten (10) feet to the area where
parking is prohibited by State Law would make the starting point
approximately thirty-five (35) feet from the curbline. Other locations should
be at least thirty (30) feet for one (1) taxi and an additional twenty-five (25)
feet for each additional taxi.
No taxi stand may be established in any area where it is prohibited to stand
or park pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
§ 7-29 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-30
1:290
§ 7-30. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [2000 Code § 7-30; Ord. No.
2314 § 1; Ord. No. 2665]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
(Reserved)
§ 7-31. SPEED LIMITS. [2000 Code § 7-31]
Speed limits shall be established as follows. Regulatory and warning signs,
conforming to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, shall be erected and maintained to effect the
designated speed limit(s), as required by the Commissioner of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey and as specified and authorized
in writing from the Bureau of Traffic Engineering of the Department of
Transportation.
Name of Street Direction Speed Location
Memorial Drive Both 30 m.p.h. From Monroe Avenue to
Sixth Avenue
§ 7-32. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS. [2000 Code § 7-32]
A Mid-Block Crosswalk shall be established and maintained at the following
location.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-33. NO PASSING ZONES. [2000 Code § 7-33; Ord. No. 2571]
No Passing Zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Ridge Avenue Both Neptune Township-Asbury Park City
Corporate Line and Asbury Park City-
Ocean Township Corporate Line [Ord. No.
2571]
§ 7-34. through § 7-35. (RESERVED)
§ 7-36. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-36.1. Handicapped Parking on Streets. [2000 Code § 7-36.1;
Ord. No. 2013 § 1; Ord. No. 2292 § 1; Ord. No. 2315 § 1; Ord. No.
§ 7-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-36.1
1:291
2398; Ord. No. 2405; Ord. No. 2447; Ord. No. 2451 § 1; Ord. No.
2459 § 1; Ord. No. 2492; Ord. No. 2514; Ord. No. 2521; Ord. No.
2576; Ord. No. 2604; Ord. No. 2613; Ord. No. 2636; Ord. No. 2724;
Ord. No. 2725; Ord. No. 2746; Ord. No. 2747; Ord. No. 2838; Ord.
No. 2839; Ord. No. 2854; Ord. No. 2895; Ord. No. 2896; Ord. No.
2900; Ord. No. 2942; Ord. No. 2943; Ord. No. 2944; Ord. No. 2945;
Ord. No. 2963; Ord. No. 2984; Ord. No. 2995; Ord. No. 3832; Ord.
No. 3050; Ord. No. 3060; Ord. No. 3070; Ord. No. 3078; Ord. No.
3087; Ord. No. 3088; Ord. No. 2015-19; Ord. No. 2015-26; Ord. No.
2015-27; Ord. No. 2016-19; Ord. No. 2016-21; Ord. No. 2016-29;
Ord. No. 2016-38; Ord. No. 2017-7; Ord. No. 2017-14; Ord. No.
2017-17; Ord. No. 2017-32; Ord. No. 2017-42; Ord. No. 2017-45;
Ord. No. 2018-3; Ord. No. 2018-33; amended 11-8-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-46]
a. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking places. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards or plates or placards by the New Jersey Motor
Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these places.
b. That on or before January 15th of every year (or the first weekday
thereafter), the applicant shall provide proof to the City of Asbury Park
Police Department that the handicapped parking space is still needed at
the subject property. A failure to do so may result in the City's
termination of the designated handicapped parking space.
c. The City reserves the right to terminate the designation of a
handicapped parking space at the City's discretion.
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Asbury Avenue
[Ord. No. 3021]
South Beginning at a point located 239
feet west of the southwest corner of
Asbury Avenue and Comstock Street
and extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
Atkins Avenue a. West Beginning at a point 59 feet from
the northwest corner of Bangs
Avenue and Atkins Avenue and
extending 25 feet northward
therefrom
Atkins Avenue
[Ord. No. 2854]
b. East Beginning at a point located five (5)
feet north of the church driveway
(south side of church) in the 100
block of Atkins Avenue (east side of
street) and continuing north for
twenty-five (25) feet
§ 7-36.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-36.1
1:292
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Atkins Avenue
[Ord. No. 3087]
c. West Beginning at a point located 76 feet
north of the northwest corner of
Springwood Avenue and Atkins
Avenue and extending 20 feet on
center therefrom
Bangs Avenue a. South Beginning at a point 33 feet from
the southeast corner of Bangs
Avenue and Emory Street, then
continuing easterly for 24 feet along
Bangs Avenue
Bangs Avenue b. North Beginning at a point 107 feet west
from the northwest corner of Bangs
Avenue and Main Street and
extending 20 feet westerly
therefrom
Bangs Avenue
[Ord. No. 2984]
c. South Beginning at a point 25 feet from
the southwest corner of Emory
Street and Bangs Avenue,
proceeding westerly and extending
22 feet westerly
Bangs Avenue
[Ord. No. 2984]
d. North Beginning at a point 25 feet from
the northwest corner of Bond Street
and Bangs Avenue, proceeding
westerly and extending 22 feet
westerly
Bangs Avenue
[Ord. No. 2978]
e. North Beginning at a point located 80 feet
west of the northwest corner of
Bangs Avenue and DeWitt Avenue
and extending 20 feet westerly
therefrom
Bangs Avenue
[Ord. No. 3044]
f. North Beginning at a point located 147
feet east of the northeast corner of
Bangs Avenue and Borden Avenue
and extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
Bergh Street [Ord.
No. 3008]
East Beginning at a point located 50 feet
south of the southeast corner of
Second Avenue and Bergh Street
and extending 20 feet southerly on
center therefrom
§ 7-36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-36.1
1:293
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Comstock Street East Beginning at a point 153 feet from
the northeast corner of Sunset
Avenue and Comstock Street,
proceeding northbound and
extending 30 feet north
Cookman Avenue a. South Beginning at a point 265 feet west
from the southwest corner of
Cookman Avenue and Grand Avenue
and extending 20 feet westerly
therefrom
Cookman Avenue b. South Beginning at a point 25 feet east
from the southeast corner of
Cookman Avenue and Langford
Street and extending 50 feet
easterly therefrom
Cookman Avenue
[Ord. No. 2984]
c. South Beginning at a point 68 feet from
the southwest corner of Bond Street
and Cookman Avenue, proceeding
westerly and extending 22 feet
westerly
Cookman Avenue
[Ord. No. 2984]
d. North Beginning at a point 47 feet from
the southwest corner of Mattison
Avenue and Cookman Avenue,
proceeding westerly and extending
22 feet westerly
Deal Lake Drive
[Ord. No.
2016-38]
South 4 Deal Lake Court, which
handicapped parking space shall
begin 105 feet East of the Southeast
corner of Deal Lake Drive and Park
Avenue and extend 20 feet East.
Space should be 20 feet on center
and located on the South side of
Deal Lake Drive
Deal Lake Drive
[Ord. No. 2018-3]
South 400 Deal Lake Drive, in the City, on
the Asbury Park City Tax Map,
which handicapped parking space
shall begin 25 feet south of the
southwest corner of Park Avenue
and Deal Lake Drive and extending
20 feet on center therefrom
§ 7-36.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-36.1
1:294
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Dewitt Avenue
[Added
12-12-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-52]
East 18 Dewitt Avenue, in the City, on the
Asbury Park City Tax Map, which
handicapped parking space shall
begin at a point located five feet
south of the driveway for 18 Dewitt
Avenue and extending 20 feet on
center therefrom in a northern
direction as to line up with the
center curb way in front of 20
Dewitt Avenue
DeWitt Avenue a. East Beginning at a point 47 feet
northerly from the Neptune
Township borderline and extending
23 feet northerly therefrom
DeWitt Avenue
[Ord. No. 3832]
b. West Beginning at a point located 30 feet
from southwest corner of the
driveway of 27 DeWitt Avenue and
extending in a southerly direction
25 feet therefrom
DeWitt Avenue
[Ord. No. 3023]
c. West Beginning at a point located 148
feet south of the southwest corner
of DeWitt Avenue and Springwood
Avenue and extending 20 feet on
center therefrom
DeWitt Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-07]
West 215 DeWitt Avenue, in the City,
which is also known and designated
as Block 1006, Lot 10, on the
Asbury Park City Tax Map, which
handicapped parking space shall
begin 145 feet south of the
southwest corner of Dewitt Avenue
and Mattison Avenue, extending
north 20 feet
Drury Lane a. West Beginning at a point 145 feet from
the northwest corner of Sunset
Avenue and Drury Lane proceeding
northbound and extending 18 feet
easterly
Drury Lane b. West Beginning at a point 184 feet from
the northwest corner of Sunset
Avenue and Drury Lane proceeding
northbound and extending 18 feet
easterly
§ 7-36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-36.1
1:295
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Elizabeth Avenue
[Ord. No. 3024]
a. East Beginning at a point located 35 feet
north of the northeast corner of
Elizabeth Avenue and McKinley
Place and extending 20 feet on
center therefrom
Elizabeth Avenue
[Ord. No. 3024]
b. East Beginning at a point located 57 feet
north of the northeast corner of
Elizabeth Avenue and McKinley
Place and extending 20 feet on
center therefrom
Fifth Avenue [Ord.
No. 3060]
South Beginning at a point located 123
feet east of the southeast corner of
Main Street and Fifth Avenue and
extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
Fifth Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-07]
North Beginning at a point located 165
feet east of the northeast corner of
Fifth Avenue and Pine Street and
extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
First Avenue a. South Beginning at a point 100 feet east
from the southeast corner of
Comstock Street and First Avenue
and extending 30 feet easterly
therefrom
First Avenue b. South Beginning at a point 25 feet west
from the southwest corner of First
Avenue and Grand Avenue and
extending 25 feet westerly
therefrom
First Avenue [Ord.
No. 3020]
c. North Beginning at a point located 148
feet west of the northwest corner of
First Avenue and Pine Street and
extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
First Avenue [Ord.
No. 3078]
d. South Beginning at a point located 94 feet
west of the southwest corner of
First Avenue and Comstock Street
and extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
§ 7-36.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-36.1
1:296
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Fourth Avenue
[Ord. No. 2896]
a. North Beginning at a point located 61 feet
from the northwest corner of Fourth
Avenue and Dunlewy Street and
extending in a westerly direction for
30 feet therefrom
Fourth Avenue
[Ord. No. 2896]
b. North Beginning at a point 95 feet from
the northwest corner of Fourth
Avenue and Dunlewy Street and
extending in a westerly direction for
30 feet therefrom
Grand Avenue West Beginning at a point located 25 feet
south of the southwest corner of
Grand Avenue and Asbury Avenue
and extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
Grand Avenue
[Ord. No.
2016-29;
repealed
12-12-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-51]
Grand Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
West Beginning at a point located 25 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Monroe Avenue and extending 22
feet south therefrom
Heck Street a. West Beginning at a point 200 feet from
the southwest corner of Fourth
Avenue and Heck Street and
extending 25 feet southward
therefrom
Heck Street [Ord.
No. 3029]
b. East Beginning at a point located 143
feet south of the southeast corner of
Heck Street and Second Avenue and
extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
Kingsley Street
[Ord. No.
2015-27]
North Beginning at a point located 164
feet south of Kingsley Street's
intersection with Deal Lake Drive
and extending 20 feet on center
therefrom, which space shall
replace the City's current parking
stall #1421.
§ 7-36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-36.1
1:297
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Lake Avenue [Ord.
No. 2984]
a. North Beginning at a point 190 feet from
the northwest corner of Press Plaza
and Lake Avenue, proceeding
westerly and extending 22 feet
westerly
Lake Avenue [Ord.
No. 2984]
b. North Beginning at a point 215 feet from
the northwest corner of Grand
Avenue and Lake Avenue,
proceeding westerly and extending
22 feet westerly
Lake Avenue [Ord.
No. 2984]
c. North Beginning at a point 25 feet from
the northeast corner of Bond Street
and Lake Avenue, proceeding
easterly and extending 22 feet
easterly
Lake Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-19]
d. North Beginning at a point located 164
feet east of Press Plaza, positioned
on the westbound side of Lake
Avenue, and extending 20 feet on
center therefrom
Langford Street
[Ord. No. 2724]
West Beginning at a point 137 feet in the
northerly direction from the
northwest corner of Third Avenue
and Langford Street and extending
north 25 feet therefrom
Main Street [Ord.
No. 2839]
East Beginning at a point located 25 feet
from the northeast corner of the 700
block of Cookman Avenue and
extending in a northerly direction
25 feet therefrom
Mattison Avenue
[Ord. No. 2944]
a. East Beginning at a point located 100
feet from the northeast corner of
Mattison Avenue and Langford
Street extending in an easterly
direction 20 feet therefrom on
center
Mattison Avenue
[Ord. No. 2984]
b. North Beginning at a point 25 feet from
the northwest corner of Bond Street
and Mattison Avenue, proceeding
westerly and extending 22 feet
westerly
§ 7-36.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-36.1
1:298
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Mattison Avenue
[Ord. No. 2984]
c. North Beginning at a point 78 feet from
the northwest corner of Emory
Street and Mattison Avenue,
proceeding westerly and extending
22 feet westerly
Monroe Avenue a. South Beginning at a point 79 feet from
the southwest corner of Monroe
Avenue and Emory Street and
extending 35 feet westerly
Monroe Avenue
[Ord. No. 2725]
b. South Beginning at a point located 36 feet
in the westerly direction from the
southwest corner of Winn Avenue
and Monroe Avenue and extending
west 25 feet therefrom
Monroe Avenue
[Ord. No. 2943]
c. West Beginning at a point located 174
feet west of the southwest corner of
Monroe Avenue and Grand Avenue
extending in a westerly direction 20
feet on center therefrom
Monroe Avenue d. South Beginning at a point located 37 feet
east of the sidewalk handicapped
entrance ramp located at Monroe
Avenue and Pine Street and
extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
Monroe Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
e. North Beginning at a point located 90 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Heck Street and extending west 22
feet therefrom
Ocean Avenue a. East Beginning at a point 72 feet north
from the northeast corner of Sunset
Avenue and Ocean Avenue and
extending 20 feet northerly
therefrom
Ocean Avenue b. East Beginning at a point 50 feet south
from the southeast corner of
Seventh Avenue and Ocean Avenue
and extending 20 feet southerly
therefrom
Ocean Avenue c. East Beginning at a point 35 feet from
the northeast crosswalk of First
Avenue and Ocean Avenue and
extending 22 feet north therefrom
§ 7-36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-36.1
1:299
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Ocean Avenue d. East Beginning at a point 35 feet from
the northeast crosswalk of Second
Avenue and Ocean Avenue and
extending 22 feet north therefrom
Ocean Avenue e. East Beginning at a point 29 feet from
the northeast crosswalk of Fourth
Avenue and Ocean Avenue and
extending 44 feet north therefrom
Ocean Avenue f. East Beginning at a point 90 feet from
the northeast crosswalk of Fifth
Avenue and Ocean Avenue and
extending 22 feet north therefrom
Ocean Avenue g. East Beginning at a point 82 feet from
the southeast crosswalk of Sunset
Avenue and Ocean Avenue and
extending 22 feet south therefrom
Park Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-42]
a. West Beginning at a point located 30 feet
south of the southwest corner of
Deal Lake Drive and Park Avenue
and extending 20 feet south
therefrom
b. West Beginning at a point located 25 feet
south of the southwest corner of
Eighth Avenue and Park Avenue and
extending 20 feet south therefrom
c. West Beginning at a point located 25 feet
south of the southwest corner of
Sixth Avenue and Park Avenue and
extending 20 feet south therefrom
d. East Beginning at a point located 25 feet
north of the northeast corner of
Sunset Avenue and Park Avenue and
extending 20 feet north therefrom
Press Plaza [Ord.
No. 2984]
West Beginning at a point 50 feet from
the northwest corner of Press Plaza
and Lake Avenue, proceeding
northerly and extending 22 feet
northerly
§ 7-36.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-36.1
1:300
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Ridge Avenue
[Ord. No. 2900]
North Beginning at a point located 116
feet south of the southwest corner
of Ridge Avenue and Stratford
Street and extending in a southerly
direction for 30 feet on the south
side of the 100 block
Second Avenue a. North Beginning at a point 115 feet east
from the northwest corner of
Comstock Street and Second
Avenue and extending 30 feet
easterly therefrom
Second Avenue b. South Starting at a point 63 feet from the
southwest center of Second Avenue
and Comstock Street and extending
25 feet westerly therefrom
Sewall Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-32]
South 1034 1/2 Sewall Avenue, in the City,
on the Asbury Park City Tax Map,
which handicapped parking space
shall begin 60 feet east of the
southeast corner of Sewall and
Comstock. Space should be 20 feet
on center at the location
Sixth Avenue a. North Beginning at a point 365 feet from
the western crosswalk line of Sixth
Avenue and Memorial Drive,
proceeding westerly and extending
10 feet west
Sixth Avenue b. North Beginning at a point 375 feet from
the western crosswalk line of Sixth
Avenue and Memorial Drive,
proceeding westerly and extending
10 feet west
Sixth Avenue [Ord.
No. 2963]
c. North Beginning at a point located 188
feet east of the northeast corner of
Park Avenue and Sixth Avenue and
extending in an easterly direction
20 feet therefrom
Sixth Avenue [Ord.
No. 3025]
d. South Beginning at a point located 124
feet west of the southwest corner of
Sixth Avenue and Park Avenue and
extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
§ 7-36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-36.1
1:301
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Springwood
Avenue [Ord. No.
2016-19]
North 1215 Springwood Avenue, Block
1103, Lot 48, which handicapped
parking space shall begin 110 feet
east of the northeast corner of
Springwood Avenue and Borden
Avenue and extend 20 feet east and
the space should be 20 feet on
center and located on the north side
of Springwood Avenue
Summerfield
Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-14]
South Beginning at a point located 25 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Bond Street and extending 22 feet
westerly therefrom
Summerfield
Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-14]
South Beginning at a point located 25 feet
east of the easterly curbline of Bond
Street and extending 20 feet
easterly therefrom
Summerfield
Avenue [Ord. No.
2017-14]
South Beginning at a point located 25 feet
east of the westerly curbline of
Grand Avenue and extending 22 feet
westerly therefrom
Sunset Avenue North Beginning at a point 220 feet from
the northeast corner of Sunset
Avenue and Comstock Street,
proceeding easterly and extending
25 feet easterly
Sunset Avenue
[Added
11-8-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-46]
South 912 Sunset Avenue, in the City, on
the Asbury Park City Tax Map,
which handicapped parking space
shall begin at a point located three
feet west of the driveway to 914
Sunset Avenue and extending 20
feet east on center therefrom
Third Avenue
[Repealed
12-12-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-51]
a.
(Reserved)
Third Avenue b. South Beginning at a point 130 feet west
from the southwest corner of Third
Avenue and Langford Street and
extending 30 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 7-36.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-36.1
1:302
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Third Avenue c. South Beginning at a point 111 feet from
the southwest corner of Third
Avenue and Langford Street,
extending 60 feet westerly
therefrom
Third Avenue d. South Beginning at a point 180 feet from
the southwest corner of Comstock
Street and Third Avenue and
extending 25 feet westerly
Third Avenue e. South Beginning at a point 84 feet from
the southwest corner of Third
Avenue and Langford Street and
extending 85 feet westerly
therefrom
Third Avenue f. North Beginning at a point located 91 feet
north of the northeast corner of
Third Avenue and Emory Street
extending in a northeasterly
direction 20 feet on center
therefrom [Ord. No. 2942]
Third Avenue
[Ord. No.
2016-21]
West 1310 Third Avenue, Block 1802, Lot
23, which handicapped parking
space shall begin 277 feet west of
the southwest corner of Third
Avenue and New Street and extend
20 feet west; space should be 20
feet on center and located on the
south side of Third Avenue
Third Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-17]
South 302 Third Avenue, in the City, on the
Asbury Park City Tax Map, which
handicapped parking space shall
begin 76 feet West of the Southwest
corner of Third Avenue and Bergh
Street and extend 20 feet West.
Space should be 20 feet on center
and located on the South side of
Third Avenue
Third Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-45]
West 1021 Third Avenue, in the City, on
the Asbury Park City Tax Map,
which handicapped parking space
shall begin 269 feet west of the
north/west corner of Third and
Langford Street and extending 20
feet on center therefrom
§ 7-36.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-36.1
1:303
§ 7-36.2. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and
Board of Education Property. [2000 Code § 7-36.2]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 the following offstreet
parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
Handicapped Parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards issued by the
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by
the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-36.3. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public and to Which the Public is Invited (Retail Business). [2000
Code § 7-36.3]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking spaces are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, or
a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
In any space on public or private property appropriately marked for vehicles
for the physically handicapped pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq., or any other applicable law unless the vehicle is
authorized by law to be parked therein and a handicapped person is either
the driver or a passenger in that vehicle. State, County, or municipal law
enforcement officers or parking enforcement officers shall enforce the
parking restrictions on spaces appropriately marked for vehicles for the
physically handicapped on both public and private property.
7-36 Handicapped Parking
Name of Street Side Location
Third Avenue
[Ord. No.
2018-33]
East 1509 Third Avenue, in the City, on
the Asbury Park City Tax Map,
which handicapped parking space
shall begin at a point located 70 feet
east of the northeast corner of Third
Avenue and Dunlewy Street and
extending 20 feet on center
therefrom
§ 7-36.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-36.3
1:304
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
§ 7-36.4. Handicapped Parking on All Other Private Property. [2000
Code § 7-36.4]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1; the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, or
a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location*
(Reserved)
*Editor's Note: All sketches are on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 7-36.5. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[2000 Code § 7-36.5]
The owners of the premises referred to in subsections 7-36.3 and 7-36.4
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the City of Asbury Park. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
§ 7-36.6. Penalty for Violations. [2000 Code § 7-36.6]
Pursuant to P.L. 1989, C. 201 (N.J.S.A. 39:4-1380), the penalties for
violations of this Section 7-35 must be one hundred ($100) dollars for a first
offense and for a subsequent offense must be a fine of at least one hundred
($100) dollars and up to ninety (90) days community service on such terms
and such form as the Court shall deem appropriate, or any combination
thereof.
§ 7-37. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY PER N.J.S.A.
39:5A-1.
§ 7-36.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.1
1:305
§ 7-37.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [2000 Code
§ 7-37.1; Ord. No. 2486; Ord. No. 2558; Ord. No. 2631; Ord. No.
2841; Ord. No. 2874; Ord. No. 2906; Ord. No. 2936; Ord. No. 2982;
Ord. No. 2015-54]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
§ 7-37.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Private Property Open to the Public and to Which the Public Is
Invited (Retail Business). [2000 Code § 7-37.2; Ord. No. 2323]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, on the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the types of regulations
indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the
following regulations.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
a. Municipal Complex (City Hall) Parking Lot. The following spaces are
located within the municipal complex (City Hall) parking lot located at
One Municipal Plaza (Block 2401, Lot 1), and shall be reserved during
the hours of 8:30 a.m. through 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, as
indicated below.
Space #4099 - Reserved for City Manager
Space #4098 - Reserved for Mayor
Space #4097 - Reserved for Deputy Mayor
Space #4090 - Reserved for Councilperson
Space #4089 - Reserved for Councilperson
Space #4088 - Reserved for Councilperson
Space #4091 - Reserved Parking Space
b. Locations and regulations for other municipal and Board of Education
properties may be found on file in the City Offices.
§ 7-37.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-37.3
1:306
§ 7-37.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
All Other Private Property. [2000 Code § 7-37.3]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 the regulations of
Subtitle 1 of the Title 39 are hereby made applicable to the properties listed
below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
a. MonOc Credit Union.
1. Consent Filed. The MonOc Credit Union of Asbury Park has filed a
written consent with the City that the provisions of Subtitle One,
Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable
to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and parking lots at
MonOc Credit Union, Monroe Avenue and Bond Street.
The following regulations shall be enforceable:
2. Parking. All vehicles must park only in designated areas between
the lines provided.
3. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve (12) feet wide as
shown on the site plan and signed with R-78 (Reserved Parking sign
and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the Handicapped Parking permits by the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
4. Stop Intersection. The following intersections are hereby
designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein:
Intersection Stop Signs On
Main Drive and Monroe Avenue Main Drive
North Drive and Bond Street North Drive
Teller Drive and Monroe Avenue Teller Drive
5. Speed Limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
Road m.p.h. Limits
Main Drive 15 Entire length
North Drive 15 Entire length
Teller Drive 15 Entire length
§ 7-37.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37.3
1:307
§ 7-37.4. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[2000 Code § 7-37.4]
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner
shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such
signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to
the City of Asbury Park. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
§ 7-37.5. Violations of Provisions of Section 7-37. [New]
For a violation of the provision of this Section 7-37 or any supplement
thereto for which no specific penalty is provided, the offender shall be liable
to a penalty of not more than fifty ($50) dollars or imprisonment for a term
(c) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to affect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
6. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or to present in any
way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the
vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
7. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the direction
indicated. Parking on these streets will be permitted on the sides
indicated below:
Name of
Street DirectionLimits
Parking
Permitted
Teller Drive South North Drive to
Monroe Avenue
None
8. Installation of Signs. All signs, posts, bolts, or other necessary
materials shall be installed and paid for by the applicant. Work
shall be checked by the Police Department to ensure installations
meet State and Federal Specifications, and all signing shall
conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
9. Penalty for Violation. Unless another penalty is expressly provided
by New Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
section or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not
less than one hundred ($100) dollars for the first offense;
subsequent offense, not less than one hundred ($100) dollars and
up to ninety (90) days community service, or both.
§ 7-37.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-37.5
1:308
not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both; except that for a violation of N.J.S.A.
39:4-80 et seq., N.J.S.A. 39:4-105 et seq., N.J.S.A. 39:123 et seq. or N.J.S.A.
39:4-140 et seq., the offender shall be liable to a penalty of not less than
fifty ($50) dollars or more than two hundred ($200) dollars or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding fifteen (15) days, or both.
§ 7-38. through § 7-39. (RESERVED)
§ 7-40. PRIVATE PARKING LOTS.
§ 7-40.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 7-40.1]
As used in this section:
PARKING LOT — shall mean, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, any place, lot,
parcel, yard, or garage used in whole or in part for storing or parking motor
vehicles, where a storage or parking fee is charged therefor, and which is
open to the general public. The term excludes residential, neighborhood
parking lots restricted to residents thereof without charge, or on a monthly
rental basis, where such premises are not held out for use by the general
public and are not marked or advertised as a public parking lot.
§ 7-40.2. License. [2000 Code § 7-40.2]
§ 7-40.3. Application for License. [2000 Code § 7-40.3]
a. No person shall operate or maintain a parking lot without obtaining a
license from the City. Application for the license and renewal shall be
made to the City Clerk.
b. No license shall be issued until all the requirements of this section and
the matters set forth, in the application and shown on the plan filed in
connection therewith have been complied with and approved by the
City Clerk and the Director of Public Safety.
c. No license shall be granted for any premises unless the use for
automobile parking is permitted on the premises under the Zoning
Regulations of the City or under a variance granted under the Zoning
Regulations.
d. The license for a parking lot expires annually on December 31.
e. The conditions set forth in the application upon which the license is
issued shall be maintained by the licensee continuously during the
conduct of the business thereunder.
f. In the event of the sale or transfer to new ownership of the parking
premises, the new owner shall make application to the City Clerk for
transfer in manner provided herein. Such application and transfer shall
be subject to all the conditions of a new application.
§ 7-37.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-40.3
1:309
§ 7-40.4. Insurance. [2000 Code § 7-40.4]
Prior to the issuance of a license for a parking lot, the applicant shall
file a policy or certificate of public liability insurance in the minimum
of ten thousand ($10,000) dollars for each person, and twenty thousand
($20,000) dollars for two (2) or more, and five thousand ($5,000) dollars
a. Application for a parking lot license shall be made by the person
intending to operate the parking lot, upon a form furnished by the City
Clerk. Applicant shall file with the application a plat or drawing of the
parking lot, approved by the City Engineer, showing the location, size,
capacity and, subject to City approval, the location and size of
driveways, kind of floors or ground surface, location, size, and
construction of attendant's shelter, wall or railing surrounding the lot,
location and type of lighting units and signs. It shall not be necessary to
furnish a supplementary plat or drawing with application for renewal
unless changes have been made that do not appear upon the original
plat.
b. The application shall contain the following information:
1. The name under which, and place where, the parking lot is to be
operated;
2. Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation;
if an individual, the name and business and residence address of
the applicant; if a partnership, the name and business and bona
fide residence address of each partner; if a corporation, the name,
date, and State under which such corporation was organized, and
the name and business address of the officers and stockholders;
3. Whether the premises are owned or leased by the applicant, and, if
leased, the name and business address of the owner;
4. The number of motor vehicles which may, at one time, be stored
upon the premises;
5. The hours during which the motor vehicles may be stored;
6. The hours during which parking attendants will be on duty on the
lot;
7. A complete schedule of rates to be charged for storing motor
vehicles; and
8. Such other information as the City Clerk may require.
c. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant, if an
individual or partnership, or by an authorized agent, or properly
constituted officers if a corporation.
d. Before a license is issued, a Certificate of Occupancy shall be obtained
from the Building Subcode Official.
§ 7-40.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-40.4
1:310
property damage, by a company authorized to do business in New Jersey.
Any owner desiring to carry his/her own public liability insurance may make
application to the Mayor and Council, showing his/her financial ability to
do so, and, if the Mayor and Council is satisfied of the applicant's financial
ability, they may exempt the applicant from the requirement of furnishing
the policy of insurance. A determination of such financial responsibility shall
be made upon the application for renewal. The Mayor and Council may at
any time during the period for which such exemption is granted review such
action and make a new determination as to the insurance requirements.
§ 7-40.5. License Fees. [2000 Code § 7-40.5]
The annual license fee for the operation of a parking lot shall be for a lot,
twenty-five (25) car capacity or less, thirty-five ($35) dollars; over twentyfive
(25) car capacity and not more than seventy-five (75) car capacity, sixtyfive
($65) dollars; over seventy-five (75) car capacity, one hundred forty
($140) dollars; vehicle garage, enclosed, less than seventy-five (75) cars,
sixty-five ($65) dollars; vehicle garage, enclosed, more than seventy-five
(75) cars, one hundred forty ($140) dollars.
§ 7-40.6. Revocation of License. [2000 Code § 7-40.6]
a. The Mayor and Council, subject to right of appeal, may after a hearing,
revoke or suspend a parking lot license upon proof that the licensee,
his/her agent or employee:
1. Has made any false or materially incorrect statements in his/her
application; or
2. Has made any charge for storing any motor vehicle in a parking lot
other than set forth in his/her license application; or
3. Has violated or permitted or countenanced the violation of any
provision of this chapter; or
4. Has violated or permitted or countenanced the violation of any
provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft, larceny or
conversion of a motor vehicle, or the operation of a motor vehicle
without the owner's consent, whether or not such license or other
person has been convicted of such an offense; or
5. Fails to keep an attendant on duty during the time specified on his/
her application; or
6. Fails to keep the lot adequately lighted at all times that cars are
stored thereon, during the hours that the lot shall be kept open,
according to the application for a license.
b. The licensee is responsible for the proper conduct of his/her agents,
and employees in the conduct of the business, and for any violation of
the provisions of this section by them.
§ 7-40.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-40.6
1:311
§ 7-40.7. Signs. [2000 Code § 7-40.7]
§ 7-40.8. Barriers. [2000 Code § 7-40.8]
A wood or concrete bumper six (6) inches high and six (6) inches in width,
suitably anchored into the earth, shall be provided along the lot lines of each
parking lot. The bumper shall be placed three (3) feet from the lot lines.
§ 7-40.9. Ground Maintenance. [2000 Code § 7-40.9]
§ 7-40.10. Shelters. [2000 Code § 7-40.10]
Not more than one (1) building for the use of attendants for the operation of
each parking lot is permitted. Such building shall be durable construction
and the plans shall be approved by the Director of Public Works. On parking
lots facing two (2) or more streets, one (1) additional building may be
maintained.
§ 7-40.11. Lighting. [2000 Code § 7-40.11]
The operator of a parking lot shall place shielded floodlights or other type
of approved lighting in such location, and to such an extent as will permit
c. No license shall be revoked or suspended for any of the above listed
reasons until the licensee has been notified in writing of the charges
against him/her. The notice shall be given by registered mail to the
licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall state
the time and place of the hearing.
a. The operator of a parking lot shall maintain in good condition at each
entrance to his/her parking lot a sign showing the name of the licensee,
the hours of the day or night during which such place is open for storing
motor vehicles, the rates charged, and the closing hour of the station.
Where more than one (1) rate is charged for parking, the figures for
each rate shall be of the same size and dimension, and such figures
shall measure not less than three (3) inches in height.
b. Signs giving information as to the owner, rates, and operation of the lot
shall be erected on private property only at points of ingress or on
shelter buildings and not on enclosures. They shall be of sheet metal or
other suitable material and shall be displayed at a height of not less
than four (4) feet and not more than twelve (12) feet above street level.
No sign shall be erected in such manner as to obstruct the vision of
traffic. The sign shall be readily visible within a reasonable distance.
a. The operator of a parking lot shall keep the sidewalks surrounding the
parking lot free from dirt, ice, sleet and snow, and shall keep the
sidewalks in safe condition for the travel of pedestrians.
b. A parking lot shall be kept free from dust so that it does not become a
nuisance to adjacent property owners or others.
§ 7-40.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-40.11
1:312
owners of cars to have safe, lighted access to all portions of the lot during
the hours of darkness. A certificate approving the lighting, installation, and
service shall be obtained from the Director of Public Works. The operator of
any parking lot which does not remain open after 4:00 p.m. need not comply
with this subsection.
§ 7-40.12. Entrances and Exits. [2000 Code § 7-40.12]
Each parking lot, as the City Engineer shall determine convenient for the
public safety, shall have one (1) or more entrances and exits over the public
sidewalks which may or may not be combined. Driveways shall not exceed
eighteen (18) feet in width at the property line, and shall be at least twentyfive
(25) feet from the curbline of any intersection street. All curbs shall be
lowered to street level at driveway entrances.
§ 7-40.13. Fire Equipment. [2000 Code § 7-40.13]
A parking lot operated in conjunction with a garage or hotel shall be
equipped with proper fire extinguishing apparatus, subject to the approval
of the Fire Department, and all motor vehicles therein shall be so stored
that they may be reached readily in case of fire or other emergency.
§ 7-40.14. Pavement. [2000 Code § 7-40.14]
All parking lots hereinafter constructed within the City shall conform to the
following specifications:
§ 7-40.15. Claim Checks. [2000 Code § 7-40.15]
At the time of accepting a motor vehicle for storage or parking in a parking
lot, every person parking his/her motor vehicle shall be furnished a
distinctive check which shall be numbered to correspond to a coupon placed
upon such motor vehicle. The check shall contain the name and address of
the parking lot.
a. The sub-grade shall be properly graded and sloped so as to provide
adequate stormwater drainage across the surface of the lot to the
street. Drainage structures shall be utilized where found necessary by
topographical conditions. After sub-grading has been completed, the
entire area shall be thoroughly compacted with the minimum ten (10)
ton roller in preparation for the base course material.
b. Upon completion of the sub-grading, the base course shall be installed
consisting of four (4) inches of Type 2 Road Gravel or two (2) inches
compacted bituminous stabilized base.
c. The top course shall consist of one and one-half (1 1/2) inch thick,
compacted F.A.B.C. 1 bituminous concrete.
d. All materials and workmanship shall conform to New Jersey Highway
Department Standard Specifications for Road Bridge Construction,
latest edition.
§ 7-40.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-40.16
1:313
§ 7-40.16. Change of Rates. [2000 Code § 7-40.16]
The operator of a parking lot shall not make any charge for storage of a
motor vehicle in excess of that set forth in his/her application for a license
unless he/she has:
§ 7-40.17. Notification to Police. [2000 Code § 7-40.17]
§ 7-40.18. Pavement of Private Parking Lots. [2000 Code § 7-40.18]
Any place, lot, parcel, yard or garage used in whole or in part for the storing
or parking of three (3) or more motor vehicles, whether or not a storage or
parking fee is charged therefor, and whether or not it is open to the general
public shall be paved in accordance with § 7-40.14.
§ 7-41. METERED PARKING.
§ 7-41.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2982; Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No.
2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14]
The purpose of this section is to establish rates, schedules and policies in
the metered and time-limit parking areas specified herein, and to permit
the Asbury Park Parking Utility to establish procedures to be implemented
pursuant to these policies.
§ 7-41.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2982, Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No.
2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14]
As used in this section:
BANGS AVENUE PARKING GARAGE — shall mean the City-controlled 75
parking spots located within the Bangs Avenue Garage (located at 605
Bangs Avenue) that will be available to the public for monthly residential
permits on a first come first served basis, with Zone 4 residents who have
no off-street parking option(s) available to them having right of first refusal.
a. Notified the City Clerk in writing of the change at least forty-eight (48)
hours before the effective date of the change, and
b. Posted signs showing such increase in the same manner as set forth in §
7-40.7.
a. The operation of a parking lot shall, within twenty-four (24) hours,
giving necessary details, notify the Police Department of any claim
made by reason of any loss, theft, or conversion occurring upon the
premises.
b. The operator of a parking lot shall immediately notify the Police
Department, giving the necessary details, when any automobile
remains in his/her lot without explanation for a period longer than
twenty-four (24) hours.
§ 7-40.16 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.2
1:314
CBD — shall mean the Central Business District Redevelopment Area, as
designated and defined by the City.
CUSTOM CARD — shall mean a card that allows use for a certain period
of time, and a certain number of uses. The user can park for the maximum
parking duration (of up to 15 hours) for each use.
LPR (LICENSE PLATE RECOGNITION) — is an image-processing
technology used to identify vehicles by their license plates.
NON-PEAK SEASON — shall mean the time period from September 16th to
May 14th of each year.
PASS/PERMIT — shall mean prepaid parking via hang tags, stickers,
Personal Identification Numbers (PINS), and/or Prepaid cards (Smart cards,
Custom Cards and license plate recognition (LPR)).
PEAK SEASON — shall mean the time period from May 15th to September
15th of each year.
PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION NUMBER (PIN) — shall mean a unique
number that is purchased in bulk (minimum of 10), and can be utilized in
the same manner as a Custom card for single day or multi-day events.
SMART CARD — shall mean a prepaid parking card denoted by dollar value.
A Smart Card does not have a use restriction, and can be reloaded at a
machine.
WRA — shall mean the Waterfront Redevelopment Area, as previously
designated and defined by the City.
§ 7-41.3. On-Street Metered Parking Schedules; Rates and
Regulations.
a. On-Street Metered Parking.
The following regulations governing on-street metered parking,
parking rates, time limits, and permit parking as set forth in the On-
Street Metered Parking Schedule and the On-Street Metered Parking
Rate Schedule are hereby approved and adopted for use within the City.
[Ord. No. 2982; Ord. No. 2015-25; Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No.
2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14; Ord. No. 2017-42; Ord. No. 2018-18]
On-Street Metered Parking Schedule (Subsection 7-41.3a)
Street Name From To
Metered
Parking
Duration
Time
Limit
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Event
Passes
Allowed
Asbury Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Heck
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Bangs Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Cookman
Avenue
Main
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit No Yes — Zone
restricted
(10pm-10am)
Yes
§ 7-41.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.3
1:315
On-Street Metered Parking Schedule (Subsection 7-41.3a)
Street Name From To
Metered
Parking
Duration
Time
Limit
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Event
Passes
Allowed
Bond Street
[Ord. No.
2017-14;
amended
12-27-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-54]
Summerfield
Avenue
Asbury
Park City
Limits
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit No Yes — Zone
restricted
(10pm-10am)
Yes
Cookman Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Kingsley
Street
Main
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
(10pm-10am)
Yes
Deal Lake Drive
[Ord. No.
2017-14; Ord.
No. 2017-42]
Ocean
Avenue
Park
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit No Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Eighth Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Webb
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Emory Street
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Summerfield
Avenue
Lake
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit No Yes — Zone
restricted
(10pm-10am)
Yes
Fifth Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Grand
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes —
Zone
restricted
Yes — Zone
restricted
Yes
First Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Bergh
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Fourth Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Bergh
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Grand Avenue
[Amended
12-27-2018 by
Ord. No.
2018-54]
Lake
Avenue
Sewall
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes — Zone
restricted
Yes
Heck Street
[Ord. No.
2015-25 § 7;
Ord. No.
2017-14]
Sewall
Avenue
Cookman
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
§ 7-41.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.3
1:316
On-Street Metered Parking Schedule (Subsection 7-41.3a)
Street Name From To
Metered
Parking
Duration
Time
Limit
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Event
Passes
Allowed
Heck Street West
Side only [Ord.
No. 2015-25
§ 7; Ord. No.
2017-14]
Cookman
Avenue
Lake
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Kingsley Street
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Asbury
Avenue
Deal Lake
Drive
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Lake Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Wesley
Lake Drive
Bond
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Main Street
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Springwood
Avenue
Summerfield
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit No No Yes
Mattison Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Cookman
Avenue
Main
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit No Yes — Zone
restricted
(10pm-10am)
Yes
Monroe Avenue Grand
Avenue
Heck
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit No Yes — Zone
restricted
Yes
Ocean Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Asbury
Avenue
Deal Lake
Drive
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit
[Ord. No.
2015-55]
No No No
St. James Place
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Lake
Avenue
Cookman
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Second Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Bergh
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Seventh Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Webb
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Sewall Avenue Grand
Avenue
Heck
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit No Yes — Zone
restricted
Yes
Sixth Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Webb
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
§ 7-41.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.3
1:317
On-Street Metered Parking Schedule (Subsection 7-41.3a)
Street Name From To
Metered
Parking
Duration
Time
Limit
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Event
Passes
Allowed
Summerfield
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-14]
Grand
Avenue
Main
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes —
Zone
restricted
Yes — Zone
restricted
Yes
Sunset Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Grand
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes —
Zone
restricted
Yes — Zone
restricted
Yes
Third Avenue
[Ord. No.
2017-14]
Ocean
Avenue
Bergh
Street
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Webb Street
[Ord. No.
2018-18]
Sunset
Avenue
Deal Lake
Drive
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit No Yes — Zone
restricted
Yes
Wesley Lake
Drive [Ord. No.
2017-14]
Lake
Avenue
Cookman
Avenue
9:00 a.m.
— 2:00
a.m.
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
b. On-Street Metered Parking Rate Schedules Adopted.
The parking rate schedules for on-street metered parking as set forth
below are hereby approved and adopted for use within the City. [Ord.
No. 2982; Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No. 2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14;
amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-54]
On-Street Metered Parking Rate Schedules
(Subsection 7-41.3b)
Metered Parking Rates - Peak Season (May 15 - September 15) (Subsection
7-41.3b)
Days Times
Waterfront
(Kingsley Street,
Ocean Avenue,
and the streets
between)
Downtown
(Cookman
Avenue, Lake
Avenue and the
streets
between) All Other Areas
Monday-
Thursday
9:00 a.m. - 2:00
a.m.
$2/hour $1/hour $1/hour
Friday 9:00 a.m. - 5:00
p.m.
$2/hour $2/hour $2/hour
Friday 5:00 p.m. - 2:00
a.m.
$2/hour $2/hour $2/hour
§ 7-41.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.3
1:318
On-Street Metered Parking Rate Schedules
(Subsection 7-41.3b)
Metered Parking Rates - Peak Season (May 15 - September 15) (Subsection
7-41.3b)
Days Times
Waterfront
(Kingsley Street,
Ocean Avenue,
and the streets
between)
Downtown
(Cookman
Avenue, Lake
Avenue and the
streets
between) All Other Areas
Saturday,
Sunday
9:00 a.m. - 2:00
a.m.
$2/hour $2/hour $2/hour
Metered Parking Rates - Non-Peak Season (September 16— November 15, March 15
— May 14) (Subsection 7-41.3b)
Days Times
Waterfront
(Kingsley Street,
Ocean Avenue,
and all the
streets between)
Downtown
(Cookman
Avenue, Lake
Avenue and the
streets between) All Other Areas
Monday -
Thursday
9:00 a.m. -
2:00 a.m.
$1/hour $1/hour $0.50/hour
Friday 9:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
$1/hour $1/hour $0.50/hour
Friday 5:00 p.m. -
2:00 a.m.
$2/hour $2/hour $1/hour
Saturday-
Sunday
9:00 a.m. -
2:00 a.m.
$2/hour $2/hour $1/hour
Metered Parking Rates CBD - Winter Season (November 16th, March 14th)
(Subsection 7-41.3b)
Days Times
Waterfront
(Kingsley Street,
Ocean Avenue,
and all the
streets between)
Downtown
(Cookman
Avenue, Lake
Avenue and the
streets
between) All Other Areas
Monday - Thursday 9:00 a.m. -
2:00 a.m.
$0.50/hour $0.50/hour $0.25/hour
Friday 9:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m
$0.50/hour $0.50/hour $0.25/hour
Friday 5:00 p.m. -
2:00 a.m.
$2/hour $2/hour $1/hour
§ 7-41.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.3
1:319
§ 7-41.4. City Controlled Metered Parking Lots.
Metered Parking Rates CBD - Winter Season (November 16th, March 14th)
(Subsection 7-41.3b)
Days Times
Waterfront
(Kingsley Street,
Ocean Avenue,
and all the
streets between)
Downtown
(Cookman
Avenue, Lake
Avenue and the
streets
between) All Other Areas
Saturday - Sunday 9:00 a.m. —
2:00 a.m.
$2/hour $2/hour $1/hour
c. Daily Parking Rate. The City shall offer $15-per-day parking for
metered parking spaces in the Waterfront Zone. [Ord. No. 2982; Ord.
No. 2015-55 § 3c2; Ord. No. 2017-14; amended 12-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-54]
d. 15-minute Parking.
All zones shall have 15-minute parking rates which shall be one-quarter
of the 60-minute parking rate but never less than twenty-five cents per
hour. [Ord. No. 2017-14]
e. Handicapped Parking. For metered parking spaces that are used by
vehicles displaying a handicapped placard or license plate, in
compliance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-207, no penalty shall be imposed for the
parking overtime of persons and/or vehicles covered by N.J.S.A.
39:4-207, so long as the maximum time shall have been purchased, and
so long as said individual and/or vehicle shall have been parked in one
location for not more than 24 hours. Handicapped designated parking
spaces shall be free at all times for any motor vehicle which has
displayed thereon a placard or wheelchair symbol license plates. [Ord.
No. 2017-14; amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-54]
a. City Controlled Metered Parking Lot Schedules Adopted.
The City hereby establishes metered parking in the City controlled
parking lots referenced in the City Controlled Metered Parking Lot
Schedules. [Ord. No. 2015-11; Ord. No. 2015-25; Res. No.
2015-217; Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No. 2016-25; Ord. No.
2017-14]
§ 7-41.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.4
1:320
City Controlled Metered Parking Lot Schedule — Locations and Regulations
(Subsection 7-41.4a)
Name Location Time Limit
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Event
Passes
Allowed
Asbury Park
Municipal
Parking Lot
(City Hall)
One Municipal Plaza No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Bangs Avenue
Parking
Garage
605 Bangs Avenue No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Transportation
Center
Parking Lot
Parking lot situated
immediately to the
south of the Asbury
Park Transportation
Center
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
Memorial
Drive Parking
Parking lot situated
immediately to the
west of City Hall/
Transportation
Center (west side of
railroad tracks)
No Limit Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes - Zone
restricted
Yes
b. City Controlled Metered Parking Lot Rates. [Ord. No. 2982; Ord. No.
2015-55; Ord. No. 2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14; 12-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-54]
City Controlled Metered Parking Lot Rates (Subsection 7-41.4b)
Name Location
Metered Parking
Duration Meter Rate
Asbury Park
Municipal (City
Hall) Parking Lot
One Municipal Plaza Weekdays (M-F):
5:00 p.m. - 2:00
a.m. Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays: 9:00 a.m.
- 2:00 a.m.
Downtown Zone
Transportation
Center Parking
Lot
Parking lot situated
immediately to the south of
the Asbury Park
Transportation Center
Weekdays (M-F):
5:00 p.m. - 2:00
a.m. Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays: 9:00 a.m.
- 2:00 a.m.
All Other Areas
Zone
§ 7-41.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.4
1:321
§ 7-41.5. Residential and Employee Permit Schedules, Fees and
Regulations. [Ord. No. 2982; Ord. No. 2015-25; Ord. No. 2015-55;
Ord. No. 2016-02; Ord. No. 2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14; Ord. No.
2017-42; Ord. No. 2018-18; Ord. No. 2018-28; amended 12-27-2018
by Ord. No. 2018-54]
Residential and employee permits can be purchased by residents and
employees, respectively, for parking in the following designated zones:
Zone
Street
Name From To Side
Permit Parking
Duration
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Allowed
Zone 1 Deal Lake
Drive
Ocean
Avenue
Webb Street Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Deal Lake
Drive
Park
Avenue
Webb Street Both All Times
(Residential) —
North Side,
Residential-Only
— South Side
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Eighth
Avenue
Ocean
Avenue
Webb Street Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
City Controlled Metered Parking Lot Rates (Subsection 7-41.4b)
Name Location
Metered Parking
Duration Meter Rate
Memorial Drive
Parking Lot
Parking lot situated
immediately to the west of
City Hall/Transportation
Center (west side of railroad
tracks)
Weekdays (M-F):
5:00 p.m. - 2:00
a.m. Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays: 9:00 a.m.
- 2:00 a.m.
All Other Areas
Zone
Bangs Avenue
Parking Garage
605 Bangs Avenue Weekdays (M-F):
6:00 pm - 2:00 am
Saturdays,
Sundays and
Holidays: 9:00 am -
2:00 am
All Other Areas
Zone
§ 7-41.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.5
1:322
Zone
Street
Name From To Side
Permit Parking
Duration
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Allowed
Zone 1 Eighth
Avenue
Park
Avenue
Webb Street Both Residential —
Only North Side
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Kingsley
Street
Sixth
Avenue
Deal Lake
Drive
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. —2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Park Avenue Deal Lake
Drive
Eighth
Avenue
Both Residential-Only
— West Side
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Seventh
Avenue
Ocean
Avenue
Webb Street Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Seventh
Avenue
Park
Avenue
Webb Street Both Residential-Only
— North Side
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Sixth Avenue Ocean
Avenue
Webb Street Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Sixth Avenue Park
Avenue
Webb Street Both Residential Only
— North Side
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Sunset
Avenue
Grand
Avenue
Park Avenue Both All Times
(Residential)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Sunset
Avenue
Park
Avenue
Webb Street Both All Times
(Residential) -
South Side,
Residential-Only -
North Side
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes - Zone
restricted
Zone 1 Webb Street Sunset
Avenue
Deal Lake
Drive
Both All Times
(Residential)
No Yes — Zone
restricted
§ 7-41.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.5
1:323
Zone
Street
Name From To Side
Permit Parking
Duration
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Allowed
Zone 2 Asbury
Avenue
Ocean
Avenue
Heck Street Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 6:00 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day, 7
Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 2 Cookman
Avenue
Heck
Street
Asbury
Avenue
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 2 First Avenue Ocean
Avenue
Bergh
Street
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 6:00 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 2 Grand
Avenue
Monroe
Avenue
Sewall
Avenue
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 2 Heck Street Sewall
Avenue
Lake
Avenue
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 2 Lake Avenue Heck
Street
Wesley Lake
Drive
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
§ 7-41.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.5
1:324
Zone
Street
Name From To Side
Permit Parking
Duration
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Allowed
Zone 2 Monroe
Avenue
Grand
Avenue
Heck Street Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 2 Second
Avenue
Ocean
Avenue
Bergh
Street
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 6:00 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 2 Sewall
Avenue
Grand
Avenue
Heck Street Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 2 St. James
Place
Cookman
Avenue
Lake
Avenue
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 2 Wesley Lake
Drive
Cookman
Avenue
Lake
Avenue
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 3 Fifth Avenue Grand
Avenue
Heck Street Both All Times
(Residential) —
North Side,
Residential-Only
South Side
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 3 Fifth Avenue Heck
Street
Bergh
Street
Both All Times
(Residential)
No Yes — Zone
restricted
§ 7-41.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.5
1:325
Zone
Street
Name From To Side
Permit Parking
Duration
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Allowed
Zone 3 Fourth
Avenue
Ocean
Avenue
Bergh
Street
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes - Zone
restricted
Zone 3 Fourth
Avenue
Grand
Avenue
Bergh
Street
Both Residential-Only,
North Side
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 3 Third Avenue Ocean
Avenue
Bergh
Street
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes - Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Bond Street Bangs
Avenue
Lake
Avenue
Both 10:00
p.m. — 10:00 a.m.
(Residential)
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Bond Street Summerfield
Avenue
Bangs
Avenue
Both 10:00 p.m. —
10:00 a.m.
(Residential)
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Bond Street Lake
Avenue
Asbury Park
City Limits
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 6:00 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 City Hall Lot Cookman
Avenue
Bangs
Avenue
N/A Monday — Friday
5:00 p.m. — 2:00
a.m., Weekends/
Holidays 9:00 a.m.
— 2:00 a.m.
(Residential), 5:00
p.m. — 2:00 a.m.
(7-Day Employee)
7-Day Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Emory Street Lake
Avenue
Bangs
Avenue
Both 10:00 p.m. —
10:00 a.m.
(Residential)
No Yes — Zone
restricted
§ 7-41.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.5
1:326
Zone
Street
Name From To Side
Permit Parking
Duration
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Allowed
Zone 4 Emory Street Summerfield
Avenue
Bangs
Avenue
Both 10:00 p.m. —
10:00 a.m.
(Residential)
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Grand
Avenue
Cookman
Avenue
Lake
Avenue
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 5:30
p.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Lake Avenue Bond
Street
Heck Street Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 6:00 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Main Street Lake
Avenue
Summerfield
Avenue
Both 10:00 p.m. —
10:00 a.m.
(Residential)
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Mattison
Avenue
Main
Street
Cookman
Avenue
Both 10:00
p.m. — 10:00 a.m.
(Residential)
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Memorial
Drive Lot
Springwood
Avenue
Bangs
Avenue
N/A 9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (Residential),
9:00 a.m. — 5:30
p.m. (5-Day
Employee), 9:00
a.m. — 2:00 a.m.
(7-Day Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 4 Summerfield
Avenue
Main
Street
Grand
Avenue
Both All Times
(Residential), 9:00
a.m. — 5:30 p.m.
(5-Day Employee),
9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (7-Day
Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
§ 7-41.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.5
1:327
Zone
Street
Name From To Side
Permit Parking
Duration
Employee
Passes
Allowed
Residential
Permits
Allowed
Zone 4 Transportation
Center Lot
Cookman
Avenue
Springwood
Avenue
N/A 9:00 a.m. — 2:00
a.m. (Residential),
9:00 a.m. — 5:30
p.m. (5-Day
Employee), 9:00
a.m. — 2:00 a.m.
(7-Day Employee)
5-Day,
7-Day
Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 5 First Avenue Heck
Street
Bergh
Street
Both Residential-Only
(5:00 p.m. — 8:00
a.m.)— North Side
No Yes — Zone
restricted
Zone 5 Third Avenue Heck
Street
Bergh
Street
Both Residential-Only
(5:00 p.m. — 8:00
a.m.)— North Side
No Yes — Zone
restricted
All permits are valid from the time of purchase through the end of the
calendar year. The following fee schedule for residential and employee
permits is hereby approved and adopted for use within the various zones of
the City described above:
a. Fees for Residential Parking Permits.
1. Zones 1, 2, and 3: $90/year (Permit #1); $120/year (Permit #2);
$150/year (Permit #3)*; and $180/year (Permit #4).
2. Zone 4 —Bangs Avenue Parking Garage - $75/month.
3. Zone 4 - -$90/year (Permit #1); $120/year (Permit #2).
b. Fees for Employee Parking Permits:
1. 5-day permit: $120/year, or $40/quarter; and
2. 7-day permit: $180/year, or $60/quarter.
c. Residential Parking Permit Regulations.
Residential parking permits shall be limited to residents in Zones 1, 2,
3, and 4, as defined in section 7-41.5, that meet the proof of residency
requirements in section 7-41.5(d) and demonstrate lack of access to
available off-street parking (garage, driveway, surface lot, or other offstreet
parking), subject to City verification.
In circumstances where more than one resident driver with a vehicle
provides proof of residency for the same dwelling unit, residential
parking permits can be awarded to each additional resident driver with
vehicle, subject to City verification. A maximum of four permits per
dwelling unit may be issued for Zones 1, 2, and 3, assuming no offstreet
parking option is available to the dwelling unit. A maximum of
§ 7-41.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.5
1:328
two permits per dwelling unit may be issued for Zone 4, assuming no
off-street parking option is available to the dwelling unit.
Access to off-street parking is defined as the ability to purchase, rent or
otherwise utilize at least one off-street parking space associated with a
specific dwelling unit or when a dwelling unit has a driveway, garage,
or other off-street parking space. Dwelling units with access to at least
one available off-street parking space. A garage shall be considered as
one off-street parking space even if it is utilized as storage. Dwelling
units with access to at least one available off-street parking space shall
be handled in the following manner:
1. One vehicle must utilize the off-street parking option. If there is
only one resident driver in a dwelling unit and off-street parking is
available, the resident is not eligible for a residential parking
permit.
2. Zone 1, 2, and 3: In circumstances where more than one resident
driver with a vehicle provides proof of residency for the same
dwelling unit, residential parking permits can be awarded to each
additional resident driver with vehicle, subject to City verification.
A maximum of three permits per dwelling unit may be issued,
assuming that the first vehicle utilizes the off-street parking option.
3. Zone 4: In circumstances where more than one resident driver with
a vehicle provides proof of residency for the same dwelling unit, a
residential parking permit can be awarded to one additional
resident driver with vehicle, subject to City verification. A
maximum of one permit per dwelling unit may be issued, assuming
that the first vehicle utilizes the off-street parking option.
Each residential parking permit shall have no more than three
vehicle license plates registered to any one parking permit.
If there are extenuating circumstances, a resident may file a letter
of appeal for review by the City Manager, Transportation Manager
and/or Parking Committee.
d. Proof of Residency for Residential Parking Permits. Legal proof of
residence or employment shall be required for all permits. For
residential permits, applicants must provide the following documents
for all resident drivers required in order to obtain a permit:
1. Proof of residency: Applicants must provide at least one of the
following:
(a) Copy of the deed for the property showing the applicant's
name.
(b) Copy of the most recent mortgage payment for the property at
the same Asbury Park address in the applicant's name.
§ 7-41.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.5
1:329
(c) Copy of the most recent tax or sewer bill issued by the City of
Asbury Park for the same Asbury Park address in the
applicant's name.
(d) Copy of the original lease or rental agreement showing the
applicant's name as a current renter and valid New Jersey
driver's license with the same Asbury Park address on the
license or one utility (gas or electric) or cable/internet bill
issued in the past 90 days which indicates the applicant lives at
the same Asbury Park address or one item of first-class mail
received from any federal, state, or local government agency
within the past six months for same legal residential Asbury
Park address in the applicant's name.
(e) Valid New Jersey driver's license with the same Asbury Park
address on the license and one utility (gas or electric) or cable/
internet bill issued in the past 90 days which indicates the
applicant lives at the same Asbury Park address or one item of
first-class mail received from any federal, state, or local
government agency within the past six months for same legal
residential Asbury Park address in the applicant's name.
(f) Copy of the certificate of occupancy issued by the City of
Asbury Park listing the applicant as a resident at the same
legal residential Asbury Park address and valid New Jersey
driver's license with the same Asbury Park address on the
license or one utility (gas or electric) or cable/internet bill
issued in the past 90 days which indicates the applicant lives at
the same Asbury Park address or one item of first-class mail
received from any federal, state, or local government agency
within the past six months for same legal residential Asbury
Park address in the applicant's name.
(g) Two utility (gas or electric) or cable/internet bills issued in the
past 90 days which indicates the applicant lives at the same
Asbury Park address and a bank account in the applicant's
name for the same Asbury Park address.
(h) Marriage license indicating the applicant is married to a
resident of Asbury Park who has provided sufficient proof of
residency outlined herein and one utility (gas or electric) or
cable/internet bill issued in the past 90 days which indicates
the applicant lives at the same Asbury Park address or a bank
account in the applicant's name for the same Asbury Park
address.
(i) Under rare, extenuating circumstances, other appropriate
documentation sufficient for establishing residency of an
individual may be permitted (upon approval of the City
Manager or his designee).
2. Valid driver's license in the name of the applicant.
§ 7-41.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.5
1:330
e. Employee Parking Permit Regulations. Employee parking permits shall
be allowed in Zones 1, 2, 3, and 4 in designated areas and can be
purchased quarterly or annually. For employee permits, applicant must
provide the following documents:
1. Proof of employment:
(a) Copy of Asbury Park mercantile license or state/federal tax
forms with an Asbury Park address for the business (business
owners); or
(b) Current pay statements (two) from an Asbury Park employer or
a notarized statement from the Asbury Park employer
(employees).
Business owners and employees purchasing employee parking
permits on a monthly basis are required to provide updated
proof of employment at each renewal of the permit. A lease
agreement for rented office or retail space may substitute
proof of ownership of a commercial space for an Asbury Park
business. Concessions provided by businesses for the City of
Asbury Park may provide a copy of the concession agreement
or contract with the City in order to obtain a parking permit.
2. Valid driver's license in the name of the applicant.
f. Vehicle Registration for Parking Permits. Legal proof of vehicle
registration shall be required for all permits. For residential and
employee permits, applicants must provide the following documents for
all vehicles to be assigned to a parking permit:
1. Valid vehicle registration from the State of New Jersey in the name
of the applicant. If the vehicle is not registered in the State of New
Jersey and/or is not registered to the applicant, proof of insurance
for the same vehicle with the applicant as named insured on the
policy and a valid vehicle registration (any address, any state) may
be provided to receive a permit. Proof of insurance may include an
insurance card for the vehicle with the applicant's name or a
declaration page from the insurance provider naming the applicant
as a driver on the policy.
2. If the vehicle is registered as a company car, a notarized letter from
the fleet manager, a current pay stub with the company's name and
the name of the applicant, and a valid vehicle registration in the
company's name may be provided to receive a permit.
3. If the vehicle is leased to the applicant, a valid vehicle registration
in the applicant's name or the leasing company's name (with the
applicant listed as a leasee), and proof of insurance with the
applicant's name may be provided to receive a permit. Proof of
insurance may include an insurance card for the vehicle with the
§ 7-41.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.5
1:331
§ 7-41.6. General Metered Parking Regulations. [Ord. No. 2982;
Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No. 2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14]
The following general regulations shall be applicable within the City:
applicant's name or a declaration page from the insurance provider
naming the applicant as a driver on the policy.
4. If a resident or employee has a temporary vehicle while their
primary vehicle is not in service, proof of possession of the
temporary or rental vehicle may be provided in order to assign said
vehicle to a permit. The primary vehicle will be unassigned from
the permit while the primary vehicle is not in service.
g. Special Permits. The Asbury Park Board of Education shall be provided
with no more than 50 special permits gratis per school year in order to
accommodate faculty and staff parking along Summerfield Avenue.
h. Guest Permits. Residents of Asbury Park who live in regulated parking
areas may purchase daily (twenty-four-hour) parking permits for their
guests to park in the same regulated parking area (zone). However,
guest permits are not permitted to park on Cookman Avenue or Ocean
Avenue.
1. Guest permits shall be $10 per permit during the peak season and
$5 per permit during the nonpeak/winter seasons.
2. Residents must either already possess a valid residential parking
permit or shall provide proof of residency in accordance with the
residential parking permit regulations herein in order to be eligible
to purchase a guest permit. Guest permits will not be available for
purchase via parking pay stations.
3. There is no limit on the number of guest passes that can be
purchased per year; however, residents are limited to two guest
passes per day.
a. Amendments to Rates.
The Governing Body shall be authorized to temporarily amend the
parking rates set forth herein through the adoption of a Resolution for
years 2016 and later. Said amendments may be based upon the results
of the demand pricing model or as otherwise needed.
b. Suspension of Metered Parking; Holidays, Approval by City.
Metered parking shall be suspended on the following holidays:
1. New Year's Day;
2. Veteran's Day;
3. Thanksgiving Day;
§ 7-41.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-41.6
1:332
§ 7-41.7. Additional Fees and Policies; Discounts; Event Parking.
[Ord. No. 2982; Ord. No. 2015-25; Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No.
2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14; Ord. No. 2017-42]
The following additional fees and policies are hereby established:
§ 7-41.8. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2982; Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No.
2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the following penalties:
4. Christmas Day; and
5. Other dates/time periods as approved by the City Council by
Resolution.
a. Discounted Bulk Parking.
The City of Asbury Park offers the following discount on the purchase
of bulk parking to encourage use of the mobile application.
1. Fifty dollars ($50) worth of parking for forty-five dollars ($45).
2. Seventy-five dollars ($75) worth of parking for sixty-five dollars
($65).
3. One hundred dollars ($100) worth of parking for eighty-five ($85).
4. Two hundred dollars ($200) worth of parking for One hundred
seventy dollars ($170)
b. All event parking is and will continue to be handled through the Special
Events Committee.
c. Permit Replacement Fees
Permits, in the form of hang tags, stickers, access cards or other
physical medium, may be replaced if damaged or not functional, or if a
new vehicle is registered, for a fee of $5 as long as the original permit
is returned to the Parking Utility.
Permits, in the form of hang tags, stickers, access cards or other
physical medium, may be replaced if lost or stolen at the full cost of the
permit. Access cards to the Bangs Avenue Garage, if lost, substantially
damaged, or stolen, may be replaced for $25. A late fee of $25 shall
be assessed for late quarterly payments for the Bangs Avenue Garage.
[Amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-54]
a. For time limit and expired metered parking for areas not covered in
Subsection (b) below: $36.
b. For expired metered parking in fifteen-minute zones: $55.
§ 7-41.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-41.8
1:333
§ 7-41.9. Signage, stickers/decals and smart cards. [Ord. No. 2982;
Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No. 2016-25]
The Asbury Park Parking Utility ("APPU"), under the supervision of the
City Manager and his/her designee(s), is hereby authorized and directed to
install appropriate signage, and to issue appropriate instructions, vehicle
identification stickers/decals and smart cards, and to perform all other
necessary actions, in order to effectuate the intentions of this section, as
outlined in the Operations Manual of the APPU.
§ 7-41.10. Guidelines. [Ord. No. 2982; Ord. No. 2015-55; Ord. No.
2016-25; Ord. No. 2017-14]
The City Manager and his/her designee(s) is hereby authorized to develop
and implement guidelines concerning operational enforcement and related
issues, in accordance with the policies set forth in this section. Such
guidelines may include the establishment of advertising rates on the meters
and establishment of various zones.
§ 7-41.11. (Reserved)
Editor's Note: Subsection 7-41.11 Metered Parking Appendix was repealed
by Ordinance No. 2017-14.
§ 7-42. EMERGENCY AND TEMPORARY PARKING REGULATIONS.
§ 7-42.1. Parking Temporarily Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2017-14]
In accordance with the provisions of this section, no person shall park or
stand any vehicle upon any streets or parts thereof in deference to an
emergent or temporary regulation as posted.
c. For parking in permit-only designated spaces without a permit: $50.
[Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-18
d. For any other violations, the penalties shall be as prescribed in Chapter
1, Section 1-5 of the City Code, or by applicable State Statute.
a. Upon declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergent conditions
exist with respect to highway and road conditions, weather, accidents,
fires or public celebrations which dictate or require the avoidance of
hazards or other conditions which interfere with the flow of traffic or
safety and welfare of the general public.
b. The herein listed personnel are hereby authorized and empowered to
declare an emergency and direct the posting of emergency no parking
signs: the City Manager (or designee), Police Chief (or highest ranking
Officer), Fire Chief and the Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 7-41.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-42.1
1:334
§ 7-42.2. Temporary Reservation of Parking Spaces. [Ord. No.
2017-14]
Parking spaces may be reserved for commercial vehicles involved in
moving, special events or large deliveries, or for construction purposes on
a temporary basis. Personal uses are not allowed for temporary reservation.
Temporary reservations will be enforced with cones, temporary no parking
signs, or other methods as deemed suitable by the City Manager (or
designee), Police Department or the Parking Utility.
c. It shall be deemed to be reasonable notification to vehicles parked
within the locations of the emergent condition by the posting of
emergency/temporary regulation signs.
d. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and hazard, and any police officer may
provide for the removal of said vehicle. The owner of the vehicle shall
pay the costs for the removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
e. Any owner or other person legally entitled to the return of any vehicle
removed by the Police Department shall be required to pay, in addition
to the full amount of fees chargeable for towing and storing of said
vehicle, any fines, interest, penalties and costs that may be imposed
under the terms of N.J.S.A. 39:4-139.13a through d and the terms of this
chapter.
f. The amount of any unpaid fees, the payment of which is required
hereunder, shall constitute a debt due to the City of Asbury Park and
shall be collectible in the manner provided by law in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
g. Any member of the Police Department may cause the immobilization or
impoundment of such a vehicle found within the jurisdiction of the City
of Asbury Park, if there are any outstanding warrants against such
vehicle.
a. Fees.
Temporary reservation of parking spaces can be purchased in 4, 8,
12 and 24-hour increments for commercial vehicles and daily for
construction purposes in accordance with the following pricing (per
space): [Amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-54]
Area 4 hours 8 hours 12 hours 24 hours
Daily
(Construction)
Non-metered space
(approximately 20
feet in length)
N/A N/A N/A N/A $5
Downtown metered
space
$15 $20 $25 $50 $30
§ 7-42.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-42.2
1:335
§ 7-43. PARKING FOR ELECTRIC OR PLUG-IN HYBRID VEHICLES.
[Amended 3-13-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-4]
§ 7-43.1. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AC — Alternating current (electricity).
Area 4 hours 8 hours 12 hours 24 hours
Daily
(Construction)
Waterfront metered
space
$15 $20 $25 $50 $30
Metered space in all
other areas
$10 $15 $20 $40 $15
b. Time Limits.
Temporary reservation of a parking space for non-construction
purposes may not exceed twenty-four (24) hours, unless approved by
resolution of the City Council.
c. Other Regulations.
1. Signs will be posted no less than 48 hours prior to the event.
[Amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-54]
2. All reservations must be received a minimum of five (5) business
days prior to the effective date. Reservations submitted less than
five (5) business days prior to the event start date are subject to an
expedited fee of twenty-five ($25) dollars.
3. If the location of the address requested to be reserved is a nonmetered
space but is not a legal parking space (such as driveway,
fire hydrant, within twenty-five (25) feet from a crosswalk or
intersection, or handicapped space), Parking Utility officers will
post signs at the closest location at their discretion.
4. Temporary reservation of parking spaces does not recuse vehicles
from observation of street cleaning/alternate side of the street
parking regulations.
5. Temporary reservation of parking spaces for City construction in
the public right-of-way are at no charge.
6. The approval of special event functions may result in an altered
parking fee per space subject to review by the Special Events
Committee in accordance with § 4-10.4 of the City Code. The
parking fee per space to be paid will be the higher of the two (2)
fees.
§ 7-42.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-43.1
1:336
BATTERY — A cell or cells onboard an electric vehicle which is used for
storing and furnishing electrical energy for the purpose of propelling the
vehicle.
BATTERY ELECTRIC VEHICLE (BEV) — An electric vehicle with an onboard
battery that operates exclusively on electrical energy from the battery,
which battery is charged from an electrical power source (charging station)
not onboard. the vehicle.
CAR SHARE VEHICLE — A vehicle that is operated as part of a regional
fleet by a public or private car sharing company or organization and
provides hourly or daily service for the purposes of sharing amongst
residents, visitors, and businesses.
CHARGING LEVEL — The standardized indicators of electrical force or
voltage at which an electric vehicle's battery is recharged. Typical electric
vehicle charging levels and specifications are:
CHARGING STATION — Equipment that has as its primary purpose the
transfer of electric energy by conducive or inductive means to a battery
or other energy storage device located onboard an electric vehicle. Various
type of charging stations include:
CHARGING STATION EQUIPMENT — The conductors, including
ungrounded and grounded, and the electric vehicle connectors, attachment
plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power outlets, charging stations or
apparatus installed specifically for the purpose of delivering electrical
energy from the charging station to the electric vehicles.
CHARGING STATION PLACE — A dedicated, marked space that identifies
the use thereof as exclusively for the charging of electric vehicles.
a. Level 1-AC slow battery charging. Voltage is 120 volts.
Level 2-AC medium battery charging. Voltage is between 120 volts and
240 volts.
b.
Level 3-DC fast or quick battery charging. Voltage is greater than 240
volts. This is often referred to as "DC fast" charging.
c.
Accessible charging station: A charging station incorporated into or
immediately adjacent to a handicapped parking space as "handicapped
parking space" is defined by the New Jersey State Statutes.
a.
Level 3 charging station (sometimes "DC fast charging station"): A
charging station that provides any single-phase voltage or current
rating higher than that of Level 2 or any three-phase supply voltage
configuration.
b.
Private charging station: A charging station that is (a) privately owned
and restricted access or (b) publicly owned and restricted.
c.
Public charging station: A charging station that is (a) publicly owned
and publicly available or (b) privately owned and publicly available.
d.
§ 7-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-43.1
1:337
CITY CAR SHARE PROGRAM — A program under which the City designates
on-street parking spaces or spaces in off-street public parking facilities for
the exclusive use of car share vehicles for the purposes of sharing amongst
residents, visitors, and businesses.
ELECTRIC SCOOTERS AND/OR MOTORCYCLES — A two-wheel or threewheel
electric vehicle that operates exclusively on electrical energy stored
in the vehicle's batteries.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — A vehicle that operates, either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from a charging station or other electrical
energy source that is stored in the vehicle's battery for propulsion purposes.
"Electric vehicle" includes: (1) a battery electric vehicle; (2) a plug-in hybrid
electric vehicle; (3) a neighborhood electric vehicle; and (4) electric
scooters or motorcycles.
NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLE — An electric vehicle with four
wheels that conforms to federal regulations under Title 49 CFR Part
571.5000 which can from a standstill attain a speed of 20 miles per hour
(mph) within one mile but cannot exceed a speed of more than 25 mph.
NON-ELECTRIC VEHICLE — A vehicle that does not meet the definition of
"electric vehicle" as provided herein.
PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLE (PHEV) — An electric vehicle that
(1) contains an internal combustion engine and also allows power to be
delivered to drive wheels by an electric motor; and (2) charges its battery
primarily by connecting to a charging station or other electrical source
not on board the vehicle; (3) may additionally be able to sustain a battery
charge using an on-board internal-combustion-driven generator; and (4) has
the ability to be propelled through the use of electricity.
VEHICLE — Has the same meaning as provided in the New Jersey State
Statute, Title 39, Motor vehicles and traffic regulations, Chapter 1,
Definitions, 39.1.1., Words and phrases defined.
§ 7-43.2. Guidelines Related to Parking for Electric Vehicles Only.
a. Notification and Signage.
1. At the direction of the City Manager or designee, appropriate signs
and markings shall be placed on or near electric vehicle charging
stations, indicating prominently thereon the parking regulations.
The signs may identify the voltage and amperage levels; define
time limits, fees, and hours of operation, as applicable; and state
that the charging station space is reserved for charging purposes
only, which is to be defined as occurring when a vehicle is
connected to the EVSE for electric charging purposes. The signs
may also identify the charging station space is reserved for the City
car share program or car share vehicles only.
2. Signage for charging station spaces reserved for charging or City
car sharing purposes shall clearly and conspicuously states the
§ 7-43.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-43.2
1:338
following: "Unauthorized vehicles not connected for electric
charging [or for City car share] purposes may be towed away at
owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed at designated
towing facility or by calling the Asbury Park Police Department -
732-774-1300."
3. Parking signage related to electric vehicle parking and charging
stations in public parking facilities or on public streets shall
accurately reflect the City Code provisions as applied to days and
times of parking enforcement under this chapter. If there is a
conflict between on-street parking signage and associated electric
vehicle parking spaces and charging stations with respect to days,
hours of enforcement, and/or maximum parking times, the
information contained in the parking signage shall apply.
b. Prohibitions.
1. When a sign authorized under Subsection a above provides notice
that a space is designated as electric vehicle parking or an electric
vehicle charging station, no person shall stop, stand, or park any
nonelectric vehicle, or otherwise block access to parking, in any
such designated parking space or charging station.
2. When a sign authorized under Subsection a above provides notice
that a space is designated as electric vehicle charging station, it is
unlawful to park or permit to be parked any vehicle, including an
electric vehicle, if such electric vehicle is not in the process of
charging. Only one electric vehicle shall occupy any space marked
as an electric vehicle parking space or charging station, and no
person shall park except within the boundaries of the space
defined.
3. When a sign authorized under Subsection a above provides notice
that a space is designated as a car share vehicle parking space, no
person shall stop, stand, or park any vehicle, or otherwise block
access to parking, in any such designated parking space or
charging station, except for an authorized car share vehicle.
c. Enforcement.
1. Electric vehicle parking spaces and charging stations shall be
enforced by any police officer or parking enforcement officer.
2. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $50 Each
day such violation is committed shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such.
3. In addition to a fine, a person who has parked or left a vehicle
standing upon a street, alley, or city parking lot or garage in
violation of this section is subject to having the vehicle removed
from the street, alley or City parking lot or garage.
§ 7-43.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-43.3
1:339
§ 7-43.3. Electric Vehicle Charging Area.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof listed
below except an electric or hybrid plug-in vehicle.
Name of Street Side Location
Sunset Avenue South Beginning at a point 25 feet from the
westerly curbline of Webb Street and
continuing 45 feet westerly therefrom
(total of 4 parking spaces)
Mattison Avenue North Beginning at a point 25 feet from the
westerly curbline of Bond Street and
continuing 100 feet westerly therefrom
(total of 4 spaces)
Springwood Avenue North Beginning at a point 25 feet from the
easterly curbline of Union Avenue and
continuing 100 feet easterly therefrom
(total of 4 spaces)
Chapter 8
LICENSING AND REGULATION OF TAXICABS, LIVERIES AND
PEDICABS
§ 7-43.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 7-43.3
1:340
ARTICLE I
Taxicabs and Liveries
Article I was adopted in entirety by Ord. No. 3066. Prior source history
includes 2000 Code §§ 8-1–8-13.3, Ord. Nos. 2403, 2406, 2416, 2439, 2539,
2592, 2622, 2693, 2753, 2808, 2879
§ 8-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 3066]
As used in this chapter:
AFFILIATED DRIVER — shall mean a person who drives a for-hire affiliated
vehicle and who is required to be licensed by the City.
APPLICANT — shall mean a person seeking a license from the City of
Asbury Park to drive a taxi or livery in the City.
BASE — shall mean a place of business from which for-hire vehicles are
dispatched.
BASE OWNER — shall mean any individual, partnership or corporation
licensed by the City to own and operate a base.
CITY — shall mean the City of Asbury Park.
CRUISING — shall mean the driving of an empty taxi along a public street
at a slow rate of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting passengers.
DISPATCH — shall mean an instruction to a driver by a base to provide
transportation to a passenger who has previously arranged for such
transportation with the base.
DISPATCH RECORD SHEET — shall mean a record kept at all times of the
operation by the dispatcher. Information includes trips assigned to drivers,
times, dates, identification numbers and any other information required by
the City.
DRIVER — shall mean a person who drives a for-hire vehicle and who is
required to be licensed by the City.
LICENSED VEHICLE — shall mean a taxicab authorized to accept
passengers for hire pursuant to the Code of the City of Asbury Park.
LIVERY or LIMOUSINE — shall mean a for-hire vehicle designed to carry
fewer than six (6) passengers, which charges for service on the basis of flat
rate, time, mileage or zones and has a DMV Livery License Plate, is radio
dispatched and may not pick up street hails.
MAILING ADDRESS — shall mean the address designated for the mailing
of all notices and correspondence from the City and for issuance of
summonses.
MEDALLION — shall mean the official number issued by the City, to each
vehicle, be it taxi or livery.
§ 8-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-1
1:341
PASSENGER — shall mean a person who has engaged a for-hire vehicle
for the purpose of being transported to a destination or a person who is
awaiting the arrival of a dispatched for-hire vehicle.
POLICE — shall mean the Asbury Park Police Department and its officers.
PUBLIC TAXI STAND — shall mean a section of a public street or public
place set apart for the exclusive use of a limited number of taxis when such
section is distinctly marked as such by a metal sign attached to a stanchion
on the curb or other conspicuous place or by clearly visible marks upon the
surface of the street or public place.
RENEWAL APPLICANT — shall mean a person seeking to renew a taxi or
livery drivers license within the time period established by the City.
ROOF LIGHT — shall mean any working apparatus attached to the roof of a
vehicle, or extending above the roof line of a vehicle, which shall be of onepiece
solid and can only have the company name and phone number on it.
Taxis that have DMV Omnibus Plates must have a roof lighted sign.
SPONSOR — shall mean a base owner who is licensed by the City and has
entered into an agreement with the prospective driver, who, if licensed by
the City, will be affiliated with said base for a stated period of time.
TAXI — shall mean a vehicle used in the business of transportation of
passengers for hire within the City. These vehicles may pick up street hails,
and/or use any designated taxi stand and must have DMV Omnibus license
plates.
TRIP RECORD — shall mean a document, also known as a trip sheet, carried
by a taxi or livery driver, setting forth the origin and destination of each trip
as well as other information required by the City.
§ 8-2. OWNER LICENSE; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 8-2.1. Required. [Ord. No. 3066]
No vehicle shall be hired out or operated as a taxi within the City without
the owner first having obtained a license for that purpose. Taxi companies
located outside of the City that operate taxis not licensed under this Chapter
must provide proof at the request of the Police that they were called directly
by a customer seeking taxi service by providing the name(s) and phone
number(s) of the person(s) requesting taxi service, and failure to do so is a
violation of this Chapter.
§ 8-2.2. Application. [Ord. No. 3066]
Application for a license to operate a vehicle as a taxi or livery shall be made
annually by the owner, lessee, or bailee upon a form to be furnished by the
City Clerk. The application shall contain but not be limited to, full name
and address of the applicant, the year, type and model of the vehicle to be
licensed and the number of persons it is capable of carrying and shall be
accompanied by the required fee. No person shall be issued a license unless
the vehicle can accommodate a minimum of four (4) passengers.
§ 8-1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-2.3
1:342
§ 8-2.3. Fee. [Ord. No. 3066]
The annual fee for a license for an owner of a vehicle to operate the vehicle
as a taxi or livery is one hundred twenty-five ($125.00) dollars, irrespective
of when during the year the license is sought, to provide for the cost of
administering and enforcing this Chapter. The fee for a taxi or livery driver's
license under this Chapter is set forth below in section 8-3.2.
§ 8-2.4. Issuance. [Ord. No. 3066]
The City Clerk shall review all applications for use of vehicles as taxis or
liveries.
§ 8-2.5. Transfer of License; Transfer Fee. [Ord. No. 3066]
§ 8-2.6. Insurance Required. [Ord. No. 3066]
a. In those cases where the license has been approved, the City Clerk shall
provide the licensee with a card containing the name of the applicant, a
front two (2) inch by two (2) inch straight view photograph of the
applicant, the City license number, a notice that in case of any
complaint they should notify the City Clerk in writing and the rate of
fares under which the taxi or livery is operated. There shall be three (3)
numbered decals issued to be placed on each front door and the trunk.
The license shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year for
which it is issued, and shall expire on December 31 of that year.
b. In those cases where the license has been denied, the applicant shall be
afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the Chief of Police, as the
case may be, or his/her designee. Any request for hearing must be made
within ten (10) days of the applicant's receipt of written notice of denial
from the City. At the hearing, the applicant shall have the right to be
represented by counsel and will be afforded the opportunity to testify
himself or to present witnesses, to cross-examine witnesses and, at his
or her own expense, have a stenographic record made of the
proceedings. Following the hearing, the determination by the Chief of
Police, as the case may be, or his/her designee, shall be final.
a. The owner of a licensed taxicab shall not sell, lease, transfer or in any
other manner dispose of a license without the permission of the City
Clerk, nor shall any owner of the licenses hire out or lease a vehicle to
any driver or any other person for use within the City for a stipulated
sum over a definite period of time.
b. Any license issued may be transferred with the payment of a transfer
fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars upon obtaining the approval of the
City Clerk.
c. Any new or replacement vehicle must be inspected before any license
will be transferred.
§ 8-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-2.6
1:343
§ 8-3. DRIVER'S LICENSE; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 8-3.1. Required. [Ord. No. 3066]
No vehicle shall be hired out or operated as a taxi within the City without
the driver first having obtained a license for that purpose. Drivers from taxi
companies located outside of the City that operate taxis not licensed under
this Chapter must provide proof at the request of the Police that they were
called directly by a customer seeking taxi service by providing the name(s)
and phone number(s) of the person(s) requesting taxi service, and failure to
do so is a violation of this Chapter.
§ 8-3.2. License Fee. [Ord. No. 3066]
The annual license fee for each driver of a taxi or livery is fifty ($50.00)
dollars, irrespective of when during the year the license is sought, to
provide for the cost of administering and enforcing this Chapter.
§ 8-3.3. Initial Application; Background Checks; Rechecks;
Renewals. [Ord. No. 3066]
All applicants for a taxi or livery driver's license shall meet all of the
following requirements:
a. No license shall be issued to operate a taxi or livery, and no person shall
operate a taxi or livery unless the applicant complies with provisions of
N.J.S.A. 48:16-1, et seq.
b. If notice is provided to the City Clerk that the insurance coverage has
been revoked or suspended, the City Clerk shall notify the taxi or livery
owner forthwith and he or she shall immediately surrender the license
to the Chief of Police as the case may be, or his or her designee. If
notice is provided to the owner of the taxi or livery that the insurance
coverage has been revoked or suspended, the taxi or livery shall
immediately cease operating and the City Clerk shall be notified
forthwith.
a. Be twenty-one (21) years of age or over.
b. Maintain in good standing a valid and unconditional/non-provisional
State of New Jersey Motor Vehicle license, and have no more than eight
(8) New Jersey State Division of Motor Vehicle points on his or her
driving record, or the equivalent if licensed in any other state.
c. Must not have been convicted, within three (3) years prior to the date of
the application, of reckless driving, leaving the scene of an accident or
driving more than thirty (30) miles per hour above the speed limit, and
must not have been convicted within five (5) years prior to the date of
the application of driving while intoxicated.
d. Present the required doctor's physical form obtained from the City
Clerk certifying that he or she has been examined within the last thirty
§ 8-2.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-3.3
1:344
(30) day period and that he or she is of sound physique with good
eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other
infirmity of the body or mind which make him or her unfit for the safe
operation of a vehicle.
e. Never have been convicted of a crime (not including a disorderly
persons or petty disorderly persons offense) or engaged in conduct in
any other State or jurisdiction, which if committed in New Jersey, would
constitute any of the crimes identified in paragraphs 1. through 4.
below, within ten (10) years of the date of submission of the initial
application as identified below. A criminal background check shall be
conducted by the Chief of Police as the case may be, or his or her
designee, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-3b.
1. Any crime involving a danger to the person meaning those crimes
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1, et seq. (criminal homicide), N.J.S.A.
2C:12-1, et seq. (assault; reckless endangering; threats); N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1, et seq. (kidnapping and related offenses); N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1,
et seq. (sexual offenses); or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1, et seq. (robbery); or
2. Any crime (not including disorderly persons offenses) against the
family, children or incompetents, meaning those indictable offenses
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1, et seq.; or
3. Any crime (not including disorderly persons offenses) involving
theft and related offenses as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of
the New Jersey Statutes; or
4. Any crime (not including disorderly persons offenses) involving any
controlled dangerous substance or controlled substance analog as
set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes.
f. If a person who has been convicted of a crime listed above can produce
a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8, or
an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction where the criminal
offense occurred if the criminal offense occurred outside of New Jersey,
then the criminal offense shall not disqualify the applicant from
operating a taxi or livery within the City.
g. Complete a form furnished by the City Clerk his or her full name,
residence, places of residence for the preceding five (5) years, age,
height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, previous employer,
whether married or single, whether he or she has ever been convicted
of an indictable offense, driving violations, or violation of this chapter
and whether his or her driver's license has ever been suspended or
revoked and for what cause, which statement shall be signed and sworn
by the applicant to be true and filed with the City Clerk as a permanent
record. Any changes to any of the information contained within the
application must be reported to the City Clerk within three (3) business
days thereof, with a penalty of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars to be
assessed for each business day thereafter that any changes are not
reported.
§ 8-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-3.3
1:345
h. Furnish four (4) copies of photographs size two (2) inches by two (2)
inches.
i. Shall have an acceptable understanding of the English language and
shall be able to read and write in English.
j. Be a citizen of the United States and present a Social Security card or
possess a permanent alien registration card or work authorization.
k. Pay a fee of fifty ($50.00) dollars to provide for the cost of administering
and enforcing this Chapter.
l. Renew their license beginning in December of each year at which time
they will be notified by the City Clerk that their completed paperwork
and fee for the annual license is due in the City Clerk's office no later
than the following March 1st. Failure to meet the March 1 deadline will
result in a fine of twenty five ($25.00) dollars per month for each month
the March 1 deadline is not met, in addition to such other penalties
prescribed in this Chapter for failure to have a valid license for
operation of a taxi or livery.
m. There shall be filed with the City Clerk an insurance policy issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in New Jersey in at least
the amount of $50,000.00 to satisfy all claims for damages, by reason of
bodily injury to, or the death of, any person(s), resulting from, or on
account of, an accident, by reason of the ownership, operation,
maintenance or use of the taxi(s) upon any public street in the City of
Asbury Park, and to satisfy any claim for damages to property of any
person(s), resulting from, or on account of, an accident, by reason of the
ownership, operation or use of such taxi(s) upon the public streets of
the City of Asbury Park. The insurance policy shall remain in effect
during the time that the applicant operates under a license issued by
the City of Asbury Park.
n. Undergo a criminal history background check prior to the issuance of
an initial license, and on years ending in an odd number thereafter prior
to renewal. Such criminal history background check may be performed
by the Asbury Park Police Department or by a private outside agency
which has been approved by the Asbury Park Police Department. If
performed by an approved outside agency, then the results of the
criminal history background check shall be forwarded directly from the
outside agency to the Asbury Park Police Department. In all cases, the
Asbury Park Police Department shall be responsible for oversight of the
criminal history background check process. The applicant shall incur all
costs associated with the background check, which costs shall not
exceed a maximum of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
o. Must not make a false statement in any license application or any
record or certificate required to be filed or maintained, he or she shall
be subject to rejection of the application and/or the appropriate
disciplinary sanctions, including license suspension or revocation or
any penalty provided under the New Jersey Criminal Code.
§ 8-3.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-3.4
1:346
§ 8-3.4. Denial of License. [Ord. No. 3066]
In those cases where the license has been denied, the applicant shall be
afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the Chief of Police as the case
may be, or his/her designee. Any request for hearing must be made within
ten (10) days of the applicant's receipt of written notice of denial from the
City. At the hearing, the applicant shall have the right to be represented by
counsel and will be afforded the opportunity to testify himself or to present
witnesses, to cross-examine witnesses and, at his or her own expense, have
a stenographic record made of the proceedings. Following the hearing,
the determination by the Chief of Police, as the case may be, or his/her
designee, shall be final.
§ 8-3.5. License Regulations. [Ord. No. 3066]
§ 8-4. DRIVER RULES; CONDUCT AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
§ 8-4.1. Vehicles Ordered Off-the-Road; Operation Prohibited. [Ord.
No. 3066]
No driver shall operate any vehicle that has been ordered off-the-road by
the Chief of Police as the case may be, or his or her designee, because it
has been found to be in unsatisfactory condition for the transportation of
passengers.
§ 8-4.2. Lost Property. [Ord. No. 3066]
A driver of a taxi who discovers any property lost or left in his taxi shall
immediately report it to the base, and as soon as possible, turn it over to the
Police.
§ 8-4.3. Conduct of Drivers. [Ord. No. 3066]
a. Licenses issued pursuant to this section are nontransferable.
b. Upon suspension or revocation of his or her New Jersey driver's license,
a driver shall immediately surrender his or her taxi or livery driver's
license to the City.
a. Drivers appearance must be neat, clean and drivers must be dressed in
a professional manner (no t-shirts of any kind).
b. Drivers shall be courteous to customers at all times.
c. There shall be no smoking in any taxi. (N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13).
d. Drivers of livery plated vehicles may not solicit fares but drivers of taxis
with omnibus plates may solicit fares.
e. A driver must always have a formal receipt pad with them so that a
proper receipt can be issued when requested.
§ 8-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-4.3
1:347
§ 8-4.4. Display of License, Rates and Photograph. [Ord. No. 3066]
The driver must display all licenses in a conspicuous manner so they may be
conveniently read by any passenger. A card containing the maximum rates
of fare charged, the name and license number of the operator of the taxicab
and the name, address and a two (2) inch by two (2) inch front straight view
photograph of the driver of the taxi. These must be mounted on the front
face of the dashboard, not on it, facing the passengers.
§ 8-4.5. Substance Abuse. [Ord. No. 3066]
A driver shall not operate or occupy a taxi while his driving ability is
impaired by either alcohol or drugs, nor shall a driver consume any
alcoholic beverage within eight (8) hours of the start of their shift. When
facts exist that provide a reasonable objective basis to suspect that a driver
has illegally used drugs, or has consumed alcoholic beverages, he shall
submit to a breath test or drug screening through urinalysis. A driver who
refuses to submit to such testing requested upon individualized reasonable
suspicion will be subject to revocation of his licenses.
§ 8-4.6. Compliance with Laws While Operating Vehicle. [Ord. No.
3066]
A driver shall operate his vehicle within full compliance of all laws.
§ 8-4.7. Notification of Employer of Accidents and Summons. [Ord.
No. 3066]
The driver must notify his/her employer, if any, of any accident and also
when any motor vehicle summons has been issued to the driver.
§ 8-4.8. Persons Permitted in Vehicle During Operation; Seating of
Fares. [Ord. No. 3066]
f. Drivers and owners not licensed under this Chapter are prohibited from
cruising within the City.
a. During the work shift a driver may not allow any person to operate the
taxi or livery or occupy the driver's seat, except in the event of an
emergency.
b. The driver may have a fare in the front seat if there are two (2) fares in
the back seat.
c. A fare may sit in the front seat when the back seat is empty if they are
handicapped or elderly. For the purpose of providing security during
high risk hours and locations an additional person licensed by the City
as a driver may occupy the front seat.
d. No family members or relatives may occupy the front seat unless
licensed as a driver by the City and for the purpose of providing
§ 8-4.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-4.8
1:348
§ 8-4.9. Possession of Controlled Substances. [Ord. No. 3066]
No driver may have in their possession, on their person or in the vehicle any
illegal controlled substance (drugs) at any time.
§ 8-4.10. Horn Blowing Prohibited. [Ord. No. 3066]
Drivers may not at any time blow their horn to alert a prospective customer
that the taxi has arrived.
§ 8-4.11. Applicability. [Ord. No. 3066]
The above drivers' rules contained in this Section 8-11 apply to taxi drivers,
livery drivers, owner/operators, when performing the duties of a driver.
§ 8-5. TAXI AND LIVERY COMPANY/BASE RULES AND
REGULATIONS.
§ 8-5.1. Base Owners. [Ord. No. 3066]
Base owners shall be required to do the following:
§ 8-5.2. Compliance Required. [Ord. No. 3066]
The base owner must not dispatch any affiliated vehicles/drivers unless the
vehicle is in compliance with the following:
security. Under no circumstances are young children to occupy the
front seat of a taxi or livery.
a. Maintain the following hours of service: six (6) or more vehicles,
twenty-four (24) hours a day; five (5) or less vehicles, twelve (12) hours
a day. Hours may be split in any fashion as long as the required service
time is met. A record of this must be kept on the dispatchers trip sheets.
b. Maintain a principal place (base), dispatch office in a commercial zone
within the City.
c. Provide safe and adequate storage for all business records (Drivers Trip
Sheets and Dispatcher Trip Sheets) for a period of two (2) years.
d. Maintain an operating telephone.
e. Provide a mechanism for transmitting trip requests to affiliated drivers.
f. Not provide taxi or livery service to the public without the proper City
license.
g. Must enforce all rules and regulations set forth by the City.
a. New Jersey State laws in regard to liability insurance and have all
drivers of said vehicles listed with the insurance companies as required.
§ 8-4.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-5.2
1:349
§ 8-5.3. Taxi or Livery Operator Requirement; Record
Requirements. [Ord. No. 3066]
The taxi or livery operator shall:
§ 8-6. INSPECTIONS.
b. The vehicle must have all exterior markings/numbers as required by the
City and New Jersey statutes.
a. File with the City Clerk or his designee, the name, including any trade
name and address of the base of which for-hire vehicles are dispatched.
b. Dispatch from one (1) specific location only.
c. When changing the location of the base address, must apply to the City
sixty (60) days prior to the change.
d. Be aware that any notice from the City Clerk or his designee shall be
deemed sufficient if sent by regular mail to the last mailing address
furnished by the owner.
e. Furnish to the City, within ten (10) days of being requested, a complete
current list of all drivers and affiliated drivers, consisting of their
names, address, medallion or livery number and the vehicle
identification number.
f. Keep the following records of the dispatcher while in the performance
of his or her duties, a complete record, covering twenty-four (24) hours
a day, seven (7) days a week:
1. Date, time, pickup address, driver dispatched, drop off address,
City Clerk car number.
2. Have on hand at all times a complete list of all affiliated drivers,
their address (no P.O. boxes), phone numbers, vehicle identification
number, plate number, insurance company, date of last inspection,
and expiration of insurance.
g. Not transfer or assign his base owner's license to another without the
written approval of the City Clerk or his designee.
h. Not use or attempt to use any physical force against anyone while in the
performance of his duties as a base owner.
i. Be responsible for answering truthfully and complying as directed with
all questions, communications, directives and summonses from the City
Clerk or his designee, as well as producing any licenses or other
documents required to be kept by the owner whenever the City Clerk or
his designee requires them to do so, within five (5) working days.
§ 8-5.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-6.1
1:350
§ 8-6.1. Inspection of Vehicles. [Ord. No. 3066; Ord. No. 2018-9]
No vehicle shall be used as a taxi or livery and no license shall be issued
for that purpose until the vehicle has been inspected and examined by an
officer designated by the Chief of Police, as the case may be, or his or her
designee, and found to be in a thoroughly safe, clean and sanitary condition
for the transportation of passengers. Side curtains, shades or dark tinted
window glass are not permitted on any such vehicle in accordance with
N.J.S. Title 39, Chapters 3 and 4. Thereafter, each owner of a taxi or livery
shall have his/her vehicle inspected and examined by the City of Asbury
Park yearly during the month of March. The validation sticker issued by
the City for the prior year shall be valid until the City inspection for the
current year is conducted. The City inspection shall occur subsequent to
the owner obtaining inspection approval from the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission. Each taxi/livery owner shall make an appointment with the
officer designated by the Chief of Police to conduct the City inspection. No
vehicle shall continue to operate as a taxi or livery if such vehicle has been
inspected and examined by the officer designated by the Chief of Police
and found not to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of
passengers. In no event shall any taxi/livery operate beyond March 31 of the
immediately preceding year without a validation sticker from the City. Side
curtains, shades and window tinting are not permitted in accordance with
N.J.S.A. Title 39, Chapters 3 and 4.
§ 8-6.2. Inspection of Driver's Trip Sheets. [Ord. No. 3066]
If a driver is stopped by a City Police Officer for any violation of this Chapter
or any provision of state law, the driver must permit the Police Officer to
check the driver's trip sheet for accuracy.
§ 8-6.3. Inspection of Base Dispatch Records. [Ord. No. 3066]
Base dispatch records may be checked by the City Clerk or his designee
with reasonable notice given of such inspection and may be checked at any
time by the Police Department.
§ 8-7. TAXI AND LIVERY NUMBERING SYSTEM.
§ 8-7.1. Assignment of Numbers; Placement on Vehicle. [Ord. No.
3066]
a. Every taxi and livery will be assigned a number exclusive to that
vehicle.
b. When a vehicle has been retired, sold, replaced or transferred pursuant
to section 8-6 of this Chapter, the number will be put on any
replacement vehicle.
c. The number shall be displayed in the center of the rear quarter panels
on the driver and passenger sides and the rear center line of the trunk
of the vehicle.
§ 8-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-7.1
1:351
§ 8-8. TAXI AND LIVERY LIMITATIONS.
§ 8-8.1. Licenses Nontransferable. [Ord. No. 3066]
Any medallion holder, license #1 thru #95, inclusive, may choose to operate
his/her vehicle with either omnibus or livery/limousine license plates
provided proper insurance is filed in accordance with State Statute.
§ 8-8.2. Medallion License Transfers. [Ord. No. 3066]
Taxi medallion holders may transfer their medallion license in accordance
with the requirements set forth in this section.
§ 8-8.3. Number of Medallion Licenses Limited; Issuance of New
Licenses. [Ord. No. 3066]
d. The number will be three (3) inches in height and made of a reflective
type material with contrasting background to be easily read at a
distance of fifty (50) feet.
e. No number will appear on the vehicle other than the City Clerk's
assigned vehicle number.
f. Every taxi and livery shall display on each rear door of the vehicle the
words "City of Asbury Park" in letters three (3) inches in height.
a. Medallion holders will advise the City Clerk when their medallion is up
for transfer.
b. If after sixty (60) days the medallion holder has not transferred the
medallion and paid the one hundred ($100.00) dollar transfer fee, he or
she must continue to operate as normal, and if not, the medallion holder
must turn in their medallion license, which shall be retired and not
reissued to anyone.
a. The total number of medallions issued by the City of Asbury Park shall
not exceed one hundred (100).
b. Whenever the City determines to issue one or more additional
medallion licenses (up to the total number authorized in sub-paragraph
(a) above), the Mayor and Council may authorize that such license or
licenses be issued to the highest qualified bidder therefor at a sale by
public auction for that purpose conducted or supervised by the City
Clerk. Such authorization shall be made by Resolution of the Governing
Body. The Resolution may also prescribe qualifications for prospective
bidders, along with a minimum bid amount and conditions of sale, with
the reservation of the right to reject all bids where the highest bid is not
accepted. The Resolution may also include a requirement that the
recipient of a taxi medallion license issued pursuant to this section, as a
condition of the award of such license, shall reimburse the City for any
costs incurred by the City in complying with the public notice
requirement established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.1. In the event
§ 8-7.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-8.3
1:352
§ 8-8.4. Payment of Fees Required; Time Period for Payment;
Retirement of Medallion for Failure to Pay Fees. [Ord. No. 3066]
If the appropriate renewal fee for a licensed vehicle is not paid to the City
within fifteen (15) days of when it is due, the medallion shall be revoked and
retired and not reissued to anyone.
§ 8-9. POLICE SUPERVISION.
§ 8-9.1. Record of Vehicle. [Ord. No. 3066]
The Police Department shall keep a registry of the name and current
address of each person licensed to operate a taxi or livery and the license
number, make and description of such vehicle and the date and complete
record of inspection made of the licensed vehicle. In addition to the above,
a dispatcher/base owner must provide, upon demand, the log and/or trip
sheet of any taxi or livery.
§ 8-10. TAXI STANDS. [Ord. No. 3066]
§ 8-11. RATES; DISPLAY OF RATES REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 3066]
that more than one taxi medallion license is issued at the same public
auction, the recipients thereof shall equally split the costs of
reimbursing the City for any costs incurred in complying with the public
notice requirements.
a. The following locations are hereby designated as public taxi stands:
Ocean Avenue and Second Avenue: at the eastern end of the center
divider between eastbound and westbound lanes, with one (1) space
designated, but for only between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m.
West side of Kingsley Street from Third Avenue to Second Avenue:
beginning at the southern most parking space on the west side
(southbound lane) of Kingsley Street, with three (3) spaces designated,
but for only between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m.
Cookman Avenue and Bangs Avenue: at the first parking space on
Cookman Avenue just west of the intersection of Bangs Avenue on the
north side (westbound lane) of Cookman Avenue, with one (1) space
designated, but for only between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m.
Main Street and Second Avenue: the first and second available parking
spaces on Main Street just north of the intersection of Second Avenue
on the west side (southbound), with two (2) spaces designated.
b. Not more than the authorized number of taxis shall remain at any public
taxi stand. Only taxis licensed by the City may use the public taxi stands
established hereinabove. The taxis shall operate on a first-in, first-out
basis and no taxi company owner shall have more than one (1) taxi at
any designated stand for more than forty-five (45) minute intervals.
§ 8-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-11
1:353
§ 8-12. SOLICITING HOTEL BUSINESS. [Ord. No. 3066]
Any licensed driver or owner/operator of a taxi in the City shall not enter
into any agreement or arrangement with the proprietor of any hotel, motel
or boarding house in the City or with any person connected with such
hotel, motel, boarding/rooming house or bed and breakfast, whereby such
licensed driver or owner/operator receives any fee, commission or monetary
return for soliciting patronage or for introducing persons to patronize same.
§ 8-13. VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
§ 8-13.1. Penalties. [Ord. No. 3066]
a. Rates and Charges. The price that may be charged to a passenger by
the owner or driver of a taxi or livery shall not exceed the following
rates at any time of the year:
1. From any point within the City to another point within the City, five
($5.00) dollars for one (1) passenger and one ($1.00) dollar for a
second passenger and fifty ($.50) cents for each additional
passenger. This also applies to additional fare pick-ups within
confines of said route, provided there is permission from
originating passenger or passengers.
2. Fifty ($.50) cents for each piece of luggage exceeding one (1) per
person, and one ($1.00) dollar for each trunk, any month of the
year.
3. Waiting time for shopping or sightseeing tours shall be Four dollars
and fifty cents ($4.50) per fifteen (15) minute increments.
b. Display of Rates. Any and all rates that are being charged by the taxicab
and livery companies, shall be posted in each taxicab or livery in a
conspicuous location and in manner so as to provide adequate notice to
all passengers.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
penalties in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the Code of the
City of Asbury Park, or by applicable State law.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection "a" above, any person
violating the provisions of Section 8-2.1, Section 8-3.1 or Section
8-4.3(f) shall, upon conviction of a first offense be subject to a fine of
two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars; upon conviction of a second offense
be subject to a fine of five hundred ($500.00) dollars; and upon
conviction of a third or subsequent offense be subject to a fine of one
thousand two hundred ($1,250.00) dollars. In addition to the above, the
violator may, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, be subject
to a term of imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days in the County
jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the detention
of prisoners.
§ 8-11 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-13.1
1:354
§ 8-13.2. Revocation or Suspension of License. [Ord. No. 3066]
§ 8-13.3. Appeals. [Ord. No. 3066]
Except as otherwise set forth herein, any person who wishes to appeal any
determination made pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter may do so in
writing to the City Manager within five (5) days of the date of the decision
or determination sought to be appealed. A hearing will be held by the City
council or its designee within ten (10) days of the date of service of the
appeal.
§ 8-14. through § 8-19. (RESERVED)
c. Nothing herein shall preclude the prosecution of any such violation
under Title 48 and/or Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes, nor restrain
or prohibit the Mayor and Council from suspending or revoking any
license issued hereunder in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
a. Licenses issues under this article may be temporarily suspended for not
more than seven (7) days by the Chief of Police as the case may be, or
his or her designee, in the case of an emergency.
b. Absent an emergency, the City Council, after reasonable notice and a
hearing, may suspend or revoke a license for cause. At said hearing, the
licensee may be represented by counsel and will be afforded the
opportunity to testify himself or to present witnesses, to cross-examine
witnesses and, at his or her own expense, have a stenographic record
made of the proceedings. Following the hearing, the determination by
the Chief of Police as the case may be, or his/her designee, shall be
final.
c. If at any time within the licensed year a taxi or livery driver and/or
owner/operator is convicted of an indictable offense, the City Clerk
shall immediately suspend their license, pending a hearing.
§ 8-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-14
1:355

ARTICLE II
Pedicabs
§ 8-20. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-14]
As used in this article:
OPERATION OF A PEDICAB — shall consist of transporting in such pedicab
one (1) or more persons for hire where the pickup of such person(s) was not
prearranged. Being parking or idling on City streets awaiting to be hired or
accepting a passenger to be transported for hire from a point of departure
within the City shall be deemed to be "operation" of a pedicab within the
City. The operation of a pedicab in any of the above-described manners by
one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the owner thereof,
as well as by the person actually driving same. The transportation of any
person other than the owner or driver in any pedicab bearing a sign(s)
therein or thereupon using the words "pedicab," "taxi," "taxicab," "cab,"
"hack," or word(s) of a similar connotation shall be prima facie evidence of
operation.
OWNER — shall consist of any person, partnership, association, corporation
or other legal entity in whose name title to any pedicab is registered, or who
appears in such records to be the conditional vendee or lessee thereof, or
the owner of any pedicab, or any person who appears to be the conditional
vendee or lessee thereof.
PEDICAB or PEDICAB VEHICLE — shall mean a bicycle-like vehicle that is
designed to be propelled by human power, has three (3) or more wheels,
and is designed to accommodate passengers in addition to the driver and is
operated for hire.
PERSON — for the purposes of ownership, operation or lease of a pedicab,
shall mean an individual (or two or more individuals related by blood,
adoption or familial ties), partnership, association, corporation, joint-stock
company or other legal entity, or its lessees, trustees or receivers appointed
by any court whatsoever, or any entity in which an individual, corporation
or partnership holds more than a fifty-one percent (51%) interest.
§ 8-21. LICENSING OF PEDICABS.
§ 8-21.1. License Required. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-15.1]
No person shall operate any pedicab within the City unless the owner of the
pedicab, the pedicab itself and the driver thereof have been duly licensed
pursuant to this article.
§ 8-21.2. Classes of Pedicab Licenses. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-15.2]
There are hereby established the following classes of pedicab licenses in the
City:
a. Pedicab Owner's License. This license shall entitle an owner as
identified therein to operate within the City any pedicab business in
§ 8-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-21.2
1:357
§ 8-21.3. Number of Licenses to Be Issued. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-15.3]
accordance with the requirements of this article. Each pedicab owner's
license will permit the owner to license and operate a certain number
of pedicabs as provided herein.
b. Pedicab Vehicle License. This license shall entitle a pedicab vehicle as
identified therein to be operated within the City by a pedicab driver in
accordance with the requirements of this article.
c. Pedicab Driver's License. The license shall entitle the person as
identified therein to operate within the City any pedicab duly licensed
hereunder.
a. Number of Pedicab Owner's Licenses.
1. The number of pedicab owner's licenses under this article which
may be issued and outstanding in any one (1) year shall not exceed
four (4).
2. No person shall hold or control more than two (2) pedicab owner's
licenses.
3. No person shall be eligible to obtain an additional owner's license
until the total number of pedicabs permitted to be licensed under
an individual owner's license is met.
4. If the maximum number of pedicab owner's licenses have been
issued, no new licenses shall be approved before an existing license
is surrendered to the City.
5. A pedicab owner's license may be transferable to a related business
entity, such as in the case of a change in the form or ownership of a
business entity, provided that the new owner provides all necessary
information to the City and complies in all other respects with the
requirements of this article.
b. Number of Pedicab Vehicles Per Owner's License.
1. The holder of a pedicab owner's license under this article shall be
permitted to obtain a license for up to five (5) individual pedicab
vehicles.
2. The total number of individual pedicab vehicles permitted to be
licensed pursuant to this article shall not, in any one year, exceed
twenty (20).
3. The license issued for an individual pedicab vehicle is only for that
specific pedicab vehicle and shall not be transferable to another
pedicab vehicle.
c. Number of Pedicab Driver's Licenses.
§ 8-21.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-21.3
1:358
§ 8-21.4. Applications for Licenses. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-15.4]
1. The number of pedicab driver's licenses under this article which
may be issued and outstanding in any one (1) year shall be
unlimited.
2. The license issued for any individual pedicab driver is only for that
specific driver and shall not be transferable to another driver.
a. Application Form. Application forms for all types of licenses shall be
obtained from the City Clerk's office or from the Clerk's designee.
b. Procedure.
1. Each applicant for the issuance or renewal of any form of license
shall supply in full all of the information requested on the
application form, and shall verify the correctness thereof by his/her
oath or affirmation.
2. Completed applications shall be filed with the Clerk's office or with
the Clerk's designee together with the full amount of the proper fee
hereinafter fixed.
3. Applications for the initial issuance of any form of license may be
made at any time, but all licenses shall expire as of December 31 of
the year of issuance.
4. Applications for the renewal of licenses shall be filed with the City
no sooner than November 1 and not later than December 1 of the
year preceding the year for which application is being made. All
applications for such renewals shall be acted upon prior to any
consideration being given to new applications, which shall be
considered in the order of their filing with the City on a first come/
first served basis. Any application for renewal of a pedicab owner's
license received after December 1 of any year shall be treated as an
application for a new license.
c. Application for Pedicab Owner's Licenses.
1. Insurance Requirements. Each applicant for a pedicab owner's
license shall, together with their application, submit a copy of their
insurance policy or certificate in lieu thereof, in the amount of one
million ($1,000,000.00) dollars. Proof of insurance shall confirm
that the coverage amount applies to all pedicabs owned or
operated by the pedicab owner and must specify by description
each pedicab covered by the policy. Such proof of insurance shall
also indicate that the City shall be notified at least thirty (30) days
in advance should the coverage be cancelled, nonrenewed or
revised, except in the case of non-payment of premium, in which
case not less than ten (10) days advance notice shall be provided to
the City.
§ 8-21.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-21.4
1:359
2. Hold Harmless requirement. Each applicant for a pedicab owner's
license shall also execute an indemnification and hold harmless
agreement, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney, through
which the owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its
officers, agents and employees, from any and all loss, costs,
damages and/or expenses suffered by any person, or to any
property arising from the owner's negligence or the negligence of
the owner's employees or agents.
d. Applications for Pedicab Driver's Licenses. Each applicant for a pedicab
driver's license shall:
1. File with their application two (2) photographs, each three and onehalf
inches (3-1/2) by three and one-half inches (3-1/2) in size,
clearly depicting the facial features of the applicant. Both of these
photographs shall thereupon become the property of the City for
retention with the application form.
2. At the time of filing the application, each applicant shall be
fingerprinted at the City Police Department and said fingerprints
shall be submitted to the New Jersey State Police, Bureau of
Identification, for a report of the applicant's criminal record, if any.
Any and all costs of this process shall be borne by the applicant.
e. Processing of Applications.
1. Upon receipt of any complete application for a license, the City
Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall provide a full copy of the
application, along with all supporting documents, to the Police
Chief or to the Police Chief's designee.
2. The Police Chief or the Police Chief's designee shall thereafter
conduct an investigation and evaluation of the application and shall
forward a report back to the City Clerk or the Clerk's designee
within fourteen (14) days containing the results of the investigation
and evaluation, and making a recommendation with regard to the
issuance, issuance with condition(s) or denial of the application.
3. In those instances where the Police Chief or the Police Chief's
designee has recommended issuance of the license, or issuance
with condition(s), then the license shall be issued by the City Clerk
or the Clerk's designee in accordance with said recommendations.
4. In those instances where the Police Chief or the Police Chief's
designee has recommended denial of the license, then the City
Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall notify the applicant in writing of
the Police Department's determination and shall forward a copy of
the Police Department's report to the applicant for their
information. The City Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall also advise
the applicant in writing of their right to request a hearing before
the Mayor and Council regarding the proposed denial. Any request
for a hearing shall be made within ten (10) days of the applicant's
§ 8-21.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-21.4
1:360
§ 8-21.5. Issuance of Licenses. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-15.5]
Each applicant granted a license under this article shall be issued a license
card in evidence thereof and signed by the City Clerk or the Clerk's
designee on behalf of the City.
§ 8-21.6. Fees. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-15.6]
The annual fee for each type of pedicab license shall be set by resolution of
the Mayor and Council.
§ 8-21.7. Prorating and/or Refunds. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-15.7]
§ 8-21.8. License Expiration. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-15.8]
All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire at 12:00 midnight on
December 31 of the year in which they were issued.
§ 8-22. DISPLAY OF LICENSES AND RATES; LETTERING AND
SIGNS; USE OF HORNS PROHIBITED.
§ 8-22.1. Display of License; Licenses to Remain Property of the
City. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-16.1]
receipt of the Police Department's report. If a hearing is requested,
then the City Clerk or the Clerk's designee shall schedule the
hearing on the next available City Council meeting agenda which
is at least ten (10) days following the receipt of the applicant's
request for a hearing. The City Clerk shall then advise the applicant
of the date of the hearing in writing, providing at least seven (7)
days advance notice to the applicant. At the hearing, the applicant
shall have the right to be represented by counsel and will be
afforded the opportunity to provide testimony or to present
witnesses in support of its position, to cross-examine any opposing
witnesses and, at its own expense, to have a stenographic record
made of the proceedings. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Council will determine whether to grant or deny the license. In
rendering any decision, the Council shall be guided by the criteria
set forth in Section 8-16.7 below, with specific regard to ensuring
the adequate protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
public.
a. The fees for initial licenses shall be prorated.
b. No part of any fee paid to the City for any type of pedicab license shall
be refunded for any reason.
a. Display of Owner's License. A copy of the pedicab owner's license card
shall at all times be prominently displayed and adequately protected in
the interior of any pedicab operated by the licensee so that the face
§ 8-21.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-22.1
1:361
§ 8-22.2. Rate and Tariff Listing. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-16.2]
No pedicab shall hereafter be operated in the City unless and until there is
prominently displayed in the interior thereof, within the full view and access
of any passengers, a complete list of fares, charges or tariff rates charged
for transportation of passengers, which fares, charges or tariff rates so
displayed, and no other, shall be those to be charged any passenger. Said
rate and tariff listing shall be submitted with the owner's license application
and any change in the rates and/or tariffs during the year shall be filed with
the City before the new rates and/or tariffs can be charged to passengers.
§ 8-22.3. Pedicab Lettering/Signage. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-16.3]
Every licensed pedicab shall have the words "taxi," "cab," or "pedicab"
prominently displayed on the pedicab.
§ 8-22.4. Rates of Fare. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-16.4]
The maximum rates of fare to be charged within the City limits shall be set
by resolution of the Mayor and Council.
§ 8-22.5. Use of Horns and Other Audible Devices. [Ord. No. 2991
§ 8-16.5]
No operator of any pedicab shall use a horn, siren, whistle, bell or other
device capable of emitting audible sound in order to pick-up customers, or
hawk, sell or otherwise advertise their services.
thereof shall at all times be in full view of and plainly legible to any
passenger seated on the rear seat of such pedicab.
b. Display of Pedicab Driver's License. The license card issued to a
pedicab driver shall have affixed to it one (1) of the two (2) photographs
required to be filed with the license application, as provided herein.
Such license card shall at all times be prominently displayed and
adequately protected in the interior of any pedicab operated by the
licensee so that the face thereof shall be at all times in full view of and
plainly legible to any passenger seated on the rear seat of such pedicab.
No pedicab driver's license card other than that of the licensee actually
operating the cab at the time shall be displayed therein.
c. Display of Pedicab Vehicle License. A pedicab owner shall affix to each
pedicab vehicle licensed to operate in the City two (2) Medallions as
issued by the City and in such a manner as directed by the City.
d. Licenses are Property of the City. The license cards and Medallions
issued pursuant to this article shall at all times be and remain the
property of the City and on direction of the Police Chief or the Police
Chief's designee shall at once be surrendered by any licensee to the
City Clerk.
§ 8-22.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-23
1:362
§ 8-23. USE AND OPERATION OF PEDICABS.
§ 8-23.1. Driver's Requirements. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-16.6]
§ 8-23.2. Number of Passengers. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-16.6]
The number of passengers, including the driver, shall be limited at any one
time to a maximum of three (3) passengers but in no event shall it exceed
the designed capacity of the pedicab.
§ 8-23.3. Equipment. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-16.6]
No person shall operate a pedicab in the City unless it is equipped with the
following features:
§ 8-23.4. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2991 § 18-16.5; Ord. No. 2018-9]
a. No person shall operate any pedicab upon the street in the City unless
that person has a valid pedicab driver's license issued pursuant to this
article.
b. No person shall operate any pedicab upon the street in the City unless
that person has a valid license to operate a motor vehicle.
c. Pedicab operators must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.
a. Operational headlights and tail lights (to be operated at all times the
pedicab is operated on the roadways).
b. Rear and side reflective devices.
c. An operational braking system.
d. Audible warning devices, such as a horn or a bell.
e. Rearview mirrors.
f. Tires having tread depth sufficient to be designed as operationally safe.
g. Must be painted a light color to ensure it is discernible to other traffic.
h. A two-way radio or similar communication device.
a. The pedicab shall be inspected by the Police Department prior to the
issuance of a pedicab vehicle license to operate within the City, but no
later than March 31 of each licensing year. If the pedicab is determined
to be unsafe or not equipped properly, the owner shall be notified. No
license shall be issued for a pedicab vehicle that is found to be unsafe.
b. If at any time, after the issuance of a permit, a pedicab vehicle is
determined to be unsafe it shall be taken out of service until such a time
that the Police Department has determined that it has been repaired
and is sufficiently safe to be returned to full service.
§ 8-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-23.5
1:363
§ 8-23.5. Taxicab Stands. [Ord. No. 2991 § 18-6.6]
Pedicabs may use taxicab stands which may be established within the City
subject to the same conditions as taxicabs.
§ 8-23.6. Compliance with Other Laws. [Ord. No. 2991 § 18-6.6]
All pedicab drivers and owners shall comply with Title 48 Public Utilities,
Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines and Jitneys of the Statutes of
New Jersey, and Title 39 Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations of the
Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or regulation.
§ 8-23.7. Prohibition on Boardwalk. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-16.6]
Pedicabs shall not be operated on the boardwalk at any time.
§ 8-24. DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
§ 8-24.1. Provisions for Denial, Revocation or Suspension of
Licenses. [Ord. No. 2991 § 8-16.7]
Pursuant to this article, the City may in its discretion refuse to issue or
renew any license. The City may also, after notice and a hearing, revoke or
suspend any license issued hereunder for any of the causes or reasons listed
below. All notice and hearing requirements shall be the same as those set
forth in subsection 8-21.4.
a. License of Any Class; Cause for Denial, Revocation or Suspension. Any
license of any class or renewal thereof may be denied, revoked or
suspended if any of the circumstances set forth below are present and if
the City has determined, based upon a review of the specific facts
presented, that the health, safety and welfare of the public is or would
be jeopardized:
1. The applicant/licensee has been convicted of a crime in this or any
other jurisdiction.
2. The applicant/licensee has been more than once convicted of being
a disorderly person.
3. The applicant/licensee has been found guilty of a violation of Title
39, "Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations" of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey.
4. The applicant/licensee has violated any provision of this article or
any ordinance of the City.
5. The applicant/licensee has any judgment unsatisfied or record
against him or her arising out of an automobile accident in any
place, or arising out of the operation of a pedicab in the City or any
other place.
§ 8-23.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-24.1
1:364
§ 8-24.2. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2991
§ 8-16.8]
6. The applicant/licensee has failed or fails to render reasonably
prompt, safe and adequate pedicab service.
7. The applicant/licensee has not complied fully with all requirements
of this article.
8. Any other basis provided for in Title 48 Public Utilities, Chapter 16
Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines and Jitneys of the Statutes of New
Jersey or similar law, rule or regulation.
b. Pedicab Driver's License. In addition to the causes listed in paragraph
a. above, any pedicab driver's license may be denied, removed or
suspended in accordance with the notice and hearing requirements set
forth in this section for any of the following reasons, where the City has
determined, based upon a review of the specific facts presented, that
the health, safety and welfare of the public is or would be jeopardized:
1. If the licensee or applicant has in any degree contributed to any
injury to person or damage to property, arising out of negligent
operation of a motor vehicle or a pedicab in the City or any other
place.
c. Pedicab Owner's License. In addition to the causes listed in paragraph
a. above, any pedicab owner's license may be denied, removed or
suspended in accordance with the notice and hearing requirements set
forth in this section for any of the following reasons, where the City has
determined, based upon a review of the specific facts presented, that
the health, safety and welfare of the public is or would be jeopardized:
1. If the pedicab vehicle(s) licensed or to be licensed, by reason of
unsafe or unsanitary conditions, is/are dangerous to the safety or
health of the occupants or others.
2. If the policy of insurance required by the Title 48 Public Utilities,
Chapter 16 Taxicabs, Autocabs, Limousines and Jitneys of the
Statutes of New Jersey or similar law, rule or regulation, or that the
requirements of this article have lapsed or such coverage is not
maintained at all times.
a. Enforcement. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the
Police Department.
b. Violations and penalties.
1. Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the following penalties:
(a) For a first offense: A fine of not to exceed three hundred
($300.00) dollars, plus costs.
§ 8-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-24.2
1:365
(b) For a second offense: A fine of not to exceed six hundred
($600.00) dollars, plus costs.
(c) For a third and subsequent offenses: A court appearance shall
be required and the violator shall be subject to a minimum fine
of twelve hundred ($1,200.00) dollars, plus costs.
(d) Any person who has been convicted of a previous violation
need not be charged as a second, third or subsequent offender
in the complaint made against him in order to render him liable
to the penalties imposed by this section on a second, third or
subsequent offense, but if the second offense occurs more than
two (2) years after the previous offense, the Court shall treat
the second conviction as a first offense for sentencing
purposes, and if a third offense occurs more than two (2) years
after the second offense, the Court shall treat the third offense
as a second offense for sentencing purposes, and if an offense
subsequent to the third offense occurs more than two (2) years
after the third offense, the Court shall treat the offense
subsequent to the third offense as a third offense for
sentencing purposes and so on for additional subsequent
offenses.
§ 8-24.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-24.2
1:366
ARTICLE III
Jitneys
§ 8-25. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
As used in this article:
FRANCHISE TAX — shall mean a government levy (tax) charged by the City
to jitney operators with a nexus in the City. The franchise tax for jitney
operators shall be calculated as a percentage of revenue, assessed monthly.
JITNEY — shall mean an autobus for hire and shall include any motor
vehicle for hire engaged in carrying individual passengers, which is
operated over and upon the streets of the City. A Jitney shall be constructed
and intended to accommodate up to thirteen (13) passengers on routes
established wholly within the limits of the City.
PERSON — shall mean and include an individual, sole proprietorship,
partnership, limited partnership, corporation, or limited liability company.
STREET — shall mean and include any street, avenue, land or public place
in the City utilized for vehicular jitney traffic.
§ 8-26. OWNER LICENSE; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 8-26.1. Required. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
No Person shall operate a Jitney within the City of Asbury Park without
obtaining from the City Clerk a license issued to that Person pursuant to
this Article.
§ 8-26.2. Application. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
Application for a license to operate a vehicle as a Jitney shall be made
annually by the owner upon a form to be furnished by the City Clerk. The
application shall contain but not be limited to, full name and address of the
applicant, the year, type and model of the vehicle to be licensed and the
number of persons it is capable of carrying and shall be accompanied by the
required fee.
§ 8-26.3. Fee. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
The annual fee for a license for an owner of a vehicle to operate the
vehicle as a Jitney is one hundred twenty-five ($125.00) dollars, irrespective
of when during the year the license is sought, to provide for the cost of
administering and enforcing this Article. The fee for a Jitney driver's license
under this Article is set forth below in section 8-27.2.
§ 8-26.4. Issuance. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
The City Clerk shall review all applications for use of vehicles as Jitneys.
§ 8-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-26.4
1:367
§ 8-26.5. Transfer of License. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
§ 8-26.6. Liability Insurance Required; Power of Attorney. [Ord. No.
2018-22]
a. In those cases where the license has been approved, the City Clerk shall
provide the licensee with a card containing the name of the applicant, a
front two (2) inch by two (2) inch straight view photograph of the
applicant, the City license number, a notice that in case of any
complaint they should notify the City Clerk in writing and the rate of
fares under which the Jitney is operated. There shall be three (3)
numbered decals issued to be placed on three sides of the vehicle. The
license shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar year for which it
is issued, and shall expire on December 31 of that year.
b. In those cases where the license has been denied, the applicant shall be
afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the Chief of Police, as the
case may be, or his/her designee. Any request for hearing must be made
within ten (10) days of the applicant's receipt of written notice of denial
from the City. At the hearing, the applicant shall have the right to be
represented by counsel and will be afforded the opportunity to testify
himself or to present witnesses, to cross-examine witnesses and, at his
or her own expense, have a stenographic record made of the
proceedings. Following the hearing, the determination by the Chief of
Police, as the case may be, or his/her designee, shall be final.
a. The owner of a licensed Jitney shall not sell, lease, transfer or in any
other manner dispose of a license without the permission of the City
Clerk, nor shall any owner of the licenses hire out or lease a vehicle to
any driver or any other person for use within the City for a stipulated
sum over a definite period of time.
b. Any license issued may be transferred with the payment of a transfer
fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars upon obtaining the approval of the
City Clerk.
c. Any new or replacement vehicle must be inspected before any license
will be transferred.
a. As a condition for the issuance of a license hereunder, the applicant for
a Jitney license shall, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
48:16-24, file with the City Clerk an insurance policy attesting that the
person and/or owner-operator is insured under a policy of
comprehensive, general liability insurance. The limits of said insurance
shall be not less than one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars per
occurrence. The insurance policy, or an accompanying document, shall
obligate the liability insurer to notify the City Clerk and City Manager of
the City of Asbury Park if any change occurs in the policy or if the policy
is terminated or canceled for any reason.
§ 8-26.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-26.6
1:368
§ 8-26.7. Franchise Tax. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
Every person as herein defined, owning and operating a Jitney within the
City of Asbury Park shall, on or before the tenth day of each calendar month,
file with the City Clerk a statement, verified by oath, showing the gross
receipts from the business of said Jitney during the preceding calendar
month, and shall at the same time pay to the City Clerk five (5%) percent of
such gross receipts as a monthly franchise tax.
§ 8-27. DRIVER'S LICENSE; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 8-27.1. Required. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
No vehicle shall be hired out or operated as a Jitney within the City without
the driver first having obtained a license for that purpose.
§ 8-27.2. License Fee. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
The annual license fee for each driver of a Jitney is fifty ($50.00) dollars,
irrespective of when during the year the license is sought, to provide for the
cost of administering and enforcing this Article.
§ 8-27.3. Initial Application; Background Checks; Rechecks;
Renewals. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
All applicants for a Jitney driver's license shall meet all of the following
requirements:
b. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-24, each owneroperator
shall execute and deliver to the City Clerk concurrently with
the filing of the policy referred to above, a power of attorney wherein
and whereby the said owner-operator shall nominate, constitute and
appoint the City Clerk as the owner-operator's true and lawful attorney
for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of a court
of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of
the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
c. Each applicant for a Jitney license shall also execute an indemnification
and hold harmless agreement, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney,
through which the owner shall indemnify and hold harmless the City, its
officers, agents and employees, from any and all loss, costs, damages
and/or expenses suffered by any person, or to any property arising from
the owner's negligence or the negligence of the owner's employees or
agents.
a. Be twenty-one (21) years of age or over.
b. Maintain in good standing a valid and unconditional/non-provisional
State of New Jersey Motor Vehicle license, and have no more than eight
(8) New Jersey State Division of Motor Vehicle points on his or her
driving record, or the equivalent if licensed in any other state.
§ 8-26.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-27.3
1:369
c. Must not have been convicted, within three (3) years prior to the date of
the application, of reckless driving, leaving the scene of an accident or
driving more than thirty (30) miles per hour above the speed limit, and
must not have been convicted within five (5) years prior to the date of
the application of driving while intoxicated.
d. Present the required doctor's physical form obtained from the City
Clerk certifying that he or she has been examined within the last thirty
(30) day period and that he or she is of sound physique with good
eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other
infirmity of the body or mind which make him or her unfit for the safe
operation of a vehicle.
e. Never have been convicted of a crime (not including a disorderly
persons or petty disorderly persons offense) or engaged in conduct in
any other State or jurisdiction, which if committed in New Jersey, would
constitute any of the crimes identified in paragraphs 1. through 4.
below, within ten (10) years of the date of submission of the initial
application as identified below. A criminal background check shall be
conducted by the Chief of Police as the case may be, or his or her
designee, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-3b.
1. Any crime involving a danger to the person meaning those crimes
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1, et seq. (criminal homicide), N.J.S.A.
2C:12-1, et seq. (assault; reckless endangering; threats); N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1, et seq. (kidnapping and related offenses); N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1,
et seq. (sexual offenses); or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1, et seq. (robbery); or
2. Any crime (not including disorderly persons offenses) against the
family, children or incompetents, meaning those indictable offenses
set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1, et seq.; or
3. Any crime (not including disorderly persons offenses) involving
theft and related offenses as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of
the New Jersey Statutes; or
4. Any crime (not including disorderly persons offenses) involving any
controlled dangerous substance or controlled substance analog as
set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes.
f. If a person who has been convicted of a crime listed above can produce
a certificate of rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8, or
an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction where the criminal
offense occurred if the criminal offense occurred outside of New Jersey,
then the criminal offense shall not disqualify the applicant from
operating a Jitney within the City.
g. Complete a form furnished by the City Clerk his or her full name,
residence, places of residence for the preceding five (5) years, age,
height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, previous employer,
whether married or single, whether he or she has ever been convicted
of an indictable offense, driving violations, or violation of this Article
§ 8-27.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-27.3
1:370
and whether his or her driver's license has ever been suspended or
revoked and for what cause, which statement shall be signed and
sworn by the applicant to be true and filed with the City Clerk as a
permanent record. Any changes to any of the information contained
within the application must be reported to the City Clerk within three
(3) business days thereof, with a penalty of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars
to be assessed for each business day thereafter that any changes are
not reported.
h. Furnish four (4) copies of photographs size two (2) inches by two (2)
inches.
i. Shall have an acceptable understanding of the English language and
shall be able to read and write in English.
j. Be a citizen of the United States and present a Social Security card or
possess a permanent alien registration card or work authorization.
k. Pay a fee of fifty ($50.00) dollars to provide for the cost of administering
and enforcing this Article.
l. Renew their license beginning in December of each year at which time
they will be notified by the City Clerk that their completed paperwork
and fee for the annual license is due in the City Clerk's office no later
than the following March 1st. Failure to meet the March 1 deadline will
result in a fine of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per month for each month
the March 1 deadline is not met, in addition to such other penalties
prescribed in this Article for failure to have a valid license for operation
of a Jitney.
m. There shall be filed with the City Clerk an insurance policy issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in New Jersey in at least
the amount of $1,000,000.00 to satisfy all claims for damages, by
reason of bodily injury to, or the death of, any person(s), resulting from,
or on account of, an accident, by reason of the ownership, operation,
maintenance or use of the Jitney(s) upon any public street in the City of
Asbury Park, and to satisfy any claim for damages to property of any
person(s), resulting from, or on account of, an accident, by reason of the
ownership, operation or use of such Jitney(s) upon the public streets of
the City of Asbury Park. The insurance policy shall remain in effect
during the time that the applicant operates under a license issued by
the City of Asbury Park.
n. Undergo a criminal history background check prior to the issuance of
an initial license, and on years ending in an odd number thereafter prior
to renewal. Such criminal history background check may be performed
by the Asbury Park Police Department or by a private outside agency
which has been approved by the Asbury Park Police Department. If
performed by an approved outside agency, then the results of the
criminal history background check shall be forwarded directly from the
outside agency to the Asbury Park Police Department. In all cases, the
Asbury Park Police Department shall be responsible for oversight of the
§ 8-27.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-27.3
1:371
§ 8-27.4. Denial of License. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
In those cases where the license has been denied, the applicant shall be
afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the Chief of Police as the case
may be, or his/her designee. Any request for hearing must be made within
ten (10) days of the applicant's receipt of written notice of denial from the
City. At the hearing, the applicant shall have the right to be represented by
counsel and will be afforded the opportunity to testify himself or to present
witnesses, to cross-examine witnesses and, at his or her own expense, have
a stenographic record made of the proceedings. Following the hearing,
the determination by the Chief of Police, as the case may be, or his/her
designee, shall be final.
§ 8-27.5. License Regulations. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
§ 8-28. DRIVER RULES; CONDUCT AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
§ 8-28.1. Vehicles Ordered Off-the-Road; Operation Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 2018-22]
No driver shall operate any vehicle that has been ordered off-the-road by
the Chief of Police as the case may be, or his or her designee, because it
has been found to be in unsatisfactory condition for the transportation of
passengers.
§ 8-28.2. Lost Property. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
A driver of a Jitney who discovers any property lost or left in his Jitney
shall immediately report it to the Asbury Park Police Department as soon as
possible.
§ 8-28.3. Conduct of Drivers. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
criminal history background check process. The applicant shall incur
all costs associated with the background check, which costs shall not
exceed a maximum of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
o. Must not make a false statement in any license application or any
record or certificate required to be filed or maintained, he or she shall
be subject to rejection of the application and/or the appropriate
disciplinary sanctions, including license suspension or revocation or
any penalty provided under the New Jersey Criminal Code.
a. Licenses issued pursuant to this Article are nontransferable.
b. Upon suspension or revocation of his or her New Jersey driver's license,
a driver shall immediately surrender his or her Jitney driver's license to
the City.
a. Drivers appearance must be neat, clean and drivers must be dressed in
a professional manner.
§ 8-27.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-28.3
1:372
§ 8-28.4. Display of License, Rates and Photograph. [Ord. No.
2018-22]
The driver must display all licenses in a conspicuous manner so they may be
conveniently read by any passenger. A card containing the maximum rates
of fare charged, the name and license number of the operator of the Jitney
and the name, address and a two (2) inch by two (2) inch front straight view
photograph of the driver of the Jitney. These must be mounted on the front
face of the dashboard, not on it, facing the passengers.
§ 8-28.5. Substance Abuse. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
A driver shall not operate or occupy a Jitney while his driving ability
is impaired by either alcohol or drugs, nor shall a driver consume any
alcoholic beverage within eight (8) hours of the start of their shift. When
facts exist that provide a reasonable objective basis to suspect that a driver
has illegally used drugs, or has consumed alcoholic beverages, he shall
submit to a breath test or drug screening through urinalysis. A driver who
refuses to submit to such testing requested upon individualized reasonable
suspicion will be subject to revocation of his or her licenses.
§ 8-28.6. Compliance with Laws While Operating Vehicle. [Ord. No.
2018-22]
A driver shall operate his vehicle within full compliance of all laws.
§ 8-28.7. Notification of Employer of Accidents and Summons. [Ord.
No. 2018-22]
The driver must notify his/her employer, if any, of any accident and also
when any motor vehicle summons has been issued to the driver.
§ 8-28.8. Persons Permitted in Vehicle During Operation. [Ord. No.
2018-22]
During the work shift a driver may not allow any person to operate the
Jitney or occupy the driver's seat, except in the event of an emergency.
§ 8-28.9. Possession of Controlled Substances. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
No driver may have in their possession, on their person or in the vehicle any
illegal controlled substance (drugs) at any time.
b. Drivers shall be courteous to customers at all times.
c. There shall be no smoking in any Jitney.
d. Drivers and owners not licensed under this Article are prohibited from
cruising within the City.
§ 8-28.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-28.10
1:373
§ 8-28.10. Horn Blowing Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
Drivers may not at any time blow their horn to alert a prospective customer
that the Jitney has arrived.
§ 8-28.11. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
The above drivers' rules contained in this Section 8-28 apply to Jitney
drivers and owner/operators, when performing the duties of a driver.
§ 8-29. INSPECTIONS.
§ 8-29.1. Inspection of Vehicles. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
No vehicle shall be used as a Jitney and no license shall be issued for
that purpose until the vehicle has been inspected and examined by an
officer designated by the Chief of Police, as the case may be, or his or
her designee, and found to be in a thoroughly safe, clean and sanitary
condition for the transportation of passengers. Side curtains, shades or dark
tinted window glass are not permitted on any such vehicle in accordance
with N.J.S. Title 39, Chapters 3 and 4. Thereafter, each owner of a Jitney
shall have his/her vehicle inspected and examined by the City of Asbury
Park yearly during the month of November. The validation sticker issued by
the City for the prior year shall be valid until the City inspection for the
current year is conducted. The City inspection shall occur subsequent to
the owner obtaining inspection approval from the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission. Each Jitney owner shall make an appointment with the officer
designated by the Chief of Police to conduct the City inspection. No vehicle
shall continue to operate as a Jitney if such vehicle has been inspected and
examined by the officer designated by the Chief of Police and found not to
be in a thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers. In
no event shall any Jitney operate beyond November 30 of the immediately
preceding year without a validation sticker from the City.
§ 8-30. JITNEY NUMBERING SYSTEM.
§ 8-30.1. Assignment of Numbers; Placement on Vehicle. [Ord. No.
2018-22]
a. Every Jitney will be assigned a number exclusive to that vehicle.
b. When a vehicle has been retired, sold, replaced or transferred pursuant
to section 8-26.5, the number will be put on any replacement vehicle.
c. The number shall be displayed in the rear of the vehicle.
d. The number will be three (3) inches in height and made of a reflective
type material with contrasting background to be easily read at a
distance of fifty (50) feet.
e. No number will appear on the vehicle other than the City Clerk's
assigned vehicle number.
§ 8-28.10 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-30.1
1:374
§ 8-31. JITNEY LIMITATIONS.
§ 8-31.1. Number of Jitney Licenses Limited. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
§ 8-32. RATES; DISPLAY OF RATES REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
§ 8-33. VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES; SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.
§ 8-33.1. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
§ 8-33.2. Revocation or Suspension of License. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
f. Every Jitney shall display on each rear door of the vehicle the words
"City of Asbury Park" in letters three (3) inches in height.
a. The total number of jitney owner/operator licenses issued by the City of
Asbury Park shall not exceed three (3).
b. The total number of jitney vehicles permitted to be operated by each
owner/operator at any one time shall not exceed five (5).
a. Rates and Charges. The price that may be charged to a passenger by
the owner or driver of a Jitney shall not exceed five ($5.00) dollars per
passenger at any time of the year. Only one (1) fare can be charged for
each seat in the vehicle.
b. Display of Rates. Any and all rates that are being charged by Jitney
companies, shall be posted in each Jitney in a conspicuous location and
in manner so as to provide adequate notice to all passengers.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to
penalties in accordance with Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the Code of the
City of Asbury Park, or by applicable State law.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a. above, any person
violating the provisions of Section 8-2.1, Section 8-3.1 or Section
8-4.3(f) shall, upon conviction of a first offense be subject to a fine of
two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars; upon conviction of a second offense
be subject to a fine of five hundred ($500.00) dollars; and upon
conviction of a third or subsequent offense be subject to a fine of one
thousand two hundred ($1,250.00) dollars. In addition to the above, the
violator may, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, be subject
to a term of imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days in the County
jail or in any other place provided by the municipality for the detention
of prisoners.
c. Nothing herein shall preclude the prosecution of any such violation
under Title 48 and/or Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes, nor restrain
or prohibit the Mayor and Council from suspending or revoking any
license issued hereunder in accordance with the provisions of this
Article.
§ 8-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-33.2
1:375
§ 8-33.3. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
Except as otherwise set forth herein, any person who wishes to appeal any
determination made pursuant to the provisions of this Article may do so in
writing to the City Manager within five (5) days of the date of the decision
or determination sought to be appealed. A hearing will be held by the City
council or its designee within ten (10) days of the date of service of the
appeal.
§ 8-34. ROUTES.
§ 8-34.1. Designation of Route(s). [Ord. No. 2018-22]
The City Council shall establish by resolution all routes and stops to be
utilized by Jitneys. All owner-operators shall operate their Jitneys on the
route designated by the City Council. In the event of a detour that prevents
the Jitney from following the designated route, the Jitney may take the
shortest, safest alternate route that will permit the owner-operator to
resume operating on the designated route.
§ 8-35. RULES AND REGULATIONS.
§ 8-35.1. Regulations. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
a. Licenses issued under this Article may be temporarily suspended for
not more than seven (7) days by the Chief of Police as the case may be,
or his or her designee, in the case of an emergency.
b. Absent an emergency, the City Council, after reasonable notice and a
hearing, may suspend or revoke a license for cause. At said hearing, the
licensee may be represented by counsel and will be afforded the
opportunity to testify himself or to present witnesses, to cross-examine
witnesses and, at his or her own expense, have a stenographic record
made of the proceedings. Following the hearing, the determination by
the Chief of Police as the case may be, or his/her designee, shall be
final.
c. If at any time within the licensed year a Jitney driver and/or owner/
operator is convicted of an indictable offense, the City Clerk shall
immediately suspend their license, pending a hearing.
a. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate any Jitney while that Jitney is
carrying more than thirteen (13) passengers or more than twenty (20)
passengers, as applicable, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:16-23.
b. Each passenger must be seated while the Jitney is in motion.
c. No person eight (8) years of age or younger shall permitted to be a
passenger in any Jitney vehicle without seat restraints as required in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2a.
§ 8-33.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 8-35.1
1:376
§ 8-35.2. Rules. [Ord. No. 2018-22]
d. No Jitney vehicle may transport passengers between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Hours of operations shall be designated in
collaboration with the City Manager or his or her designee.
e. Jitney owner/operators shall not provide service to private entities or
functions within the City of Asbury Park without providing adequate
service to the designated Jitney route during designated operating
hours. Any Jitney owner/operator providing private service shall notify
the City Manager or his or her designee at least forty-eight (48) hours
prior.
f. Passengers must be treated with courtesy and respect; repeated
complaints against owner-operators will be grounds for disciplinary
action initiated by the Asbury Park Police Department.
g. It shall be unlawful for the owner-operator of any Jitney to bypass any
prospective customer when there is space available on the Jitney. Any
complaints concerning the bypassing of a prospective customer by a
Jitney owner-operator shall be processed and handled by the Asbury
Park Police Department or the City Clerk.
a. There shall be no smoking on Jitneys.
b. Only a licensed Jitney can be used on a prescribed Jitney route.
c. Unsanitary, inadequate, unclean, or unsafe Jitneys will not be permitted
to operate.
d. All crashes involving a Jitney must be reported to the Asbury Park
Police Department immediately after the occurrence.
e. Jitney owner-operators must notify the City Clerk in accordance with
Section 8-26.5 when a change of license number or registration number
occurs.
f. Jitney license card must be displayed in accordance with the provisions
of Section 8-28.4.
g. It shall be unlawful for any person riding a Jitney to drink intoxicating
liquors or be under the influence of drugs of any kind.
h. Drivers must be neat and clean at all times. No shirts without collars
are permitted. Bare feet are prohibited. Exterior tops and bottoms must
be worn.
i. If a Jitney breaks down and is unable to continue, passengers must be
refunded any collected fares in full.
j. It shall be unlawful for any Jitney to block a crosswalk to stop for the
purpose of receiving or discharging passengers.
§ 8-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-35.2
1:377
Chapter 9
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 9-1. DEFINITIONS. [2000 Code § 9-1; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1]
As used in this chapter:
DOG — shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — shall mean a dog which has attained the age
of seven (7) months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business
of boarding or selling dogs or breeding for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
OWNER — when applied to the proprietorship of a dog shall include every
person having a right to property in that dog and every person who has
that dog in his keeping, and when applied to the proprietorship of any other
animal, including, but not limited to, a cat, shall include every person having
a right of property in that animal and every person who has that animal in
his keeping.
PET SHOP — shall mean a room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen,
not part of a kennel wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized
either under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
SHELTER — shall mean any establishment where dogs are received, housed
and distributed without charge.
VICIOUS DOG — shall mean any dog which has attacked or bitten any
human being or which habitually attacks other dogs or domestic animals.
§ 9-2. LICENSING OF DOGS.
§ 9-2.1. License Required. [2000 Code § 9-2.1]
No person shall keep or harbor any dog within the City without first
obtaining a license therefor, to be issued by the City Clerk upon application
by the owner and payment of the prescribed fee. No person shall keep or
harbor any dog in the City except in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
Editor's Note: See Section 9-3 for licensing of cats.
§ 9-2.2. Time of Application. [2000 Code § 9-2.2]
Any person who owns a dog of licensing age shall in the month of January
annually apply for and procure from the City Clerk a license and official
registration tag for the dog, and shall place upon the dog a collar or harness
with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 8-35.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 9-2.3
1:378
§ 9-2.3. Dog Licensing Fees. [2000 Code § 9-2.3; Ord. No. 2827; Ord.
No. 2937; Ord. No. 2015-43; Ord. No. 2016-47]
The fee for a dog license and registration tag shall be as follows:
§ 9-2.4. Certificate of Vaccination Against Rabies Required. [N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.2a]
No Municipal Clerk or other official designated by the Governing Body
shall grant any such license and official metal registration tag for any dog
unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the dog to be licensed and
registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by
and administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare, or has been certified exempt as provided
by regulations of the State Department of Health. Such vaccination shall be
repeated at intervals as provided by regulations of the State Department of
Health, and shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such
other veterinarian permitted by law to do the same. The State Department
of Health shall promulgate regulations providing for the recognized
duration of immunity, interval of inoculation, certificate of vaccination,
certificate of exemption, and such other matters related to this act.
§ 9-2.5. Application. [2000 Code § 9-2.6]
The application for a dog license shall state the breed, sex, age, color
and markings of the dog, and whether it is of a long or short haired
a. Fee Schedule.
Spayed/Neutered
Non-Spayed/Non-
Neutered
License fee $13.80 $13.80
N.J. Registration $1.00 $1.00
N.J. Pilot Clinic Fund $.20 $.20
N.J. Pet Population
Control
n/a $3.00
Total: $15.00 $18.00
b. Replacement Tag Fee. A fee of five ($5.00) dollars will be charged for
each replacement tag issued to an already registered dog.
c. Late Fee. A late fee of ten ($10.00) dollars shall be assessed beginning
March 1 of each year.
d. Expiration. For each annual renewal, the fee for the license and for the
registration tag shall be the same as for the original license and tag.
The license and registration tags expire on January 31 of the
subsequent year.
§ 9-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2.5
1:379
variety; also the name, street and post office address of the owner and the
person who keeps or harbors the dog. The information on the application
and the registration number issued for the dog shall be preserved for a
period of three (3) years by the City Clerk. In addition he/she shall forward
similar information to the State Department of Health each month on forms
furnished by the Department. Registration numbers shall be issued in the
order of the applications.
§ 9-2.6. Dogs Subject to Licensing Requirements. [2000 Code
§§ 9-2.5; 9-2.7; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.6]
Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of licensing age:
§ 9-2.7. Dogs Licensed in Other New Jersey Municipalities. [N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.3]
Only one (1) license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and the license and tag issued by any
other municipality of this State shall be accepted by the City as evidence of
compliance with this section.
§ 9-2.8. Seeing Eye Dogs and Service Dogs. [2000 Code § 9-2.4;
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3]
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing eye"
dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known as
"service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known
as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs
hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall
not be required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 9-2.9. Removing Tags. [2000 Code § 9-2.8]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his/her duties shall
remove a registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of
the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which
it was not issued.
a. Dogs owned and kept within the City on the first day of January of any
calendar year.
b. Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any calendar year
and kept within the City for more than ten (10) days after acquisition.
c. Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar year.
d. Any unlicensed dog brought into the City by any person and kept within
the City for more than ten (10) days.
e. Any dog licensed by another state, brought into the City by any person
and kept within the City for more than ninety (90) days.
§ 9-2.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 9-3
1:380
§ 9-3. (RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Section 9-3 Licensing of Cats was repealed by Ordinance No.
2016-47.
§ 9-4. KENNELS, PET SHOPS AND SHELTERS.
§ 9-4.1. Licensed Required. [2000 Code § 9-4.1]
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a pet
shop, a shelter or a pound shall apply to the City Clerk or such other City
Official so authorized for a license entitling him/her to keep or operate such
establishment.
§ 9-4.2. Description of Premises. [2000 Code § 9-4.2]
The application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located, the purpose of which it is to be
maintained, and shall be accompanied by the written approval of the City
Clerk or such other City Official so authorized showing compliance with the
local and State rules and regulations governing location of and sanitation at
such establishments.
§ 9-4.3. Regulations. [2000 Code § 9-4.3]
§ 9-4.4. Fee. [2000 Code § 9-4.4]
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for ten (10)
or less dogs is ten ($10.00) dollars and for more than ten (10) dogs, twentyfive
($25.00) dollars. The annual fee for a pet shop is ten ($10.00) dollars.
No fee shall be charged for a shelter or pound.
a. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state
the purpose for which the establishment is maintained. Such licenses
expire annually on January 31 and are subject to revocation by the City
Council on recommendations of the State Department of Health or the
City Board of Health for failure to comply with the rules and regulations
of the State Department or the City Board of Health governing the same
after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State
Department or the City Board of Health.
b. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensees and kept at such
establishments.
c. Such licenses shall not be transferable to another owner or different
premises.
d. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted
off such premises, except on leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 9-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-5
1:381
§ 9-5. DISPOSITION OF FEES. [2000 Code § 9-5; Ord. No. 2811;
Ord. No. 2827]
License fees and other moneys collected or received under this chapter
shall be forwarded to the City Treasurer within thirty (30) days after
collection or receipt and shall be placed in a special account separate from
any of the other accounts of the City and which account shall be used
for the following purposes only: for collecting, keeping and disposing of
dogs liable to seizure under this chapter; for local prevention and control
of rabies; for providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the
City Board of Health for any person known or suspected to be exposed
to rabies; for all other purposes prescribed by the Statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject; and for administering the provisions of this chapter.
Any unexpended balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be
used for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of the third
fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall
be transferred from such special account to the general funds of the City
any amount then in such account which is in excess of the total amount paid
into the special account during the last two (2) fiscal years next preceding.
The registration fee as collected for each dog shall be forwarded within
thirty (30) days after collection by the City Clerk to the State Department of
Health.
§ 9-6. REPORTS TO THE STATE.
§ 9-6.1. Reports on Kennels, Pet Shops and Pounds. [2000 Code
§ 9-6.1]
The City Clerk or such other City Official so authorized shall forward to
the State Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters
and pounds licensed within thirty (30) days after the license(s) therefor are
issued, which list shall include the name and address of the licensees and
the kind of license issued.
§ 9-6.2. Dog Census. [2000 Code § 9-6.2]
The City Clerk or such other City Official so authorized or other designated
authority shall promptly after February 1 of each year cause a canvass to be
made of all dogs owned, kept, or harbored within the City and shall report to
the State Department of Health the result thereof, setting forth in separate
columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping, or harboring
such dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept, or harbored by each
person, the registration number of each dog and the number of unlicensed
dogs owned, kept, or harbored by each person, and a description of each
unlicensed dog.
§ 9-7. ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
§ 9-5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 9-7.1
1:382
§ 9-7.1. Position Established; Administrative Control. [Ord. No.
2786]
There is hereby created in and for the City of Asbury Park the position
of Animal Control Officer. Such position shall be within the administrative
control of the Police Department.
§ 9-7.2. Appointment; Term. [Ord. No. 2786]
The Animal Control Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager, and
shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager.
§ 9-7.3. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2786]
The Animal Control Officer shall be qualified by education and experience
and shall possess, at a minimum, the following requirements prior to his or
her appointment by the City Manager:
§ 9-7.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2786]
The Animal Control Officer shall receive such compensation as shall be set
forth by ordinance of the City Council.
§ 9-7.5. Duties. [Ord. No. 2786]
The Animal Control Officer shall perform the following duties:
a. The Animal Control Officer shall possess a current and valid certificate
as an Animal Control Officer issued by the New Jersey Department of
Health and Senior Services.
b. The Animal Control Officer may be required to possess a current and
valid certificate as a Certified Animal Cruelty Investigator issued by the
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services.
c. The Animal Control Officer shall possess a valid New Jersey driver's
license.
d. The Animal Control Officer shall have at least one (1) year of experience
in animal control.
e. The Animal Control Officer may be required to complete a course and
obtain a certification in the Chemical Immobilization of Animals,
pursuant to the direction of the Deputy Chief of Police.
The City Manager may waive any of the requirements set forth above
when, in his or her judgment, the best interests of the City shall be
served thereby, except that the City Manager shall not waive any of
the requirements for the position that are mandated by the New Jersey
Department of Personnel (N.J.D.O.P.) for Civil Service jurisdictions.
§ 9-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-7.5
1:383
§ 9-7.6. Reporting. [Ord. No. 2786]
The Animal Control Officer shall report to, and be under the supervision and
direction of the City Manager and the Deputy Chief of Police.
§ 9-8. SEIZURE; IMPOUNDMENT.
§ 9-8.1. Seizure of Dogs. [2000 Code § 9-7.3; Ord. No. 2786]
Any official authorized to perform any duty under this chapter may go upon
any premises to seize for impounding any dog which he/she may lawfully
seize and impound when such officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog,
a. Enforce all laws and ordinances enacted for the protection of animals,
including but not limited to, animal control, animal welfare and animal
cruelty laws of the State and local ordinances.
b. Conduct investigations and initiate and prosecute complaints and/or
issue summonses for violations of local or State animal control
regulations.
c. Engage in the apprehension and arrest and detection of offenders who
have validated animal control, animal welfare and animal cruelty laws
of the State as well as local ordinances.
d. Patrol the City streets and capture and impound stray animals, wild
game, birds, and unlicensed dogs.
e. Care for and feed animals and observe their physical condition and
behavior.
f. Contact a veterinarian(s) when necessary for assistance with and care
of animals.
g. Enforce required rabies control program(s).
h. Capture and impound animals suspected of being rabid and observe
their physical condition.
i. Arrange for the destruction of rabid animals in a humane way, and take
their remains to the State Health Clinic or other appropriate facility, for
analysis.
j. Promote the adoption of animals and arrange for their spaying and
neutering.
k. Maintain records and files relative to all matters of City business which
involve animal control issues.
l. Such other responsibilities as may be assigned to him or her by the City
Manager and/or by the Deputy Chief of Police, or which are otherwise
necessary for the discharge or his or her duties or the conduct of City
business.
§ 9-7.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 9-8.1
1:384
except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if the owner is present
and forbids the same.
§ 9-8.2. Impoundment of Dogs. [2000 Code § 9-3.8; Ord. No. 2786;
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16]
§ 9-9. VICIOUS DOGS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
a. Authority. The Animal Control Officer or any Police Officer shall have
the power to take into custody and impound, and thereafter destroy and
dispose of the following:
1. Any dog off the premises of the owner which the Animal Control
Officer or Police Officer has reason to believe is a stray dog.
2. Any dog off the premises of the owner without a current
registration tag on its collar.
3. Any female dog off the premises of the owner.
4. Any dog as stated in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16.
b. Service of Notice. If any dog so seized wears a collar or harness having
inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any
person or a registration tag or the owner is known, the Animal Control
Officer or Police Officer shall serve on the person whose address is
given on the collar or on the owner, if known, a notice in writing stating
that the dog has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or
destroyed if not claimed within seven (7) days after the service of the
notice.
c. Method of Service. A notice shall be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it as the person's usual
or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar or by
forwarding it by mail in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his/
her usual or last known place of abode or to the address given on the
collar.
d. Disposition and Destruction. When any dog so seized has been detained
for seven (7) days after notice is given or when notice has not been and
cannot be given as set forth above and if the owner has not claimed the
dog and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention, including
a charge of five ($5.00) dollars per day for maintenance during the time
the dog is impounded, and if the dog is unlicensed at the time of the
seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring the dog has not
produced a license and registration tag for the dog, the Animal Control
Officer or Police Officer may place the unclaimed dog in a legitimate
home or arrange for the destruction of the dog in a humane manner
causing as little pain as possible.
§ 9-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-9.1
1:385
§ 9-9.1. Adoption of State Statute Provisions. [2000 Code § 9-9.1]
The portion of the New Jersey Statutes, specifically N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 through
4:19-37, commonly referred to as the vicious or potentially dangerous dogs
statute, as amended and supplemented, are hereby adopted in entirety by
reference.
§ 9-9.2. Authority of Animal Control Officer; Notice of Complaint.
[2000 Code §§ 9-3.6, 9-9.1; Ord. No. 2786; N.J.S.A. 4:19-16 et seq.]
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to receive and investigate
complaints against dogs, and when any dog complained against shall be
deemed by the Animal Control Officer to be a potentially dangerous dog or
a vicious dog, he/she shall report the facts to the Municipal Judge, who shall
thereupon cause the owner or person keeping such dog to be notified in
writing of the complaint against such dog, and give notice to appear before
the Judge at a stated time and place. The Judge shall inquire into the facts
and give all interested persons an opportunity to be heard under oath and
to be represented by counsel. If the Judge decides that such dog complained
of is a potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog, notice of such decision
shall be given to the owner of such dog. All proceedings shall be held in
accordance with State law.
§ 9-9.3. Potentially Dangerous Dog. [N.J.S.A. 4:19-24; N.J.S.A.
4:19-31]
a. Definition.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG[N.J.S.A. 4:19-18] — shall mean any
dog or dog hybrid declared potentially dangerous by a Municipal Court
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-23.
b. Finding to Declare Dog Potentially Dangerous.
1. The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially
dangerous if it finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
(a) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a
person during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious
threat of bodily injury or death to a person, or
(b) Severely injured or killed another domestic animal, and
(1) Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person;
or
(2) Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal, or
(c) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged
to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic
animals.
2. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
§ 9-9.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 9-9.3
1:386
(a) Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a
person if the dog was provoked, or
(b) Severely injuring or killing a domestic animal if the domestic
animal was the aggressor. [N.J.S.A. 4:19-23]
c. Order and Schedule for Compliance for Potentially Dangerous Dog;
Conditions.
1. If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially
dangerous, it shall issue an order and a schedule for compliance
which, in part:
(a) Shall require the owner to comply with the following
conditions:
(1) To apply, at his own expense, to the Municipal Clerk or
other official designated to license dogs pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2, for a special municipal potentially
dangerous dog license, municipal registration number, and
red identification tag issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-30.
The owner shall, at his own expense, have the registration
number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent location. A
potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until the
owner obtains a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license, municipal registration number, and red
identification tag;
(2) To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises
warning that a potentially dangerous dog is on the
premises. The sign shall be visible and legible from fifty
(50) feet of the enclosure required pursuant to paragraph
3. below;
(3) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the
potentially dangerous dog on the property where the
potentially dangerous dog will be kept and maintained,
which has sound sides, top and bottom to prevent the
potentially dangerous dog from escaping by climbing,
jumping or digging and within a fence of at least six (6)
feet in height separated by at least three (3) feet from the
confined area. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog
shall securely lock the enclosure to prevent the entry of
the general public and to preclude any release or escape of
a potentially dangerous dog by an unknowing child or
other person. All potentially dangerous dogs shall be
confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by
the Animal Control Officer and having a minimum tensile
strength sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict
the potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius of
§ 9-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-9.3
1:387
no more than three (3) feet from the owner and under the
direct supervision of the owner;
(b) May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an
amount determined by the Municipal Court to cover any
damage or injury caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The
liability insurance, which may be separate from any other
homeowner policy, shall contain a provision requiring the
municipality in which the owner resides to be named as an
additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination or
expiration of the liability insurance policy. [N.J.S.A. 4:19-24]
d. Duties of Owner of Potentially Dangerous Dog.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
1. Comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. in accordance
with a schedule established by the Municipal Court, but in no case
more than sixty (60) days subsequent to the date of determination;
2. Notify the licensing authority, local Police Department, and the
Animal Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large, or
has attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal;
3. Notify the licensing authority, local Police Department, and the
Animal Control Officer within twenty-four (24) hours of the death,
sale or donation of a potentially dangerous dog;
4. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner
that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
5. Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a
different municipality, notify the licensing authority, Police
Department, and Animal Control Officer of that municipality of the
transfer of ownership and the name, address and telephone of the
new owner; and
6. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to section N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.3, pay a potentially dangerous dog license fee to the
municipality as provided by N.J.S.A. 4:19-31. [N.J.S.A. 4:19-28]
e. Violations by Owner; Penalties; Enforcement; Seizure and
Impoundment of Dog; Destruction by Order of Court. The owner of a
potentially dangerous dog who is found by clear and convincing
evidence to have violated this act, or any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, or to have failed to comply with a court's order shall
be subject to a fine of not more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars
per day of the violation, and each day's continuance of the violation
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. The Municipal Court
shall have jurisdiction to enforce this section. An Animal Control Officer
is authorized to seize and impound any potentially dangerous dog
§ 9-9.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 9-9.3
1:388
§ 9-9.4. Vicious Dogs. [N.J.S.A. 4:19-22]
whose owner fails to comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et
seq., or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or a court's
order. The Municipal Court may order that the dog so seized and
impounded be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
[N.J.S.A. 4:19-29]
f. Potentially Dangerous Dog Registration Number, Red Identification Tag
and License. The Municipality shall:
1. Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag along with a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to
the Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the Court's
orders. The last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog
registration number issued by the municipality will be the three
number code assigned to the municipality in the regulations
promulgated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-33. The Animal Control
Officer shall verify, in writing, compliance to the Municipal Clerk or
other official designated to license dogs in the municipality;
2. Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of this
section and N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. [N.J.S.A. 4:19-30]
g. Potentially Dangerous Dog License Required; Fee. The owner or keeper
of any dog declared to be potentially dangerous shall obtain a license
from the municipality and pay an annual fee of one hundred fifty
($150.00) dollars. The license shall be issued according to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-30.
a. Definition.
VICIOUS DOG[N.J.S.A. 4:19-18] — shall mean any dog or dog hybrid
declared vicious by a Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-22.
b. Findings to Declare Dog Vicious; Grounds.
1. The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear
and convincing evidence that the dog:
(a) Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
(b) Has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26.
2. A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious
bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the
dog was provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof
to demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
§ 9-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-9.4
1:389
§ 9-10. CONTROL OF DOGS.
§ 9-10.1. Barking Dogs. [2000 Code § 9-3.1]
No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually
barks or cries so as to disturb the public peace.
§ 9-10.2. Running at Large. [2000 Code § 9-3.2]
No owner of any dog shall permit this dog to run at large upon the public
streets or in any public park or in any public building or in any other public
place within the City.
§ 9-10.3. Leashing. [2000 Code § 9-3.3]
No owner of any dog shall permit it to be upon the public streets or in any
public place within the City unless the dog is accompanied by a person over
the age of twelve (12) years and is securely confined and controlled by an
adequate leash not more than six (6') feet long.
§ 9-10.4. Damage to Property. [2000 Code § 9-3.4]
No owner of a dog shall permit it to do any injury or to do any damage to any
lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property. No person owning or having
the care, custody or control of any dog shall permit such dog to soil or defile
or to commit any nuisance upon any sidewalk, street or thoroughfare, in or
upon any public property, or in or on the property of persons other than the
owner or person having the care, custody or control of such dog.
§ 9-10.5. Soiling and Defilement by Dogs. [2000 Code § 9-3.5]
No person owning, harboring, keeping, walking, or in charge of any dog
shall cause, suffer, permit or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on
or commit any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, street, sidewalk,
passageway, road, bypath, play area, park, or any place where people
congregate or walk, or upon any boardwalk, benches or beachfront in this
City, or upon any public property whatsoever, or upon any private property
without the permission of the owner of the private property in the last
instance. If any such person shall permit such dog to soil, defile, defecate on
or commit any nuisance on the areas aforesaid, he or she shall immediately
remove all feces and droppings deposited by such dog, which removal shall
be in a sanitary manner by shovel, container, disposal bag, etc., and the
feces and droppings shall be removed by the person from the designated
areas and disposed of by the person in a sanitary manner.
§ 9-11. PET WASTE.
3. If the Municipal Court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to section N.J.S.A. 4:19-25, the dog
shall be destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except
that no dog may be destroyed during the pendency of an appeal.
§ 9-9.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 9-11.1
1:390
§ 9-11.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2805 § 9-10.2]
This section shall establish requirements for the proper disposal of pet solid
waste in the City of Asbury Park, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 9-11.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2805 § 9-10.3]
For the purpose of this section:
IMMEDIATE — shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — shall mean any person who shall possess, maintain,
house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or
not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — shall mean waste matter expelled from the bowels of
the pet, also known as "excrement."
PROPER DISPOSAL — shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container
which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse
collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
§ 9-11.3. Requirements for Disposal. [Ord. No. 2805 § 9-10.4]
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 9-11.4. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2805 § 9-10.5]
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 9-11.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2805 § 9-10.6]
This section shall be enforced by the City of Asbury Park Police Department
or any other department as designated by the City Manager or City Council.
§ 9-11.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2805 § 9-10.7]
a. Maximum Penalty. For violation of any provision of this section, unless a
specific penalty is otherwise provided in connection with the provision
§ 9-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-11.6
1:391
§ 9-12. WILDLIFE FEEDING.
§ 9-12.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2804 § 9-11.2]
This section shall prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public
park or on any other property owned or operated by the City of Asbury
Park, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for failure to comply. This prohibition helps prevent nutrients,
organic pollutants, and pathogens associated with wildlife fecal matter from
entering local water bodies, as well as preventing overgrazing, which can
lead to erosion. Feeding attracts wildlife in unnatural number, beyond food
and water supplies. This overcrowding often results in overgrazing which
can lease to erosion, which can result in excess amounts of sediment getting
into the City's waters. Excess nutrients from fecal matter in ponds and other
waterways caused by unnatural numbers of wildlife can result in water
quality problems such as summer algal blooms.
§ 9-12.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2804 § 9-11.3]
For the purpose of this section:
FEED — shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated. Wildlife includes waterfowl, bears, deer, and pigeons, among
other animals.
violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the violation shall be
by one (1) or more of the following: imprisonment in the County Jail or
in any place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners,
for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days; or by a fine not exceeding
one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars; or by a period of community service
not exceeding ninety (90) days.
b. Minimum Penalty. The City Council hereby prescribes that for the
violation of any provision of this section, unless a specific penalty is
otherwise provided in connection with the provision violated, a
minimum penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine of one
hundred ($100.00) dollars. The Court before which any person is
convicted of violating this section shall have power to impose any fine,
term of punishment, or period of community service not less than the
minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in this section.
§ 9-11.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 9-12.3
1:392
§ 9-12.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2804 § 9-11.4]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by City of Asbury Park, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 9-12.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2804 § 9-11.5]
This section shall be enforced by the City of Asbury Park Police Department
or any other department as designated by the City Manager or City Council.
§ 9-12.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2804 § 9-11.6]
§ 9-13. through § 9-14. (RESERVED)
§ 9-15. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2786 § 9-3.10]
All Police Officers of the City of Asbury Park, regular and special, and the
Animal Control Officer, are hereby given authority and are charged with the
duty of enforcing this chapter.
§ 9-16. INTERFERENCE. [Ord. No. 2786 § 9-3.9]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 9-17. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [2000 Code § 9-8; Ord. No.
2786 § 9-8; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19]
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.2, Dogs; license and metal registration tag required; placing tag
on dog, N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.4, Time for applying for license; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.6,
a. Maximum Penalty. For violation of any provision of this section unless a
specific penalty is otherwise provided in connection with the provision
violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the violation shall be
by one (1) or more of the following: imprisonment in the County Jail or
in any place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners,
for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days; or by a fine not exceeding
one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars; or by a period of community service
not exceeding ninety (90) days.
b. Minimum Penalty. The City Council hereby prescribes that for the
violation of any provision of this section, unless a specific penalty is
otherwise provided in connection with the provision violated, a
minimum penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine of one
hundred ($100.00) dollars. The Court before which any person is
convicted of violating this section shall have power to impose any fine,
term of punishment, or period of community service not less than the
minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in this section.
§ 9-12.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-17
1:393
Dogs brought into State; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.7, Removing tag from dog without
owner's consent; attaching tag to another dog; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8, License
for Kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.10, Kennels, pet
shops, shelters or pounds; permitting dogs to go off premises; and N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.18, Interfering with persons performing duties under act, or the
rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.14, shall be liable to a penalty of fifty ($50.00)
dollars for each offense.
Any person who violates any provision of this section for which no other
penalty is established shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty
established in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
Chapter 10
FINANCE AND TAXATION
§ 10-1. TAX EXEMPTION; FIVE YEAR PLAN.
§ 10-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 3059 Preamble]
The Five-Year Exemption and Abatement Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, et seq.,
(the "Act") enables municipalities which have been designated as in need
of rehabilitation to exempt or abate local property taxes imposed upon
eligible dwellings, commercial and industrial structures. The entire area of
the City of Asbury Park (the "City") has been designated by the Department
of Community Affairs to be an area in need of rehabilitation and is in an
area endangered by blight and in need of rehabilitation as measured by
physical deterioration of buildings and the maintenance thereof, the age of
building stock and other structures and arrearages in real property taxes
due on buildings, structures and land. The City Council of the City of Asbury
Park has determined that it is in the best interests of the City to encourage
the renovation and rehabilitation and new construction of commercial and
industrial structures, and residential buildings.
§ 10-1.2. Authority; Term of Exemptions; Expiration. [Ord. No. 3059
§§ 2, 3]
The City Council hereby determines to utilize the authority granted under
Article VIII, Section I, Paragraph 6 of the New Jersey Constitution to
establish the eligibility of dwellings, and commercial and industrial
structures for exemptions as provided in the within section and as permitted
by the Act throughout the entire municipality.
This section authorizes the City to grant exemptions up to a five-year
period to commence and take effect in the 2014 tax year and thereafter.
This section shall lapse, unless readopted, in the 2018 tax year and no
exemptions shall be granted after December 31, 2018 tax year without such
re-adoption.
§ 9-17 ASBURY PARK CODE § 10-1.3
1:394
§ 10-1.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3059 § 4]
As used in this section:
§ 10-1.4. Dwelling Exemptions. [Ord. No. 3059 §§ 5, 6]
a. Qualifying commercial or industrial structures shall mean:
1. Structures or parts thereof used for the manufacturing, processing
or assembling of material or manufactured products, or for
research, office, industrial, commercial, retail, recreational, hotel
or motel facilities, or warehousing purposes, or for any
combination thereof, which will tend to maintain or provide gainful
employment within the City, assist in the economic development of
the City, maintain or increase the tax base of the City and maintain
or diversify and expand commerce within the City.
2. Not included as qualifying commercial or industrial structures are
structures or parts thereof used or to be used by any business
relocated from another qualifying municipality unless: the total
square footage of the floor area of the structure or part thereof
used or to be used by the business at the new site together with the
total square footage of the land used or to be used by the business
at the new site exceeds the total square footage of that utilized by
the business at its current site of operations by at least ten (10%)
percent; and the property that the business is relocating to has
been the subject of a remedial action plan costing in excess of
$250,000.00 performed pursuant to an administrative consent
order entered into pursuant to authority vested in the
Commissioner of Environmental Protection under P.L. 1970, c. 33
(C. 13:10-1, et seq.), the "Water Pollution Control Act," P.L. 1977, c.
74 (C. 58:10A-1, et seq.), the "Solid Waste Management Act," P.L.
1970, c. 39 (C. 13:1E-1, et seq.), and the "Spill Compensation and
Control Act," P.L. 1976, c. 141 (C. 58:10-23.11, et seq.).
b. A renovation housing project shall mean any work or undertaking to
provide a decent, safe, and sanitary single-family dwelling, to
exclusively benefit at least half of the number of people occupying a
dwelling as their primary residence.
c. An Exemption shall mean that portion of the Assessor's full and true
value of any improvement, conversion, alteration or construction not
regarded as increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to the
Act.
d. All other terms utilized in this section not specifically defined herein
shall conform to the meaning identified in the Act.
a. The City Council hereby determines to provide for the exemption from
taxation of improvements (1) resulting from a renovation housing
project and (2) to dwellings more than twenty (20) years old. The term
"dwelling," for purposes of this subsection, shall include condominium
§ 10-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.4
1:395
§ 10-1.5. Application Procedure for Dwellings. [Ord. No. 3059 § 7]
The exemptions identified in § 10-1.4 require the following application
procedure:
residential units but not cooperative type residential properties. The
City shall regard the Assessor's full and true value of the improvements
for each renovation housing project as not increasing the value of
the property for a period of five (5) years, notwithstanding that the
value of the property to which the improvements are made is increased
thereby. In determining the value of real property for each dwelling
unit, the City shall regard the first $25,000.00 in the Assessor's full
and true value of improvements for each dwelling unit primarily and
directly affected by the improvements as not increasing the value of the
property for a period of five (5) years, notwithstanding that the value of
the property to which the improvements are made is increased thereby.
During the exemption period, the assessment on any property pursuant
to this subsection shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing
immediately prior to the improvements, except if there is damage to
the dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
deduction.
b. The City Council hereby determines to provide for an exemption of
thirty percent (30%) of the Assessor's full and true value for each of the
first five (5) years of construction of new dwellings or of the conversion
of other buildings and structures, including unutilized public buildings,
to dwelling use. The term "dwelling," for purposes of this Paragraph,
shall include condominium residential units but not cooperative type
residential units. This exemption is to be granted notwithstanding that
the value of the property upon which the construction or conversion
occurs is increased thereby.
a. An application must be submitted to and filed with the City's Tax
Assessor no later than thirty (30) days, including Saturdays and
Sundays, following completion of the improvement, conversion,
alteration or construction. An application may be filed with the Tax
Assessor any time prior to such deadline. "Completion" means that the
subject improvement is substantially ready for the intended use for
which it is constructed. Such completion is substantially ready for the
intended use for which it is constructed. Such completion may be
evidenced by the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or like
document by the City's building inspector(s).
b. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director of the
Division of Taxation and shall be available to claimants at the City's
municipal building.
c. Each application for exemption from taxation of improvements
resulting from a renovation housing project must demonstrate that the
applicant meets the definition of a renovation housing project and the
criteria for exemption set forth in the Act.
§ 10-1.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 10-1.5
1:396
§ 10-1.6. Exemptions to Improvements. [Ord. No. 3059 § 8]
In addition to the Tax Assessor's authority to grant exemptions identified in
§ 10-1.4, this section also authorizes the exemption for up to the Assessor's
full and true value of the "improvements" to existing commercial and
industrial structures as may be granted only by the governing body on an
individual basis after review, evaluation and approval of each application
by resolution. The application procedure for seeking such an exemption
shall be consistent with the procedures outlined in § 10-1.9. However,
the granting of an exemption under this subsection shall not require the
adoption of an ordinance nor a written tax agreement. An "improvement"
is defined under N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3n, which definition is fully incorporated
herein, and includes the renovation, rehabilitation, repair, and alteration
of an existing building that improves the safety and attractiveness of the
building, but does not include ordinary painting, repairs, and replacement
of maintenance items nor the enlargement of the volume of an existing
structure by more than thirty percent (30%).
§ 10-1.7. Exemptions for New Construction.
The City Council hereby further determines to grant exemptions from
taxation for the construction of commercial and industrial structures
pursuant to the procedures set forth in the Act and in this section. The term
"construction" is defined under N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3g, which definition is fully
incorporated herein, and includes the construction of a new commercial
or industrial building or the enlargement of an existing commercial or
industrial building by more than thirty percent (30%), but shall not mean
the conversion of an existing building or structure to another use.
§ 10-1.8. Mixed Uses.
For purposes of subsections 10-1.6 and 10-1.7, the term commercial
structure relates to office, retail and like uses, but does not include multiple
dwelling type (three or more rental units) structures. In the event a
structure includes a mix of commercial and multiple dwelling uses, the
exemption shall only apply to that component of the structure relating to
commercial use.
§ 10-1.9. Application for New Construction. [Ord. No. 3059 § 11]
Applicants for tax exemption under § 10-1.7 above shall provide the
Governing Body of the City with an application setting forth the following
information:
d. Every application for exemption timely filed with the Tax Assessor shall
be approved and allowed by the Assessor if the application is consistent
with the statute and this section and the subject property qualifies for
the exemption as provided herein.
e. The granting of the exemption shall be recorded and made a permanent
part of the official tax records of the City and its Tax Assessor.
§ 10-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.9
1:397
a. A general description of a project for which exemption is sought;
b. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
c. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
Governing Body to demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
d. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two (2) years of completion of the
project;
e. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption on the project,
and a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant if a tax
agreement is granted;
f. Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
g. A statement showing (1) the real property taxes currently being
assessed at the project site; (2) estimated tax payments that would be
made annually by the applicant on the project during the period of the
agreement, and (3) estimated tax payments that would be made by the
applicant on the project during the first full year following the
termination of the tax agreement;
h. A description of any lease agreement between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of the
user's businesses;
i. Such other pertinent information as the Governing Body may require on
a case-by-case basis.
j. The original and six (6) copies of the application shall be submitted to
the City Clerk no later than thirty (30) days following completion of the
project, including Saturdays and Sundays. An application may be filed
with the City Clerk any time prior to such deadline. "Completion" means
that the subject improvement is substantially ready for the intended use
for which it is constructed. Such completion may be evidenced by the
issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or like document by the City's
building inspector(s).
k. The Council shall have full discretion to accept, deny or revise the
application and shall not be subject to any time limitations to make a
determination.
l. Notwithstanding the deadline for filing exemption applications
reflected in Subsection j. herein, which deadline is statutorily
mandated, this section is adopted with the intent of encouraging
applicants to seek approvals of tax exemptions for eligible properties as
early as possible, preferably prior to commencement of construction.
§ 10-1.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 10-1.10
1:398
§ 10-1.10. Tax Agreement. [Ord. No. 3059 § 12]
If the City Council grants the exemption for the project, the Council shall
adopt an Ordinance authorizing a tax agreement for a particular project.
The Council shall enter into a written agreement with an applicant for
the exemption of local property taxes. The agreement shall provide for the
applicant to pay the municipality in lieu of full property taxes an amount
equal to a percentage of taxes otherwise due according to the following
schedule:
§ 10-1.11. Filing of Agreement. [Ord. No. 3059 § 13]
The City Clerk is authorized to forward a copy of all executed agreements
entered into pursuant to this section to the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs within thirty
(30) days of the date of execution.
§ 10-1.12. Changes in Conditions Under Agreement. [Ord. No. 3059
§ 14]
In the event a property owner subject to a tax agreement ceases to operate
or disposes of the property or fails to meet the conditions for qualifying for
the exemption, the local property taxes due for all the prior years subject
to exemption and for the current year shall be payable as if no exemption
had been granted. The City's Tax Collector shall notify the property owner
within fifteen (15) days of the date of disqualification of the amount of taxes
due. In the event the subject property has been transferred to a new owner
and it is determined that the new owner will continue to use the property
pursuant to the qualifying conditions, and no tax or payment in lieu of tax
shall be delinquent, the exemption shall continue and the agreement shall
remain in effect.
§ 10-1.13. Additional Improvements. [Ord. No. 3059 § 15]
The City Council hereby determines that an additional improvement,
conversion or construction completed on a property already granted a
previous exemption pursuant to this section during the period in which the
a. In the first full year after completion, no payment in lieu of taxes
otherwise due;
b. In the second full year after completion, an amount not less than twenty
percent (20%) of taxes otherwise due;
c. In the third full year after completion, an amount not less than forty
(40%) of taxes otherwise due;
d. In the fourth full year after completion, an amount not less than sixty
percent (60%) of taxes otherwise due; and
e. In the fifth full year after completion, an amount not less than eighty
percent (80%) of taxes otherwise due.
§ 10-1.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-1.13
1:399
previous exemption is in effect, shall qualify for an additional exemption
under the standards identified in this section. The additional improvement,
conversion or construction shall be considered as separate for purposes of
calculating the exemption, except that the assessed value of any previous
improvement, conversion or construction shall be added to the assessed
valuation as it was prior to that improvement, conversion or construction
for the purpose of determining the assessed value of the property for which
any additional exemption is to be subtracted.
§ 10-1.14. Delinquent or Unpaid Taxes. [Ord. No. 3059 § 16]
No exemption shall be granted or tax agreement entered into pursuant to
this section for any property for which property taxes are delinquent or
remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 10-1.15. Appeal of Assessment Not Permitted. [Ord. No. 3059
§ 17]
An applicant for tax exemption under this Ordinance shall agree, as a
condition to receiving the exemption, not to file a tax appeal challenging the
assessment granted under this section.
§ 10-1.16. Revaluation or Reassessment. [Ord. No. 3059 § 18]
In the event that the City implements a revaluation or reassessment during
the exemption period for any property, the exemption shall continue to
apply but a valuation level consistent with the revaluation or reassessment.
§ 10-1.17. Revision to Assessment. [Ord. No. 3059 § 19]
The granting of an exemption for a particular property shall not prejudice
the right of the City to appropriately examine and revise the assessment
during the five-year exemption period in the event the base assessment is
found to be improperly valued and assessed.
§ 10-1.18. Termination of Agreement. [Ord. No. 3059 § 20]
At the termination of an agreement for tax exemption authorized pursuant
to this section, the project or improvement shall be subject to all applicable
real property taxes as provided by State laws and regulations and local
ordinances, provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the
project or improvement at the termination of the agreement for tax
exemption from qualifying for and receiving the full benefits of any other
tax preference provided by law.
§ 10-1.19. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 3059 § 21]
This section shall take effect for tax year 2014 upon final passage, approval
and publication as provided by law.
§ 10-1.13 ASBURY PARK CODE § 10-2
1:400
§ 10-2. HOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY AND TRANSIENT
ACCOMMODATION TAX. [Ord. No. 2980; amended 5-8-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-17]
§ 10-2.1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this section to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003, c.
114, as amended by P.L. 2018, c. 49, which authorizes the governing body of
a municipality to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage
rate not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a room or
rooms in a hotel or transient accommodation subject to taxation pursuant to
Subsection (d) of N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3, which shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room or transient
accommodation.
§ 10-2.2. Definitions.
As used in this section:
CITY — The City of Asbury Park, in the County of Monmouth and State of
New Jersey.
CUSTOMER — Every occupant of a room or rooms in a hotel or transient
accommodation.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department of
the Treasury for the State of New Jersey.
HOTEL — Establishments as defined in N.J.A.C. 18:24-3.4, as amended from
time to time, but shall not include a "transient accommodation" as defined
herein.
OCCUPANCY — The use or possession or the right to the use or possession,
of any room in a hotel or transient accommodation.
OCCUPANT — A person or persons who, for a consideration, uses,
possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any room in a hotel or
transient accommodation under any lease, concession, permit, right of
access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise.
PERSONS REQUIRED TO COLLECT TAX — Every operator of a hotel or
transient accommodation.
PURCHASER — Any person purchasing or hiring property or services from
another person, the receipts from which are taxable.
RESIDENCE — A house, condominium, or other residential dwelling unit in
a building or structure or part of a building or structure that is designed,
constructed, leased, rented, let or hired out, or otherwise made available
for use as a residence.
ROOM — Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel or
transient accommodation, which is available for or let out for any purpose
other than a place of assembly.
§ 10-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2.2
1:401
TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATION — A room, group of rooms, or other living
or sleeping space for the lodging of occupants, including but not limited
to residences or buildings used as residences. "Transient accommodation"
does not include: a hotel or hotel room; a room, group of rooms or other
living or sleeping space used as a place of assembly; a dormitory or other
similar residential facility of an elementary or secondary school or a college
or university; a hospital, nursing home, or other similar residential facility
of a provider of services for the care, support and treatment of individuals
that is licensed by the state; a campsite, cabin, lean-to, or other similar
residential facility of a campground or an adult or youth camp; a furnished
or unfurnished private residential property, including but not limited to
condominiums, bungalows, single-family homes and similar living units,
where no maid service, room service, linen changing service or other
common hotel services are made available by the lessor and where the
keys to the furnished or unfurnished private residential property, whether
a physical key, access to a keyless locking mechanism, or other means
of physical ingress to the furnished or unfurnished private residential
property, are provided to the lessee at the location of an offsite real estate
broker licensed by the New Jersey Real Estate Commission pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 45:15-1 et seq.; or leases of real property with a term of at least
90 consecutive days. The term "transient accommodation" shall specifically
include the short-term rental of a dwelling unit, or part thereof, within the
City of Asbury Park pursuant to the provisions of § 13-1300 ("Short-term
Rentals") of the City Code.
TRANSIENT SPACE MARKETPLACE — An online marketplace through
which a person may offer transient accommodations or hotel rooms to
individuals. A "transient space marketplace" allows transient
accommodations or hotel rooms to be advertised or listed through an online
marketplace in exchange for consideration or provides a means for a
customer to arrange for the occupancy of the transient accommodation or
hotel room in exchange for consideration. A "transient space marketplace"
shall not include an online marketplace operated by or on behalf of a hotel
or hotel corporation that facilitates customer occupancy solely for the hotel
or hotel corporation's owned or managed hotels and franchises.
VENDOR — Any person selling or hiring property or services to another
person upon the receipts from which a tax is imposed.
§ 10-2.3. Tax Established.
There is hereby established a hotel room occupancy and transient
accommodation tax in the City of Asbury Park which shall be fixed at a
uniform percentage rate of 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a
hotel room or transient accommodation in the City of Asbury Park which is
subject to taxation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3B-3(d).
§ 10-2.4. Tax in Addition to Other Taxes or Fees.
The hotel room occupancy and transient accommodation tax shall be in
addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local
§ 10-2.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 10-2.4
1:402
ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of
a hotel room or transient accommodation.
§ 10-2.5. Exemption.
The hotel room occupancy and transient accommodation tax authorized
herein shall not be imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser,
user or customer is an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy
under the Sales and Use Tax Act pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3(d).
§ 10-2.6. Statutory Requirements.
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114, as amended by
P.L. 2018, c. 49:
§ 10-2.7. Collection of Tax.
a. All taxes imposed by this section shall be paid by the purchaser.
b. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this section.
c. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
d. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense, and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
a. The tax imposed by this section shall be collected on behalf of the City
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or transient
accommodation customer.
b. Each person or transient space marketplace required to collect the tax
herein imposed shall be liable for the tax imposed, collected or required
to be collected hereunder. Any such person or transient space
marketplace shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax
from a customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the
same time, provided that the Chief Financial Officer of the City shall be
joined as a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
c. Notwithstanding any other provision of law or administrative action to
the contrary, transient space marketplaces shall be required to collect
and pay on behalf of persons engaged in the business of providing
transient accommodations or hotel rooms located in the City the tax for
transactions solely consummated through the transient space
marketplace. For not less than four years following the end of the
calendar year in which the transaction occurred, the transient space
§ 10-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2.7
1:403
marketplace shall maintain the following data for those transactions
consummated through the transient marketplace:
1. The name of the person who provided the transient accommodation
or hotel room;
2. The name of the customer who procured occupancy of the transient
accommodation or hotel room;
3. The address, including any unit designation, of the transient
accommodation or hotel room;
4. The dates and nightly rates for which the consumer procured
occupancy of the transient accommodation or hotel room;
5. The municipal transient accommodation registration number and/
or short-term rental permit number;
6. A statement as to whether such booking services will be provided in
connection with (i) short-term rental of the entirety of such unit; (ii)
short-term rental of part of such unit, but not the entirety of such
unit, and/or (iii) short-term rental of the entirety of such unit, or
part thereof, in which a non-short-term occupant will continue to
occupy such unit for the duration of such short-term rental;
7. The individualized name or number of each such advertisement or
listing connected to such unit and the uniform resource locator
(URL) for each such listing or advertisement, where applicable; and
8. Such other information as the Division of Taxation may by rule
require.
The Division of Taxation may audit transient space marketplaces as
necessary to ensure data accuracy and enforce tax compliance.
d. A person required to collect a tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this section shall, on or before the dates required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:32B-17, forward to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the
Department of the Treasury the tax collected in the preceding month
and make and file a return for the preceding month with the Director on
any form and containing any information as the Director shall prescribe
as necessary to determine liability for the tax in the preceding month
during which the person was required to collect the tax.
e. The Director may permit or require returns to be made covering other
periods and upon any dates as the Director may specify. In addition, the
Director may require payments of tax liability at any intervals and
based upon any classifications as the Director may designate. In
prescribing any other periods to be covered by the return or intervals or
classifications for payment of tax liability, the Director may take into
account the dollar volume of tax involved as well as the need for
ensuring the prompt and orderly collection of the tax imposed.
§ 10-2.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 10-2.7
1:404
§ 10-2.8. Unpaid Taxes.
§ 10-2.9. Annual Notice to State Treasurer Regarding Hotels.
The City shall annually provide to the State Treasurer, not later than
January 1 of each year, a list of the names and addresses of all of the hotels
located in the City. The City shall also provide to the State Treasurer the
name and address of any hotel that commences operation after January 1 of
any year.
§ 10-2.10. Violations and Penalties.
In addition to any of the other remedies specifically prescribed by this
section, a violation of this section shall be punishable, upon conviction, to
the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, § 1-5 of the City Code.
Chapter 11
ELECTION DISTRICTS
f. The Director may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days
after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.
a. Any unpaid taxes pursuant to this section shall be subject to interest at
the rate of 5% per annum.
b. The State Treasurer shall annually provide to the City written
notification of nonpayment of taxes required to be paid under this
section. Said written notification shall also authorize the City to act as
the collection agent for the outstanding balance of taxes due and owing
to it in place of the State Treasurer.
c. In the event that the tax authorized and imposed under this section is
not paid as and when due, the unpaid balance, and any interest
accruing thereon, shall be a lien on the parcel of real property
comprising the hotel or transient accommodation in the same manner
as all other unpaid municipal taxes, fees, or other charges. The lien
shall be superior and paramount to the interest in such parcel of any
owner, lessee, tenant, mortgagee, or other person, except the lien of
municipal taxes and shall be on a parity with and deemed equal to the
municipal lien on the parcel for unpaid property taxes due and owing in
the same year.
d. The City shall file in the office of its tax collector a statement showing
the amount and due date of the unpaid balance and identifying the lot
and block number of the parcel of real property that comprises the
delinquent hotel or transient accommodation. The lien shall be enforced
as a municipal lien in the same manner as all other municipal liens are
enforced.
§ 10-2.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-1
1:405
§ 11-1. DESIGNATIONS AND BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS. [2000
Code § 11-1]
Designation Boundaries
District 1 Beginning at the center lines at the intersection of
Memorial Drive and Sewall Avenue, thence northerly to
the center line of Fourth Avenue, westerly to the center
line of Pine Street, southerly to the center line of Third
Avenue, westerly to the center line of Central Avenue,
southerly to the center line of Asbury Avenue, easterly to
the center line of Pine Street, southerly to the center line
of Sewall Avenue and easterly to the point and place of
beginning.
District 2 Beginning at the center lines at the intersection of Bangs
Avenue and Comstock Street, thence northerly to the
center line of Sewall Avenue, westerly to the center line of
Pine Street, northerly to the center line of Asbury Avenue,
westerly to the center line of Central Avenue, northerly to
Deal Lake, westerly to the Neptune Township boundary
line, southerly to the center line of Bangs Avenue and
easterly to the point and place of beginning.
District 3 Beginning at the center lines at the intersection of Bangs
Avenue and Comstock Street, thence southerly to the
center line of Prospect Avenue, southeasterly to the
Wesley Lake Brook boundary line, westerly to the
Neptune Township boundary line, northerly to the center
line of Bangs Avenue and easterly to the point and place
of beginning.
District 4 Beginning at the center lines at the intersection of
Comstock Street and Prospect Avenue, thence southerly
to the Neptune Township boundary line, easterly to the
center line of Asbury Avenue, westerly to the center line
of Memorial Drive, southerly to the center line of Sewall
Avenue, westerly to the center line of Comstock Street
and southerly to the point and place of beginning.
District 5 Beginning at the center lines at the intersection of
Memorial Drive and Asbury Avenue, thence northerly to
the center line of Third Avenue, easterly to the center line
of Grand Avenue, northerly to the center line of Fourth
Avenue, easterly to the Atlantic Ocean boundary line,
southerly to the center line of Asbury Avenue and westerly
to the point and place of beginning.
District 6 Beginning at the center lines at the intersection of Fourth
Avenue and Grand Avenue, thence northerly to the center
line of Eighth Avenue, easterly to the Atlantic Ocean
boundary line, southerly to the center line of Fourth
Avenue and westerly to the point and place of beginning.
§ 11-1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 11-1
1:406
Designation Boundaries
District 7 Beginning at the center lines at the intersection of Grand
Avenue and Eighth Avenue, thence northerly to Deal Lake,
easterly to the Atlantic Ocean boundary line, southerly to
the center line of Eighth Avenue and westerly to the point
and place of beginning.
District 8 Beginning at the center lines at the intersection of Third
Avenue and Grand Avenue, thence northerly to Deal Lake,
westerly to the center line of Memorial Drive, southerly to
the center line of Third Avenue and easterly to the point
and place of beginning.
District 9 Beginning at the center lines at the intersection of
Memorial Drive and Fourth Avenue, thence northerly to
Deal Lake, westerly to the center line of Central Avenue,
southerly to the center line of Third Avenue, easterly to
the center line of Pine Street, northerly to the center line
of Fourth Avenue and easterly to the point and place of
beginning.
Chapter 12
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 12-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY.
§ 12-1.1. Enforcing Agency Established.
§ 12-1.2. Appeals Jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 2795]
Appeals shall be under the jurisdiction of the County of Monmouth
Construction Board of Appeals.
a. There is hereby established in the City of Asbury Park a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the Division of
State Uniform Construction Code Enforcement Agency consisting of
those officials appointed in Chapter II, Administration, Section 2-16,
Department of Building and Housing.
b. Each official position shall be filed by a person qualified for such
position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 5:23-1 et
seq.; provided that in lieu of any particular subcode official, an on-site
inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:33-1 et seq.
§ 11-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:407
§ 12-1.3. Fees. [Ord. No. 2795; Ord. No. 2830; Ord. No. 2921; Ord.
No. 2015-04]
The following fee schedule has been approved and adopted for use within
the City of Asbury Park:
a. New Jersey State permit surcharged fees.
Amount: This fee shall be in the amount of $0.00371 per cubic foot
volume of new buildings and additions. Volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The fee for all other construction
shall be $1.90 per $1,000.00 of value of construction. Minimum fee
is $1.00. The above fee is subject to periodic change and exemptions
established by the Department of Community Affairs and will be
calculated in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19 hereafter and as
applicable with the regulations.
1. General Fees.
(a) The fee for plan review shall be due upon completion of
subcode plan review.
(b) The fee to be charged for a construction permit will be the sum
of the basic construction fee plus all applicable special fees.
This fee shall be paid before a permit is issued and proposed
work commencing.
(c) The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be
paid before a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition
to the construction permit.
(d) All fees shall be rounded to the nearest dollar.
2. Fees shall be as follows:
(a) Plan review fee. The fee for plan review shall be 25 percent of
the amount to be charged for the construction permit. When
plans have been released a plan review fee shall not be
collected for permits issued there from and the total permit fee
shall be reduced by 25 percent. There shall be an additional
plan review fee of $35.00 per hour for review of an amendment
or change to any plan that has already been released per
subcode having assigned plan review responsibility to perform
such as a review in conjunction with the regulations and actual
submittal. This fee may be waived at the discretion of the
Construction Official in the event the work and review is of a
minor nature.
(b) The basic construction permit fee shall be the sum of the parts
computed on the basis of the volume or cost of construction,
the number of plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the
number of electrical fixtures and rating of electrical devices,
the number of sprinklers, standpipes and detectors (smoke and
§ 12-1.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-1.3
1:408
heat) at the unit rates and/ or the applicable flat fees as
provided herein plus any special fees. The minimum fee for a
basic construction permit shall be $65.00 for a single subcode
permit. The minimum fee for multiple subcodes per
construction permit shall be $65.00 per subcode.
(c) Flat Fees: When the term "flat fee" is used, the fee for that
work shall be as noted in the section regardless of the number
of subcodes involved or the minimum permit fees established.
Any additional work performed in conjunction with a
component that has a flat fee designation shall also be charged
the additional fee as noted herein for that particular item in
addition to the initial flat fee. Permits issued that include flat
fees are subject to the state surcharges as noted above.
(d) Individual tenant space fit-out: When plans and specifications
for individual tenant spaces in multi-tenant spaces or buildings
have been submitted and were not part of the original permit
application, the fee for permit updates shall be based upon the
cost of work. For electric, fire, and plumbing, the fee shall be
based upon the equipment installed.
b. Building Fees.
1. Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of the
structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the amount $0.045
per cubic foot of volume for buildings and structures. The fee shall
be $0.0008 per cubic for structures on farms, including commercial
farm building under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), with the maximum fee for
such structures on farms not to exceed $1,145.00.
2. Fee for additions shall be computed on the same basis as for new
construction for the added portion.
3. Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs or site construction
associated with pre-engineered systems of commercial farm
buildings, pre-manufactured construction, and the external utility
connection for pre-manufactured construction shall be based upon
the estimated cost of work. The fee for all use groups shall be in the
amount of $30.00 per $1,000.00 for the estimated cost up to and
including $50,000.00. From $50,001 to and including $100,000.00
the additional fee shall be in the amount $27.00 per $1,000.00 of
estimated cost. Above $100,000.00, the additional fee shall be in
the amount of $25.00 per $1,000.00 of estimated cost above
$100,000.00. For the purpose of determining estimated cost, the
applicant shall submit to the agency such cost data as may be
available and produced by the architect or engineer of record, or by
a recognized estimating firm, or by the contractor. A bona fide
contractor's bid, or contract if available, shall be submitted upon
request.
§ 12-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:409
4. Fees for combination of renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with the above renovation and addition.
5. Flat fee for replacement type roof coverings shall be $100.00 for R5
type use group. The fee for all other use groups shall be $30.00 per
$1,000.00 of the estimated cost. In the event the work is of a minor
nature and not a total replacement, the fee for R5 type use groups
may be calculated at the rate of $30.00 per $1,000.00 and a
minimum fee of $75.00.
6. Flat fee for replacement of vinyl siding and other exterior wall
coverings shall be $100.00 for R5 type use groups. The fee for all
other use groups shall be $30.00 per $1,000.00. In the event the
work is of a minor nature and not a total replacement, the fee for
R5 use groups may be calculated at the rate of $30.00 per
$1,000.00 and a minimum fee of $75.00.
7. The fee charged for a private above- ground swimming pool as
defined in the building subcode, in use group R5 shall be $150.00.
The fee charged for a private in-ground pool as defined in the
building subcode, in use group R5 shall be $200.00. The
construction fee for public swimming pools as defined in the
building subcode in all other use groups shall be $350.00.
8. The fee for replacement barriers surrounding and enclosing public
and private swimming pools shall be $150.00.
9. Fences greater than 6 feet shall be $30.00 per $1,000.00 and a
minimum fee of $75.00.
10. The fee for storage sheds and similar structures exceeding 200
square feet in area shall be calculated in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.28. The minimum fee for sheds and similar structures that
are 200 feet or less in floor area and less than 10 feet in height shall
be charged a flat fee of $175.00 per unit. No permit fee shall be
collected for such structures 100 square feet in area or less.
11. The building subcode fee for regulated tents subject to
construction permit and inspection shall be $200.00 per tent.
12. The fee for retaining walls new or replacement walls over 3 feet
shall be based upon the estimated market value in the amount
$30.00 per $1,000.00.
13. Annual Trailer permit shall be a flat fee of $125.00.
14. The fee for a permit for Radon abatement work shall be $150.00.
15. The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall be
$150.00.
16. The fee for a permit for asbestos abatement work shall be $150.00.
§ 12-1.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-1.3
1:410
17. The permit fee for a solar panel installation shall be $30.00 per
$1,000.00 on the building Subcode.
18. Demolition or removal permit (if needed), Structure less than 5,000
sq. ft. in area and less than 30 ft. in height, for one and two family
residences (R-5) and R use group accessory structures, the fee
shall be $125.00. Partial demolition of R-5 structures the fee shall
be $30.00 per $1,000.00. All other use groups the fee shall be
$500.00.
19. Sign permit fees: The fee shall be $75.00 per each sign greater
than 32 sq. ft. plus cost of foundation system, as figured in the
alteration portion.
c. Electric Fees.
1. The first block consisting of one to 25 receptacles, fixtures or
devices, the fee shall be $40.00; for each additional block
consisting of up to 25 receptacles, fixtures or devices, the fee shall
be $20.00. For the purpose of computing this fee, receptacles,
fixtures or devices shall include lighting fixtures, wall switches,
convenience receptacles, sensors, dimmers, alarm devices, smoke
detectors, communication outlets, light —standards eight feet or
less in height including luminaries, emergency lights, electric
signs, exit lights or electric fixtures and devices rated 20 amperes
or less including motors for equipment rated less than one
horsepower (hp) or one kilowatt (kw).
2. For each motor or electrical device rated in horsepower (hp), the
fee shall be:
From one hp up to and including 10 hp $50.00
Greater than 10 hp up to and including 50
hp
$75.00
Greater than 50 hp up to and including
100 hp
$100.00
Greater than 100 hp $500.00
3. For each generator, transformer, and all other items measured in
kw not specified in this fee schedule, the fee shall be:
From one kw up to and including 10 kw $25.00
Greater than 10 kw up to and including 45
kw
$50.00
Greater than 45 kw up to and including
112.5 kw
$75.00
Greater than 112.5 kw $500.00
4. The specific information on fees for multi-meter stacks, concurrent
installation of components of motor controls, and process
§ 12-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:411
equipment, please refer to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20©2iii(8), (9) and (11)
for details on fee applicability.
5. Air Condition (electric only) new installation and replacement for
all use groups:
Up to .5 kw (1-3 ton) $60.00
Greater than .5 kw $20.00 each additional ton
6. The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently installed
above ground, or in-ground swimming pool as defined in the
building subcode, spa, Hot tub or fountain for all use groups shall
be charged as follows $175.00 and only includes filter/pump/motor,
receptacle, timer and bonding. Any other equipment or fixtures
installed shall be charged on the basis of number of electrical
fixtures and rating of electrical devices involved in accordance with
the previous paragraph.
7. The fee charged in conjunction with the annual electric inspection
of commercial swimming pool, spas or hot tubs shall be $85.00.
8. The fee for temporary portable generators the fee shall be as
follows:
Up to and including 5 kw — 30
kw
$85.00
Up to and including 31 kw and
higher
$150.00
9. The fee for equipotential bonding grid shall be $75.00.
10. For each service equipment, panel board, load center, overhead
service entrance conductor, motor starter, motor control center,
automatic transfer switch, disconnecting means, and future
electric, such as circuits installed for future use or intermittent
needs (all bonding and grounding for the above items are
included), the fee shall be:
Up to and including 100 amps $65.00
Up to and including 150 amps $75.00
Up to and including 200 amps $85.00
Up to and including 225 amps-300
amps
$105.00
Up to and including 400 amps $185.00
Up to and including 800 amps $500.00
Each additional 200 amps $100.00
11. The flat fee for service reconnection inspections in response to
emergencies or utility requests shall be $65.00 in all use groups.
§ 12-1.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-1.3
1:412
12. The fee for site lighting over 8 feet shall be $25.00 per unit.
13. The flat fee for hard wired signage mounted on a wall shall be
$65.00 each. The fee for pylon type signage and similar free
standing structures shall be $65.00 each.
14. Furnaces (electric only) new and replacements for all Use Groups
shall be $65.00.
15. Water Heaters (electric only) new and replacement for all use
groups shall be $65.00.
16. Dishwashers (electric only) new and replacement for all Use
Groups shall be $65.00.
17. Ranges (electric only) new and replacement for all Use groups shall
be $65.00.
18. Fiber Duct Pathways all use group $30.00 per $1,000.00 or $100.00
per floor and a minimum fee of $75.00.
19. Solar panel installation for the electric subcode panel disconnect
service, the fee shall be determined per unit size as follows:
Solar panel $20.00 per panel
Inverters $65.00 each
Disconnects $65.00 each
Electric panels see above pricing
d. Plumbing Fees.
1. The fee shall be in the amount of $20.00 per fixture: water closet,
urinal, bidet, bath tub, shower, lavatory, sink, laundry tub, floor
drains, drinking fountain, dishwasher, garbage disposal, clothes
washer, recirculation systems, roof drains, hose bibs, manholes,
reheat coils, condensate drains, or similar devices, piece of
equipment or appliance connected to the plumbing system, and for
each appliance connected to the gas piping, propane or oil piping
system, except as indicated in paragraph (2) below.
2. The fee for all use groups shall be $20.00 per special device and for
the following:
Gas piping $20.00
Oil piping $20.00
Grease traps $80.00
Oil separators $80.00
Refrigeration units $150.00
Water services for each 100 ft. or part there of $125.00
§ 12-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:413
Sewer services for each 100 ft. or part there
of
$125.00
Active solar System $125.00
Septic tank abandonment $85.00
Sewer pump and interceptors $85.00
Water cap $85.00
Sewer cap $85.00
Commercial dishwashers $85.00
Geo-Thermal system $150.00
3. The fee for backflow preventers for all use groups up to 3/4" shall
be $80.00 per device. The fee for backflow preventers over 3/4"
shall be $100.00.
4. The annual fee for backflow preventers subject to testing shall be
$100.00 per device test.
5. The flat fee for replacement water heaters for all use groups, other
than electric, shall be $65.00 per unit.
6. The flat fee for warm air furnaces installed in all use groups $65.00
per unit.
7. The flat fee for water boilers for all use groups shall be $65.00 per
unit up to and including 250,000 BTU. 251,000 BTU and greater
the fee shall be $125.00.
8. The flat fee for 3 ton air conditioning shall be $60.00 per unit. Each
additional ton shall be $20.00 per unit.
9. The fee for replacement or new 5 ton RTU Heating/Cooling units
installed in all use groups other than R5 shall be $125.00 per unit.
Each additional ton shall be $25.00 per unit.
10. The fee for bottom drains and a vacuum release device for
swimming pools shall be $125.00 for all use groups.
11. The annual fee for businesses requiring regular grease trap
cleaning shall be $100.00.
e. Fire Fees. For Fire protection and hazardous equipment, sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke/heat/carbon monoxide), pre-engineered
suppression system, gas and oil fired appliances not connected to the
plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems, incinerators and
crematoriums, the fee shall be as follows:
1. The fee for 20 or fewer sprinkler heads shall be $100.00. The fee
for 21 to and including 50 heads shall be $150.00. The fee for each
additional group of 50 or part thereof shall be $100.00
§ 12-1.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-1.3
1:414
2. The fee for underground fire suppression water mains shall be
250.00 per 100'.
3. The fee for each individual standpipe shall be $275.00.
4. The fee for each fire pump shall be $250.00
5. The fee for each pre-action or dry pipe valve including a
compressor shall be $80.00.
6. The fee for residential fire sprinklers, installed in a new single
family dwelling, shall be $165.00.
7. The fee for 15 or fewer smoke detectors, heat detectors, CO
detectors, manual alarm devices, supervisory devices and visual/
audible devices shall be $100.00. The fee for 16 to 50 devices shall
be $175.00. The fee for each additional group of 50 or part thereof
shall be $100.00.
8. The fee for residential smoke, heat and CO detectors 120 volt
system, installed throughout a single family dwelling shall be
$75.00.
9. The flat fee for a "household fire alarm system" as defined by NFPA
72 (limited Voltage System) and installed in accordance with the
residential building code including smoke, heat, CO detectors and
all other required devices in use group R-5 shall be $75.00.
10. The fee for fire alarm panels, auxiliary panels, communicator
panels, booster panels or other similar control devices other than
use group R-5 shall be $65.00.
11. The fee for commercial hood suppression systems shall be $150.00.
12. The fee for commercial exhaust hoods shall be $150.00.
13. The fee for chimney liners — Commercial/ Residential $125.00.
14. The fee for incinerators and crematoriums shall be the current
State fee schedule.
15. The fee for any special device shall be $250.00.
16. The fee for gas appliances, such as stoves, ovens, dryers and
fireplaces, installed in use group R-5 shall be $65.00 per appliance
and $65.00 per appliance in all other Use Groups. Oil fired and
solid fuel burning appliances, other than furnaces, installed in all
Use Groups shall be $65.00 per appliance. Pool heaters, gas or oil
fired, installed in all Use Groups shall be $65.00 per appliance.
17. The fee for furnaces installed in Use Group R-5 shall be $65.00 per
unit and $65.00 per unit in all other Use Groups.
§ 12-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1.3
1:415
18. The fee for water heaters installed in Use Group R-5 shall be
$65.00 per unit and $65.00 per unit in all other Use Groups.
19. The fee for storage tank installations, AST/UST — Residential/
Commercial for flammable or combustible liquids shall be:
Tanks up to 250 gallons $100.00
251 — 500 gallons $350.00
Over 501 gallons $400.00
20. The fee for storage tank removal, AST/UST —for flammable or
combustible liquids shall be:
Residential
Tanks up to 1000 gallons $100.00
Over 1000 gallons $200.00
Commercial
Tanks up to 1000 gallons $400.00
Over 1000 gallons $500.00
f. Fees for Certificates and other Permits are as follows:
1. The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be 5 percent of the total
construction permit fee. The minimum fee shall be $250.00.
2. The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy for 30 days shall
be $40.00.
The fee for temporary certificate of occupancy for the first
extension of an additional 30 days shall be $100.00.
The fee for temporary certificate of occupancy extensions
thereafter in 30 day increments shall be $200.00.
3. The fee for a certificate of continued occupancy issued under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23© shall be $75.00 per subcode.
4. The fee for a mercantile certificate of continued occupancy shall be
$200.00.
The fee for renewing a certificate of continued occupancy for a
business closed 60 days or more in a calendar year shall be
$200.00.
5. The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $125.00 per subcode.
6. The minimum fee for a basic construction permit shall be $65.00
for a single subcode permit. The fee for multiple subcodes per
construction permit shall be $65.00 per subcode.
§ 12-1.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-1.3
1:416
§ 12-1.4. Fire Limits Established. [Ord. No. 2795]
The following fire limits are hereby established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23 the
boundary lines of the City of Asbury Park.
The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the City Council
biannually, a report revaluating the delineation of the fire limits. The report
shall indicate the recommendations of the Construction Official, the
Building Subcode Official, and the Fire Subcode Official regarding those
areas which should be designated as within fire limits, with the reasons
therefor.
§ 12-2. through § 12-3. (RESERVED)
§ 12-4. HOUSING CODE.
§ 12-4.1. Title. [2000 § 12-4.1]
The title of this section shall be the "Asbury Park Housing Code."
§ 12-4.2. Definitions. [2000 Code § 12-4.2; Ord. No. 2795]
As used in this section:
BASEMENT — shall mean a portion of a building located partly
underground, but having less than one-half (1/2) its clear floor-to-ceiling
height below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR — shall mean a portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground, and having one-half (1/2) or more than one-half (1/2) of
its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.
DWELLING — shall mean and be construed as any building or any part
thereof which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or
sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — shall mean and be construed as any room or any part
thereof or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — shall mean the control and elimination of insects,
rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing
7. The fee for updating an existing construction permit application
with new contractors and/or new owner in fee shall be $65.00 per
subcode.
8. The fee for a discovery shall be $50.00 plus copies and postage. The
fee for coping a set of plans is $100.00 plus printer fees.
9. A bona fide contractor's bid, or contract if available, shall be
submitted upon request.
§ 12-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4.2
1:417
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest
elimination methods approved by the Health Officer.
GARBAGE — shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — shall mean a room or enclosed floor space used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries,
foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
HEALTH OFFICER — shall mean the Director of Inspections or his/her
designee.
INFESTATION — shall mean the presence within or around a dwelling of
any insects, rodents or other pests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — shall mean any dwelling containing more than
two (2) dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — shall mean any person, over the age of one (1) year, living,
sleeping, cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit
or rooming unit.
OPERATOR — shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a
building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER CONDITIONS — shall mean the
temperature fifteen (15°) degrees Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded
temperature for the previous ten (10) year period.
OWNER — shall mean any person, who alone, or jointly or severally with
others;
PLUMBING — shall mean the following supplied facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch basins,
drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
ROOMING HOUSE — shall mean and be construed as any dwelling, or any
part thereof of any dwelling containing one (1) or more rooming units, in
which space is let by the owner or operator to three (3) or more persons
Has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or
a.
Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner,
or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such
person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this section, and of rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he/she were the owner.
b.
§ 12-4.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-4.2
1:418
who are not husband, wife, son, daughter, mother, father, sister or brother
of the owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — shall mean and be construed as any room or any part
thereof or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended
to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
except garbage, and shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
SUPPLIED — shall mean paid for, furnished or provided by or under the
control of the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — shall mean any tent, trailer or other structure
used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is
not attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system
on the same premises for more than thirty (30) consecutive days.
§ 12-4.3. New Jersey State Housing Code. [2000 Code § 12-4.3; Ord.
No. 2610]
a. Executive Officer. The Health Officer is hereby designated as the officer
to exercise the powers prescribed by the within subsection and he/she
shall serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
b. Adoption; Public Record. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the New Jersey
State Housing Code is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a
standard to be used as a guide in determining whether dwellings in this
City are safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. Three (3)
copies of the New Jersey State Housing Code have been placed on file in
the office of the City Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to
use and examine the same. (See N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 et seq., New Jersey
State Housing Code)
c. Inspection of Dwellings. The Health Officer is hereby authorized and
directed to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings,
dwelling units, rooming units and premises located within the City in
order that he/she may perform his/her duty of safeguarding the health
and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. For
the purpose of making such inspections, the Health Officer is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or
occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit, or the
person in charge thereof, shall give the Health Officer free access to
such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and
survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the
owner thereof, or his/her agent or employee, access to any part of such
dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the
§ 12-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4.3
1:419
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this subsection or with any lawful
rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this subsection.
d. Service of Notice. Whenever the Health Officer determines that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this section or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, he/she shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person
responsible therefor as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
1. Be put in writing.
2. Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
3. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
4. Be served upon the owner or his/her agent, or the occupant, as the
case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant,
if a copy thereof is served upon him/her personally; or if a copy
thereof is sent by registered mail to his/her last known address; or
if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
dwelling affected by the notice or if he/she is served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws
of this State. Such notice shall contain an outline of remedial action
which, if taken, shall affect compliance with the provisions of this
subsection and with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto.
e. Hearing. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of this section or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereof, shall file a petition with the City of
Asbury Park Municipal Court.
f. Additional Rules and Regulations. The Health Officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to make and adopt such written rules and
regulations as he/she may deem necessary for the proper enforcement
of the provisions of this section, provided that such rules and
regulations shall not be in conflict with this section, nor in any way
alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions thereof. The Health
Officer shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he/
she may adopt in his/her office and in the office of the City Clerk.
g. Prohibited Occupancy. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or
rent to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the
purpose of living therein which does not conform to the provisions of
the New Jersey State Housing Code established hereby as the standard
to be used in determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for
human habitation.
§ 12-4.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-4.4
1:420
§ 12-4.4. Responsibility of Owners and Occupants; Standards for
Maintenance. [2000 Code § 12-4.5; Ord. No. 2610]
a. Public Areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and
premises thereof.
b. Cleanliness. No occupant or owner of a dwelling unit shall cause
excessive grease, soot or other foreign matter to accumulate on
sidewalks, ceilings, or other exposed room surfaces by improper use of
heating or cooking equipment. Cooking equipment shall be kept clean,
free of garbage, free of particles and grease, and other materials which
may result in infestation or health hazard.
c. Rubbish. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of
all his/her rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the
rubbish containers required.
d. Garbage. Any occupant of the dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of
all his/her garbage or any other organic waste which might provide
food for rodents in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the
garbage facilities or garbage storage containers. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to provide such facilities or containers for all
dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units
and for all dwelling units located on premises where more than two (2)
dwelling units share the same premises. In all other cases it shall be the
responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
e. Screens. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be
responsible for hanging all screens and double or storm doors and
windows whenever they are required under the provisions of this
subsection or of any rule and regulation adopted pursuant thereto,
except where the owner has agreed to supply such service. Neither
occupants nor the owner of a dwelling unit shall damage, remove or
destroy screens needed for the building as stated above.
f. Extermination of Pests. Every occupant or owner of a dwelling unit shall
be responsible for removing conditions resulting from the occupant's or
owner's own activities which may result in an infestation condition
which are subject to and under his/her exclusive control.
g. Plumbing Fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all
plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be
responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and
operation thereof.
h. Security and Protection. Every owner of an apartment house containing
two hundred (200) or more apartments or dwelling units shall provide
security guard protection on a twenty-four (24) hour basis.
i. No occupant or owner of a dwelling unit may:
§ 12-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-4.4
1:421
1. Create or maintain any condition constituting a violation of the
Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1 et seq;
2. Take down, obscure, alter, destroy, or in any way deface any notice,
certificate, or sign required to be displayed by law; or
3. Destroy, damage, or deface equipment.
j. Willful Damage. Every occupant shall be liable for willfully or
maliciously causing damage to any part of the premises which results in
a violation of this subsection. Any adult occupant shall be responsible
and liable for any violation of this subsection caused by minors under
their care or custody occupying the same unit of dwelling space if the
violations created were permitted to continue with the knowledge or
acquiescence or consent of the adult member.
k. Storage. No occupant shall utilize any area outside of his dwelling
space for storage purposes except for an area provided for common
storage by the owner of such dwelling space. The occupant shall place
his name and dwelling unit number on the item being stored in the area
provided. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to label each
item and maintain it as labeled unless the area provided by the owner
for storage for such items is clearly designated as being for the
applicable dwelling unit and its occupants. Materials stored in such
areas shall be secured against becoming sources of infestation and
shall not be placed so as to create a hazard.
l. Responsibility of Occupants. An occupant shall in addition to complying
with all provisions of this subsection applicable to him/her, be
responsible for violations of this subsection to the extent that he/she
has the power to prevent the occurrence of the violation or assist in
abating the violation. An occupant has the power to prevent the
occurrence of violation if;
1. It is caused by his/her own willful act or the willful act of a member
of his/her family or household or his guests; or
2. It is the result of his/her own gross negligence, neglect or abuse, or
the gross negligence, neglect or abuse of a family member of his/
her family or household, or his guests; or
3. The occupant, any member of his/her family or household, or his
guests shall, with respect to the public parts of the premises, be
liable if a violation is caused by his/her own willful act, gross
negligence, neglect or abuse; or
4. Every occupant of each unit of dwelling space shall give the owner
thereof or his/her agent or employees access to any part of the unit
of dwelling space upon reasonable notification, under which
ordinary working circumstances shall be one (1) day, for the
purpose of making such inspection and such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the law and the
§ 12-4.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-4.4
1:422
§ 12-4.5. Rooming Houses; License Required. [2000 Code § 12-4.6]
§ 12-5. UNFIT DWELLINGS.
§ 12-5.1. Findings. [2000 Code § 12-5.1]
It is hereby found and declared that the existence or occupation of any
building or buildings or parts thereof in the City which are so old,
dilapidated or have become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, or occupancy or use, are
inimical to the welfare and dangerous and injurious to the health and safety
of the people of the City and that a public necessity exists for the repair,
closing or demolition of such building or buildings or part thereof.
§ 12-5.2. Definitions. [2000 Code § 12-5.2]
As used in this section:
BUILDING — shall mean any building or structure or part thereof, whether
used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any accessory
buildings, structures and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith.
OWNER — shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — shall mean all individuals, associations or
corporations who have interests of record in a building and any who are in
actual possession thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICER — shall mean the officer who is authorized under this
section to exercise the powers set forth in this section.
§ 12-5.3. Repair or Demolition Required. [2000 Code § 12-5.3]
Whenever the Public Officer of the City finds that there exists in the City
any building or buildings which are unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire accidents
or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or due to
other conditions rendering such building or buildings or part thereof unsafe
or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the welfare of the residents of
the City, the officer designated shall exercise the power vested under this
ordinance. In case of safety or structural emergency immediate
access shall be given. Upon discovery by an occupant of any
condition on the premises, a failure of service, or defect in any
equipment, which constitutes a violation of this subsection, the
occupant shall report same promptly to the owner or to the owner's
agency having charge of the premises.
a. Applicable Provisions. No persons shall operate a rooming house or
shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any room or unit in any
rooming house without a license from the State of New Jersey.
§ 12-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.3
1:423
section and under its police powers to repair, close or demolish or cause or
require the repairing, closing or demolition of the building or part thereof
in the manner herein provided.
§ 12-5.4. Public Officer Designated. [2000 Code § 12-5.4]
The City Manager is hereby designated and appointed the Public Officer
to exercise the powers set forth in this section. The City Manager may,
by resolution, designate any other person to act in the place of the City
Manager.
§ 12-5.5. Service of Complaint. [2000 Code § 12-5.5]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officer by the Health Officer,
Health Inspector, Fire Chief, Building Subcode Official or any other officer
in charge of any department of the City relating to health, fire, building
regulations or activities concerning buildings in the City or by at least
five (5) residents of the City charging that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use or whenever it appears to the Public Officer
that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, the
Public Officer shall, if his/her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties
in interest in such building, a complaint stating the charges in that respect
and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the Public Officer
or his/her designated agent at a place therein fixed, not less than seven (7)
days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint; that
the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and to give testimony
at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling to hearings before the Public
Officer.
§ 12-5.6. Determination of Imminent Threat to Safety, Health or
Welfare. [2000 Code § 12-5.1; Ord. No. 2634]
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 12-5.5, if the Public Officer of
the City determines that pursuant to subsection 12-5.3 any building is unfit
for human habitation or occupancy, and the building or buildings pose an
imminent threat of danger to the public health, safety or welfare as to be
determined by the Public Officer, the Public Officer is hereby authorized to
take immediate emergent action to repair, close or demolish or cause or
require the repair, closing, or demolition of the building or part thereof.
§ 12-5.7. Determination of Substandard Dwelling. [2000 Code
§ 12-5.6]
If, after notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the building
under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use,
he/she shall state, in writing, the findings of fact in support of the
§ 12-5.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-5.7
1:424
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order:
§ 12-5.8. Owner Fails to Repair or Vacate. [2000 Code § 12-5.7]
If the owner fails to comply with the order to repair, alter or improve or, at
the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Public Officer
may cause such a building to be repaired, altered or improved or to be
vacated and closed. The Public Officer may cause to be posted on the main
entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following words: "This
building is unfit for human habitation, and occupancy or use; the use or
occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 12-5.9. Owner Fails to Demolish. [2000 Code § 12-5.8]
If the owner fails to comply with the order to remove or demolish the
building, the Public Officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertising for, and in receipt of bids therefor.
a. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order, or at the option of the owner to vacate or have the
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
b. If the building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health
and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner fails to
repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within the reasonable time specified in the order of removal.
a. Emergencies.
1. Whenever the Public Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he
may, without notice or hearing, issue an order requiring that such
action be taken as he determines necessary, applying the statutes
and provisions of this section to meet the emergency, and such
order shall be effective immediately, and any person to whom such
order is directed shall be obliged to comply immediately. Any such
person may petition to the Public Officer for a hearing on such
order, which hearing shall be conducted not later than five (5) days
after receipt of this petition;
2. In the event the Public Officer orders immediate action by the City,
Department of Public Works or such independent contractor as
may be hired by the City to protect the health or safety of its
citizens pursuant to paragraph a. hereof, the following costs and
fees shall be charged to the property owner or owners for such
emergency work, which costs and fees shall be a lien against the
subject property and collected as provided in subsection 12-5.10;
§ 12-5.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.9
1:425
§ 12-5.10. Cost to Be Lien. [2000 Code § 12-5.9]
That the amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this act determined in favor of the City, and the
cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating and closing,
or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance thereof
remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the sale of
materials derived from the building or from any contract for removal or
demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon
which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by
the Public Officer, he/she shall sell the materials of such building. There
shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the
proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any contract
for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no such credits
or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the City Tax
Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax liens and a copy thereof
shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If the total of
the credits exceed such costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in
the Superior Court by the Public Officer, shall be secured in such manner
as may be directed by such Court, and shall be disbursed according to the
order or judgment of the Court; provided, however, that nothing in this
section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City
to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement,
by summary proceedings or otherwise.
§ 12-5.11. Owner May Contest. [2000 Code § 12-5.10]
Any owner or party in interest may, within thirty (30) days from the date
of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy
of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
3. The rates for such work shall be as follows:
(a) During regular working hours; at an amount to be established
by the City Council on an annual basis via resolution.
(b) After regular working hours; at an amount to be established by
the City Council on an annual basis via resolution.
(c) Holidays and Sundays; at an amount to be established by the
City Council on an annual basis via resolution.
(d) Materials and equipment to be used charged, based upon costs
incurred by the City.
4. Any relocation expenses incurred in remediating any emergency
situation shall be payable by the owner of such property upon
which the emergency was found as may be allowed under law.
§ 12-5.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-5.12
1:426
§ 12-5.12. Reasons for Determination. [2000 Code § 12-5.11]
The Public Officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he/she finds that conditions exist in the
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of the building, the occupant of neighboring buildings or other
residents of the City; such conditions may include the following (without
limiting the generality of the foregoing): Defects therein increasing the
hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation,
light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects;
uncleanliness; failure to have included in the building running water or
inside toilet facilities or any other violation of this section.
§ 12-5.13. Method of Service. [2000 Code § 12-5.12]
A complaint or order issued by a Public Officer shall be served upon persons
either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such
persons is unknown and the name cannot be ascertained by the Public
Officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Public Officer shall
make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order
upon such persons shall be made by publishing the same once each week for
two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the City.
A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint
or order shall be duly recorded for record with the Clerk of the County of
Monmouth.
§ 12-5.14. Power of Public Officer. [2000 Code § 12-5.13]
The Public Officer or other officer designated under this section may
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this section, including but not
limited to the following powers, in addition to the others herein granted:
a. To investigate the building conditions in the City in order to determine
which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use.
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
c. To enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possessions.
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he/she deems necessary to carry out purposes of this chapter.
e. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such
officers and agents as he/she may designate.
§ 12-5.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-5.15
1:427
§ 12-5.15. Failure to Comply; Violation. [2000 Code § 12-5.14]
The failure, neglect or refusal of any person to comply with any order by
the Public Officer pursuant to the provisions hereof or the hindrance by any
person of the Public Officer in making any investigation under this section
shall constitute a violation of this section.
§ 12-5.16. Powers of City Not Impaired. [2000 Code § 12-5.15]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of the City or any officer or department thereof to enforce any provisions
of its Charter, its ordinances, or its regulations nor to prevent or punish
violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this section shall be in
addition and supplemental to the powers conferred upon the City by any
other law or ordinance.
§ 12-5.17. Legislative Authority. [2000 Code § 12-5.16]
This section is adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq., as
amended, and the method of enforcement, definitions, procedure and
remedies shall be governed and controlled thereby and as therein set forth,
or any amendments or supplements thereto.
§ 12-5.18. Conflicting Provisions. [2000 Code § 12-5.17]
Where a provision of this section is found to be in conflict with another
provision of this Code, the provision which establishes the higher standard
for the protection of health, safety, and welfare shall prevail.
§ 12-6. (RESERVED)
§ 12-7. CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION PERMITTING OCCUPANCY.
§ 12-7.1. Certificate Required Before Occupancy. [2000 Code
§ 12-7.1]
No person shall occupy, rent, lease, transfer title to, nor suffer the
occupancy of, the letting of, nor allow any person to live in or upon or
inhabit as a tenant or tenants or occupants, or to occupy as a new owner
or co-tenants or co-owner, any dwelling house or houses, or dwelling units
within the confines of the City unless and until that person shall have first
obtained from the Health Officer or his/her agent of the City a certificate
of inspection permitting occupancy. Transfers of title may take place after
application of a certificate of inspection for occupancy, but no occupancy
shall be permitted until all items designated for correction by the Health
Officer or his/her agent are made and completed, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 12-5.15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-7.2
1:428
§ 12-7.2. Applicability of Certificate Requirements to New
Occupancy or Reoccupancy. [2000 Code § 12-7.2]
The provisions of subsection 12-7.1 shall apply with equal force and effect to
any and all new and additional lettings, tenants, transfer of title of premises
or any part thereof, and occupancies of any dwelling house or houses or
dwelling units within the City upon the vacating of same by any of the
foregoing as may hereafter occur, whether the reoccupancy is by virtue of
transfer of title of the dwelling house or houses or dwelling unit or dwelling
units or by virtue of rental of any of the foregoing or by virtue of any other
action not specifically herein enumerated. The requirements for subsection
12-7.1 and this subsection shall be effective whether the occupancy, rental,
lease, or transfer of title is temporary, seasonal or permanent, or whether
or not for a consideration.
§ 12-7.3. Definitions. [2000 Code § 12-7.3]
As used in this section:
DWELLING HOUSE — shall mean and include, but not be limited to, any
and all one (1) family dwellings and dwellings constructed for or occupied
by more than one (1) family, not excluding apartments in apartment houses
and garden apartments.
DWELLING UNIT — shall mean and include, but not be limited to, any and
all apartments and portions of apartments in dwelling houses, not excluding
apartments in apartment houses and garden apartments. This section shall
apply to each and every dwelling house and to each and every dwelling
unit within the City and shall include all single and multiple dwellings and
premises on which a building is located and is used for human occupancy.
§ 12-7.4. Compliance with City Ordinances Required. [2000 Code
§ 12-7.4]
Nothing contained in this section shall exempt any of the dwellings or
buildings, or parts of buildings, covered by this section from full and
complete compliance with any other provisions of any other ordinance or
ordinances of the City as the same may be applicable.
§ 12-7.5. Application for Certificate of Inspection Permitting
Occupancy. [2000 Code § 12-7.5]
a. Prior to the rental, transfer of title, or occupancy of any dwelling house
or houses or any dwelling unit or units provided for in this section,
application for certificate of inspection permitting occupancy shall be
made, in writing, to the Health Officer or his/her agent of the City by
that person, persons, firm or corporation, agent, servant or
representative as set forth in subsection 12-7.1, and consent shall be
given therewith unto the Health Officer or his/her agent to enter upon
and examine the dwelling house or houses and dwelling unit or units
and the building or buildings wherein the same may be situate, for
§ 12-7.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7.5
1:429
which the application is applied for, so that the Health Officer or his/her
agent may determine whether or not the dwelling unit or units and the
building wherein the same may be situate, fully complies with all City
ordinances and rules and regulations affecting the use and occupancy
of all such dwelling houses and dwelling units and structures. No
certificate of inspection permitting occupancy shall be issued unless
there is full and complete compliance with all of the foregoing, unless
otherwise specified in writing by the Health Officer or his/her agent.
b. All applications for such certificates shall be made in writing and shall
state the name and address of the owner of the dwelling house or
houses, the dwelling unit or units and the building or structure wherein
the same may be situate, and the name and address of the owneroccupant
or tenant-occupant or any other occupant of the same, and
also the name and address, if a sale or transfer of title of the seller,
transferor, buyer, and the new proposed owner-occupant or any other
purposes occupant. It shall further state name and address of the
renting agent, if any; and shall describe the premises to be occupied,
including the street address thereof; and a designation of the portion or
portions of the premises or structures for which the specific application
is being made; and shall set forth the number of persons who shall
occupy any and all portions of the premises, including the specific
portions for which the application is being made; and the specific room
or rooms in the premises to be occupied for sleeping purposes and the
number of persons to occupy each sleeping room.
1. Inspection Report. An owner of a dwelling unit may apply to the
Code Enforcement Department for an inspection report when the
owner of the dwelling has not rented the dwelling unit. The
inspection report will be issued in lieu of certificate of inspection
for occupancy, but the inspection report will only be valid for a
period of ninety (90) days, after which it shall be voided if a
certificate of inspection for occupancy has not been obtained. After
an inspection report has been issued, the owner of the dwelling
unit can obtain a certificate of inspection for occupancy by
providing within five (5) days the Code Enforcement Department in
writing with number of occupants, the tenants' names, previous
addresses, and the ages of any children who will be residing in the
dwelling unit. The dwelling unit shall not be occupied prior to the
issuance of the certificate of inspection for occupancy. The
application fee for the issuance of an inspection report for the
rental of a dwelling unit shall be thirty-five ($35.00) dollars. The
inspection shall be subject to "pass" or "fail," except as provided
herein. If the subject property fails inspection, the applicant shall
be issued a conditional inspection report and must apply for a new
(second) inspection at an additional fee of ten ($10.00) dollars. If a
conditional inspection report is issued and the dwelling unit passes
inspection on the new (second) inspection, an inspection report
shall be issued and valid for ninety (90) days from the date of issue.
§ 12-7.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-7.6
1:430
§ 12-7.6. Violations and Penalty. [2000 Code § 12-7.6]
§ 12-7.7. Issuance of Certificates; Fees. [2000 Code § 12-7.7]
a. Any person or persons or partnership or firm or corporation, including
any real estate broker or real estate agent or any representative,
servant or employee of any of the foregoing, who in any manner shall
fail to fully comply with the terms and covenants of this section and who
are part of any transaction resulting in the violations of any of the terms
and provisions of this section shall be deemed to have violated the
terms and provisions of this section and they shall be subject to the
penalties stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5, unless and until a certificate
of inspection permitting occupancy shall have been issued.
b. All violations of this section by any person or persons, partnership, firm
or corporation, or any agents or servants or representatives as provided
herein, whether the person be the owner of the premises, the agent of
any owner, or the tenant or the occupant or occupants, shall be deemed
separate and distinct violations for each and every day that the violation
may continue, and all parties violating this section shall be deemed
jointly and severally liable for any and all such violations.
c. No Notice Requirement. Due to health and safety concerns for the
residents of the City, the violations under subsections 12-7.1 and 12-7.2
do not require prior notice to the owner or person responsible before a
summons may be issued.
a. Certificate of Occupancy; Conditional Certificate of Occupancy. A
certificate of inspection permitting occupancy, hereinafter referred to
as the C/O, to be issued under the terms of this section, shall be issued
solely by the Department of Building and Housing without the necessity
of approval thereof by the Governing Body of the City. The fee for the
issuance of the certificate for the rental of a dwelling unit shall be as set
forth in subsection 12-7.8. The inspection shall be subject to "pass" or
"fail" except as provided herein. If the subject property fails inspection,
the applicant must apply for a new inspection at an additional fee of
twenty-five ($25.00) dollars. If at the time of the inspection, the existing
violations are, in the inspector's discretion, few and/or minor in nature,
the inspector may issue a certificate of inspection permitting occupancy
on a conditional basis, hereinafter referred to as a conditional C/O, the
fee shall be as set forth in subsection 12-7.8. All violations must be
abated, and an application for re-inspection must be made within
twenty-one (21) days. The fee for re-inspection of a property with a
conditional C/O shall be ten ($10.00) dollars. Failure to schedule a reinspection,
and/or pay the required fee within twenty-one (21) days of
the issuance of the certificate shall cause the certificate to expire.
Failure to abate all violations shall cause the certificate to expire.
Allowing the expiration of the conditional C/O shall constitute a
violation of this section.
§ 12-7.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-7.7
1:431
§ 12-7.8. Fees Established. [2000 Code § 12-7.8; Ord. No. 2733; Ord.
No. 2902; Ord. No. 3042]
The following fees are hereby established:
§ 12-7.9. All Buildings and Structures to Comply with Ordinances.
[2000 Code § 12-7.9]
All buildings or structures or dwelling houses or dwelling units for which an
application shall have been filed by virtue of this section shall fully comply
with all other City ordinances or requisite municipal requirements for the
structures or units. The Health Officer or his/her agent shall be required to
b. Transfer of Title. The fee for the issuance of a certificate of inspection
for transfer of title as provided for herein shall be as set forth in
subsection 12-7.8
For the purpose of the fee schedule, commercial and mixed use units
will be assessed at the same fee as residential units on a one (1) to one
(1) basis.
c. Exception. This section shall not include or apply to any certificate of
occupancy or conditional certificate of occupancy issued or related to a
licensed rooming and boarding house as defined by this Code under
Section 12-9, Rooming and Boarding House Certificate of Occupancy.
a. Certificates of Occupancy.
1. Certificate of Occupancy $100.00
2. Conditional Certificate of Occupancy $85.00
3. Ninety-Day Certificate of Occupancy Without
an Occupant
$150.00
b. Transfer of Title Fee.
1. Sale of a Single-Family Dwelling $125.00
2. Sale of a Two-Family Dwelling or Two Dwellings
on One Lot
$150.00
3. Sale of a Three-Unit Dwelling $170.00
4. Sale of a Four-Unit Dwelling $200.00
5. Sale of a Five-Unit Dwelling $225.00
6. Sale of a Six- to Ten-Unit Dwelling $375.00
7. Sale of Eleven to Fifteen Units $500.00
8. Sale of Sixteen to Twenty Units $575.00
9. Sale of Each Additional Unit over Twenty Units $50.00
c. Amendments to Certificates of Occupancy.
1. Name Changes $15.00
§ 12-7.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-7.9
1:432
specify the corrections to be made to the premises for the certificate to be
issued.
§ 12-7.10. Notification of Health Officer Concerning Time of
Inspection. [2000 Code 12-7.10]
All owners, renting agents, real estate agents, or person or persons
applying for a certificate as provided herein, shall advise the Health Officer
or his/her agent of reasonable time or times that the inspection may be
made and have someone present to assist and provide entry for the
inspection purposes. The Health Officer or his/her agent shall comply with
the request and application within a reasonable time after entry is provided,
and when proper shall issue the certificate within a reasonable time
thereafter.
§ 12-7.11. Procedures Required for Tenants, Owners, Occupants
and Real Estate Agents. [2000 Code § 12-7.11]
No tenant, owner, or occupant shall sublease, sublet, transfer title (except
as heretofore provided), or permit the use or the occupancy of the dwelling
house, dwelling unit or structure provided for herein, without following the
procedures set forth and required by the within section, nor shall any real
estate broker or agent or representative of any of the foregoing permit any
violation of this section.
§ 12-7.12. Prior Ordinances Not Affected. [2000 Code § 12-7.12]
This section shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, Code or
regulation of the City existing prior to July 21, 1976, and any such violation
shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full extent of
the law under the provisions of those ordinances, Codes or regulations in
effect at the time the violation was committed.
§ 12-8. (RESERVED)
Summer Rental Regulations may be found in Chapter XIII, Short-Term
Rentals, pursuant to Ord. No. 2017-40
§ 12-9. ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSE CERTIFICATE OF
INSPECTION.
§ 12-9.1. Purpose. [2000 Code § 12-9.1]
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by regulating the condition and habitability of rooming and boarding houses
within the City.
§ 12-9.2. Definitions. [2000 Code § 12-9.2]
As used in this section:
§ 12-7.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-9.2
1:433
BOARDER — shall mean one who rents, leases or otherwise occupies any
unit or rental dwelling space or room in a boarding house or rooming house.
BOARDING HOUSE — shall mean any building, together with any related
structure, accessory building, any land appurtenant thereto, and any part
thereof, which contains two (2) or more units of dwelling space arranged
or intended for single-room occupancy, exclusive of any such unit occupied
by an owner or operator, and wherein personal or financial services are
provided to the residents, including any residential hotel or congregate
living arrangement, but excluding any hotel, motel or established guest
house wherein a minimum of eighty-five (85%) percent of the units of
dwelling space are offered for limited tenure only, any foster home as
defined in section 1 of P.L. 1962, c. 137 (N.J.S.A. 30:4C-26.1), any
community residence for the developmentally disabled as defined in section
2 of P.L. 1977, c. 448 (N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2), any dormitory owned or operated
on behalf of any non-profit institution of primary, secondary or higher
education for the use of its students, any building arranged for single-room
occupancy wherein the units of dwelling space are occupied exclusively
by students enrolled in a full-time course of study at an institution of
higher education approved by the Department of Higher Education, and any
facility or living arrangement operated by or under contract with, any State
department or agency, upon the written authorization of the Commissioner,
and any owner-occupied, one-family residential dwelling made available for
occupancy by not more than six (6) guests where the primary purpose of
the occupancy is to provide charitable assistance to the guests and where
the owner derives no income from the occupancy. A dwelling shall be
deemed "owner occupied" within the meaning of this section if it is owned
or operated by a non-profit religious or charitable association or corporation
and is used as the principal residence of a minister or employee of that
corporation or association. For any such dwelling, however, fire detectors
shall be required as determined by the Department of Community Affairs.
OWNER — shall mean the person who owns, purports to own or exercises
control of any boarding house or rooming house.
ROOMING HOUSE — shall mean a boarding house wherein no personal or
financial services are provided to the residents.
§ 12-9.3. Exceptions. [2000 Code § 12-9.3]
This section does not apply to licensed nursing homes, rooming and
boarding houses required to be licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:11-11,
State-operated institutions, or to any municipal corporation, or to any
political subdivision of the State or body politic of any kind. Any non-profit
religious group or organization operating a rooming house or boarding
house must comply with the terms of this chapter.
§ 12-9.4. Certificate of Inspection Required. [2000 Code § 12-9.4]
No owner shall lease, rent or otherwise allow the occupancy of any unit or
rental dwelling space or room in a boarding house or rooming house within
§ 12-9.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-9.4
1:434
the City without first securing a certificate of inspection. The certificate of
inspection so issued shall apply each time, and as a prerequisite to, a new
boarder leases, rents or otherwise seeks to occupy an individual unit, rental
dwelling space or room within a boarding house or rooming house.
§ 12-9.5. Application for Inspection. [2000 Code § 12-9.5]
Upon filing of an application for such certificate of inspection, the City
shall cause such rental unit to be inspected by a City inspector designated
therefor whose findings for such unit, rental dwelling space or room within
a boarding house or rooming house, must indicate that the unit complies
with the standards provided by law in the interests of public safety, health
and welfare. The unit, rental dwelling space or room within the boarding
house or rooming house, specifically the bed, furniture and premises, must
be in a clean and sanitary condition. In addition, the premises shall be kept
free from vermin, insects and rodents.
§ 12-9.6. Inspection Fees; Failure to Appear for Inspection. [2000
Code § 12-9.6]
§ 12-9.7. Penalty. [2000 Code § 12-9.7]
Every owner who fails to comply with the requirements of this section shall
be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 12-10. REGULATION AND REGISTRATION OF GUESTS AT
MOTELS, HOTELS, LODGES AND BED AND BREAKFASTS.
a. Upon the filing of an application for an inspection the applicant shall
pay to the City a fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars which will entitle the
applicant to initial inspections for all units, dwelling spaces or rooms
within a boarding house or rooming house.
b. Additional inspections shall be required each time a boarder changes
within a single unit, rental dwelling space or individual room within a
boarding house or rooming house unless such an inspection has been
conducted of the same room(s) within the preceding thirty (30) days. In
such case, no additional inspection will be required until the thirty (30)
days since the last inspection has elapsed and a new boarder occupies
the room. Upon the filing of an application for the additional inspection,
the applicant shall pay to the City of Asbury Park a fee of fifteen
($15.00) dollars which will entitle the applicant to an immediate
inspection of a single unit, rental dwelling space or individual room.
c. If an appointment is made by an applicant with an inspector for the
purposes of conducting an inspection, and the applicant does not
appear without having notified the inspector at least forty-eight (48)
hours in advance of the time agreed upon for the inspection, the
applicant shall forfeit the application fee paid for the scheduled
inspection and must pay an additional application fee, which shall be
equal to the initial application fee, for any rescheduled inspection.
§ 12-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-10.1
1:435
§ 12-10.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 12-10.1]
As used in this section:
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS — shall mean a hotel which
serves a continental breakfast, but does not serve regular meals.
HOTEL — shall mean any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms
intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out
to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. This
definition shall also mean and include any motor lodge, motor court, motel,
tourist lodge or tourist court.
HOUSING OR LODGING UNIT — shall mean a facility providing sleeping or
dwelling accommodations to transient guests.
PERSON — shall mean any person, individual, firm, association, partnership
or corporation.
§ 12-10.2. Cooking Facilities Prohibited; Exceptions. [2000 Code
§ 12-10.2]
No cooking facilities of any kind shall be constructed, installed, placed
or used in any tourist cabin, hotel, lodge, or motel within the confines
of the City; nor shall any food be prepared, cooked, or made suitable for
consumption on or about any tourist cabin, hotel, lodge, motel, nor shall the
preparation, cooking or making suitable for human consumption of food on
or about, or in such tourist cabin, hotel, lodge, or motel be permitted by
the owners, managers, lessees, operators, or licensees thereof, except for a
restaurant operating as such exclusively for the preparation and serving of
food and except for one (1) superintendent's or manager's apartment.
This subsection shall not apply to kitchen facilities previously permitted
pursuant to the existing ordinances heretofore adopted prior to June 2,
1994 and which were legally operating and up to Code as of June 2, 1994.
This shall not prohibit any bed and breakfast establishment from serving a
continental breakfast.
Is comprised of a structure that was originally constructed for the
purpose of a private residence.
a.
Is comprised of a structure that was originally constructed for the
purpose of a private residence.
a.
Shall include individual sleeping accommodations for twenty-five (25)
or fewer guests.
b.
Has at least one (1) dwelling unit occupied by the owner of the facility
as his place of residence during the time that the facility is being used
for the lodging of a guest.
c.
Conforms to the requirements of a guest house under the Uniform Fire
Code 5:18-1.5.
d.
§ 12-10.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-10.3
1:436
§ 12-10.3. Register to Be Maintained. [2000 Code § 12-10.3]
Each operator shall at all times cause to be maintained on the premises a
register, consisting of consecutively numbered cards, which shall constitute
the register of the premises. The register shall be preserved for seven (7)
years upon the premises.
No person shall occupy and no operator shall permit any person to occupy
any housing or lodging unit on the premises, unless each person or head of
the party who is to occupy such housing unit shall first:
§ 12-10.4. Inspections by Police Department and Authorized Agents.
[2000 Code § 12-10.4]
It shall be the duty of the Police Department and any duly authorized agent
of the City to inspect the premises from time to time, at any hour of the day
or night, to determine that the provisions of this section are complied with.
a. Display to a duly authorized agent or employee of the hotel, motor
lodge, in charge of the register written evidence of his or her
identification including not less than two (2) forms of identification. The
form of identification that was produced shall be recorded as well as
any information from the identification that differs from the
identification supplied by the person renting the room.
b. Write in the register immediately following the preceding registration,
in ink, and in his or her own handwriting, his or her full legal name,
both first and last, and a current home address including the home,
apartment number, street, town and State.
If a person registering, or any member of his party registering owns
a vehicle, it is the responsibility of the operator or his duly authorized
agent to obtain a full description of the vehicle accompanying the
person to include the make, model, color, license plate number and
State of registration.
If the registrant does not write in the register the information herein
required as to the motor vehicle, it shall be the duty of the operator or
his duly authorized employee to write in the information.
c. In addition to the foregoing information, the operator shall cause to be
written into the register, in ink, the number or name of the housing or
lodging unit assigned to each registrant, the date and hour of the
registration, the signature of the person taking or accepting the
registration and the date when the occupants of each housing or
lodging unit quit and surrender the same.
The register shall be kept and preserved by the operator and shall be
available on request any hour of the day or night to any Police Officer
of the City of Asbury Park, or to any duly authorized agent of the
Governing Body of the City of Asbury Park.
§ 12-10.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-10.5
1:437
§ 12-10.5. Violations and Penalties. [2000 Code § 12-10.5; New]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 12-11. MOVING BUILDINGS ON STREETS.
§ 12-11.1. Permit Required. [2000 Code § 12-11.1]
No building or similar structure shall be moved into or through any street in
the City until a written permit therefor is granted by the Mayor and Council.
No building or structure shall be moved nor shall any permit be granted
during the months of June, July, August and September.
§ 12-11.2. Information Required. [2000 Code § 12-11.2]
The permit shall specify which streets shall be used for the transportation of
such structure. The permit shall limit the time during which transportation
of such structure is to be effected. No permit shall be issued until a written
application is filed with the City Clerk, which application shall designate the
size of the structure to be moved, the streets through which it is proposed
to be conveyed, and the time which will be necessary to effect the same.
§ 12-11.3. Bond Requirements. [2000 Code § 12-11.3]
Before the permit is issued, fifty ($50.00) dollars in cash shall be deposited
in an approved bank in the City in the name of the City Treasurer and an
approved bond for not less than three hundred ($300.00) dollars shall be
executed and filed with the City Clerk. The money and the penalty of the
bond shall become payable and due to the City if any of the requirements of
this section or of the permit are violated by the permittee or his/her agent
or employee, or so much thereof as shall be necessary to pay expenses
incurred for the repair of streets or restoration of property which shall be
destroyed or damaged by the removal of the structure.
§ 12-11.4. Removal of Obstructions. [2000 Code § 12-11.4]
The wires and other obstructions on or above the streets shall be
temporarily removed by and at the expense of the owners thereof, so far as
shall be necessary for the passage of any structure whenever the Mayor and
Council grant a permit for the transportation of such structure.
§ 12-11.5. Inconvenience to Public. [2000 Code § 12-11.5]
A building or structure shall not be moved through any street if it is wider
than the distance between the curbs of the street. No unnecessary or
avoidable inconvenience to the public or to the owners of property fronting
upon the streets through which the structure is conveyed shall be created.
No structure or moving apparatus shall needlessly obstruct any intersecting
street or crossing or remain stationary nearer than fifty (50) feet to any fire
§ 12-10.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 12-11.5
1:438
hydrant, and no road bed, pavement, curbing, tree or other property shall
be unnecessarily disturbed or in any way damaged.
§ 12-11.6. Artificial Lights. [2000 Code § 12-11.6]
Artificial red lights shall be placed and lit from sunset to sunrise upon every
such building or structure while it remains in the street. The lights shall be
so located that all persons shall be informed of the position of such house,
building or structure.
§ 12-11.7. Removal of Structure by Mayor and Council. [2000 Code
§ 12-11.7]
If the time limit in the permit expires and no extension is granted, and if a
street remains obstructed, the Mayor and Council shall proceed to remove
the structure from the street. The removal shall be at the expense of the
owner of the structure, or the permittee and the expenses for the removal
shall be paid out of the cash deposited, and from the sum secured by the
bond.
§ 12-12. NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS. [2000 Code § 12-12]
The numbering of buildings erected within the City shall correspond with
the street numbers on the City Maps, filed in the City Clerk's Office. It shall
be the duty of the property owners to have their buildings numbered in
conformity with the street numbers, as the same are designated on such
maps. Each owner shall apply to the City Clerk for the correct number of
his/her building, and, upon application, the Clerk shall furnish the correct
number to designate the property, and the property owner shall thereupon
affix to his/her building a sign indicating the number.
Chapter 13
PROPERTY IMPROVEMENT AND NEIGHBORHOOD
PRESERVATION — PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: 2000 Code §§ 13-1.1—13-1.4,
Ordinance Nos. 2408, 2578, 2599, 2640, 2769, 2881, 3031, 3077,
2015-10, 2015-18. Amendments noted where applicable.
§ 12-11.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-12
1:439

Part 1
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
ARTICLE 13-100
Applicability, Administration and Enforcement
[Ord. No. 2016-53; Ord. No. 2018-40]
§ 13-101. SCOPE AND INTENT.
§ 13-101.1. Title and General.
These regulations shall be known as the 2015 International Property
Maintenance Code (as amended herein) of the City of Asbury Park (the
City), hereinafter referred to as "this Code."
This Chapter shall be read and documented as: Chapter - Section. For
example, this section shall be documented as follows: 13-101.1.
§ 13-101.2. Scope.
The provisions of this Code shall apply to all existing residential and
nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum
requirements and standards for premises, structures, equipment and
facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from
the elements, a reasonable level of safety from fire and other hazards, and
for a reasonable level of sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners,
an owner's authorized agent, operators and occupants; the occupancy of
existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and
penalties.
§ 13-101.3. Intent.
This Code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to
ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the
continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing
structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be
altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as
required herein.
§ 13-101.4. Severability.
If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is, for
any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this Code.
§ 13-102. APPLICABILITY.
§ 13-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-102.1
1:441
§ 13-102.1. General.
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific
requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. Where differences
occur between provisions of this Code and the referenced standards, the
provisions of this Code shall apply. Where, in a specific case, different
sections of this Code specify different requirements, the most restrictive
shall govern.
§ 13-102.2. Maintenance.
Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this Code or a
previous regulation or Code under which the structure or premises was
constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order.
No owner, owner's authorized agent, operator or occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility that is required under this section to
be removed from, shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling,
except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or
alterations are in progress. The requirements of this Code are not intended
to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety
systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified
herein, the owner or the owner's authorized agent shall be responsible for
the maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
§ 13-102.3. Application of Other Codes.
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy,
shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the
International Building Code, International Existing Building Code,
International Energy Conservation Code, International Fire Code,
International Fuel Gas Code, International Mechanical Code, International
Residential Code, International Plumbing Code and NFPA 70 or adopted
State and local codes. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to cancel,
modify or set aside any provision of the International Zoning Code.
§ 13-102.4. Existing Remedies.
The provisions in this Code shall not be construed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to
the removal or demolition of any structure that is dangerous, unsafe and
unsanitary.
§ 13-102.5. Workmanship.
Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations that are caused
directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this Code shall be executed and
installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
§ 13-102.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-102.6
1:442
§ 13-102.6. Historic Buildings.
The provisions of this Code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings
or structures designated as historic buildings, where such buildings or
structures are judged by the Code Official to be safe and in the public
interest of health, safety and welfare.
§ 13-102.7. Referenced Codes and Standards.
The codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be those that are
listed in Article 13-900 and considered part of the requirements of this Code
to the prescribed extent of each such reference and as further regulated in
Sections 13-102.7.1 and 13-102.7.2.
Exception: Where enforcement of a code provision would violate the
conditions of the listing of the equipment or appliance, the conditions of the
listing shall apply.
§ 13-102.7.1. Conflicts.
Where conflicts occur between provisions of this Code and the referenced
standards, the provisions of this Code shall apply.
§ 13-102.7.2. Provisions in Referenced Codes and Standards.
Where the extent of the reference to a referenced code or standard includes
subject matter that is within the scope of this Code, the provisions of
this Code, as applicable, shall take precedence over the provisions in the
referenced code or standard.
§ 13-102.8. Requirements Not Covered by Code.
Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an
existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety, health and
general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code, shall be determined
by the Code Official.
§ 13-102.9. Application of References.
References to chapter or section numbers, or to provisions not specifically
identified by number, shall be construed to refer to such chapter, section or
provision of this Code.
§ 13-102.10. Severability Clause.
If any provision of this Code, or any application of any provision, is held
invalid, the invalidity shall not affect other applications of the provision, or
other provisions of this Code, which reasonably can be given effect despite
the invalidity.
§ 13-102.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-102.11
1:443
§ 13-102.11. Other Laws.
The provisions of this Code shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of
local, state or federal law.
§ 13-103. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
§ 13-103.1. General.
The Department of Property Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation
and Code Enforcement is hereby created and the executive official in charge
thereof shall be known as the Code Official.
§ 13-103.2. Appointment.
The Code Official shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority of the
jurisdiction.
§ 13-103.3. Deputies.
May be appointed in accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction.
§ 13-103.4. Liability.
The Code Official, member of the board of appeals or employee charged
with the enforcement of this Code, while acting for the jurisdiction, in good
faith and without malice in the discharge of the duties required by this Code
or other pertinent law or ordinance, shall not thereby be rendered civilly or
criminally liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability
for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act or by
reason of an act or omission in the discharge of official duties.
§ 13-103.4.1. Legal Defense.
Any suit or criminal complaint instituted against any officer or employee
because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful
discharge of duties and under the provisions of this Code shall be defended
by the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of
the proceedings. The Code Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for
costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the
provisions of this Code.
§ 13-103.5. Fees.
The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying
out its responsibilities under this Code shall be as authorized as per City
Ordinance.
§ 13-103.6. Inspections.
§ 13-102.11 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-103.6
1:444
a. Property Maintenance Code. The City of Asbury Park shall have the
right to conduct inspections on all structures that come within this
article. All inspections conducted pursuant to this article shall be
performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the 2015
International Property Maintenance Code of the City of Asbury Park,
with the exception that any inspections conducted pursuant to the
Uniform Fire Code shall be performed in accordance with the
provisions set forth in the Uniform Fire Code and any inspection under
the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law shall be performed in accordance
with the N.J. Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law.
b. Certificate of Rental Compliance. No person, agency, corporation,
partnership, firm, company, owner, real estate agent, broker or any
other individual shall hereafter rent, lease or sublet to another or allow
any person or persons to live in or occupy as a tenant or otherwise or
suffer or permit any change in occupancy or use of any building,
dwelling or dwelling unit or part thereof, as the owner of said premises
or on behalf of the owner of said premises, without first obtaining from
the Department of Neighborhood Preservation and Code Enforcement,
a Certificate of Rental Compliance stating that at the time of the
proposed rental lease or subletting, the premises complied with all
applicable ordinances of the City of Asbury Park. The specific
requirements for inspections for Rental Compliance are set forth in
detail in Section 13-104 et seq. of this Code.
c. Certificate of Resale Compliance for all Real Property at Time of Sale
and Transfer of Title. No person, agency, corporation, partnership, firm,
company, owner, real estate agent, broker or any other individual shall
hereafter sell or transfer title to real property to another, or otherwise
permit any change in occupancy or use of any building, dwelling or
dwelling unit or part thereof in conjunction with the transfer of title to
said premises, as the owner of said premises or on behalf of the owner
of said premises, without first obtaining from the Department of
Neighborhood Preservation and Code Enforcement, a Certificate of
Resale Compliance stating that at the time of the proposed sale or
transfer of title, the premises complied with all applicable ordinances of
the City of Asbury Park. The buyer and seller of the property are equally
responsible for the Certificate of Resale Compliance process.
d. In the event the owner or lessor of a premises fails to correct a
nuisance, defect or other violation, following proper notice of same, the
City of Asbury Park may take all necessary and appropriate actions to
abate said nuisance, correct said defect or violation or put said
premises in proper condition in accordance with state laws and local
ordinances at the cost of the owner of lessor. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.12(f), the cost expended by the municipality for such purpose
shall be charged to the owner or lessor and shall become a lien against
said premises as provided by law. The City does not have the ability to
enforce terms and conditions of lease agreements; all violations and
summons shall be written to the owner or owner's property manager.
§ 13-103.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-103.7
1:445
§ 13-103.7. Procedures.
a. Property Maintenance Code. All inspections conducted pursuant to this
article shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth
in the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Asbury Park, with the exception that any inspections conducted
pursuant to the Uniform Fire Safety Act shall be performed in
accordance to said Act and any inspections pursuant to the N.J. Hotel
and Multiple Dwelling Law shall be conducted in accordance and
procedures set forth therein.
b. Certificate of Rental Compliance. The Department of Neighborhood
Preservation and Code Enforcement shall make available appropriate
application forms for Certificate of Rental Compliance in its' office, and/
or by any other means available. These forms shall be obtained and
completed by the owner, agent, or broker of each such rental property
and individual rental unit therein. All required inspections shall be
completed as evidenced by the issuance of a Certificate of Rental
Compliance before the continued occupancy of the rental property or
individual unit in a rental property occurs, and in accordance with the
requirements of Section 104 of this Code, below. The landlord shall
make application for an inspection under this section at least ten (10)
business days prior to the intended new tenancy/occupancy, or the
expiration of the current Certificate of Rental Compliance, whichever is
sooner, and the certificate of rental compliance shall be issued before a
new tenancy or change in occupancy is permitted. The Department of
Neighborhood Preservation and Code Enforcement shall make an
inspection and issue a certificate of compliance, if the dwelling unit
complies with the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code of the
City of Asbury Park.
c. Certificate of Resale Compliance for all Real Property at Time of Sale
and Transfer of Title. The Department of Neighborhood Preservation
and Code Enforcement shall make available appropriate application
forms for a Certificate of Resale Compliance in its' office, and/or by any
other means available. It is the responsibility of the seller, the seller's
real estate agent or broker, to apply to the Department of
Neighborhood Preservation and Code Enforcement, not more than
thirty (30) days, nor less than (10) days prior to the expected date of
sale, for inspection by the Code Official or housing inspector. If such
inspection indicates that the building is in compliance with the
provisions of the 2015 International Property Maintenance Code of the
City of Asbury Park, a Certificate of Resale Compliance is issued to the
applicant. If the building is not in compliance, a list of existing
deficiencies and violations is provided to the seller who shall correct
them prior to closing of title in the sale.
1. The buyer of a property for which a Certificate of Resale
Compliance is required may elect to make the corrections
necessary to obtain the Certificate of Resale Compliance required
hereunder. In that event, upon delivery to the Code Official of a
§ 13-103.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-103.7
1:446
§ 13-104. RENTAL REGULATIONS AND REGISTRATION OF RENTAL
PROPERTIES AND LANDLORDS. (RESERVED)
§ 13-105. DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL.
§ 13-105.1. General.
The Code Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this Code. The Code Official shall have the authority to render
interpretations of this Code and to adopt policies and procedures in order
to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies
and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this
Code. Such policies and procedures shall not have the effect of waiving
requirements specifically provided for in this Code.
written Letter of Intent, signed by the buyer(s), with their
signatures being notarized, indicating their agreement for making
all such necessary repairs to bring the property into compliance
within a time acceptable to the City, then a Conditional Certificate
of Resale Compliance may be issued. In no event is the time period
permitted for the buyer(s) to make repairs after sale to be greater
than six months.
d. The Certificate of Resale Compliance, as set forth above, shall be valid
for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of issue. At the end of the
thirty (30) days, the Certificate of Resale Compliance shall expire, and a
new application and inspection must be submitted and obtained prior to
closing of title on the sale of the property may occur.
e. Violations of any requirement of this chapter must be corrected by the
owner of the unit/property before the issuance of a Certificate of Rental
or Resale Compliance. The responsibility for correction of a violation,
except in the case of a rental, may be assumed by the buyer, with the
written notification and approval of the seller, buyer and Department of
Neighborhood Preservation and Code Enforcement.
f. Failure by seller to apply for and/or obtain a Certificate of Resale
Compliance prior to transfer of title, or failure of a buyer to complete
agreed-upon repairs within the time deemed acceptable by the City,
constitutes a violation of this chapter. Both the seller and buyer shall be
in violation of this Code, in the event a closing of title on the sale of
property occurs without first obtaining a Certificate of Resale
Compliance, in accordance with the procedures in this Code.
g. In no event shall the issuance of a Certificate of Rental or Resale
Compliance pursuant to this Code be considered the same as, or a
substitute for, a Certificate of Occupancy under the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 52:27D-119 et seq., as required in Chapter
XII of the City Code.
§ 13-103.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-105.2
1:447
§ 13-105.2. Inspections.
The Code Official shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept
reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. Reports of such
inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of
such approved agency or by the responsible individual. The Code Official
is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report
upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the
appointing authority.
§ 13-105.3. Right of Entry.
In accordance with State and case law, where it is necessary to make an
inspection to enforce the provisions of this Code, or whenever the Code
Official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a structure or
upon a premises a condition in violation of this Code, the Code Official,
or a code officer in this Department, is authorized to enter the structure
or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed
by this Code, provided that if such structure or premises is occupied the
Code Official or officer shall present credentials to the occupant and request
entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the Code Official shall
first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner, owner's authorized agent
or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and
request entry. If entry is refused, the Code Official shall have recourse to
the remedies provided by law to secure entry.
§ 13-105.4. Identification.
The Code Official shall carry proper identification when inspecting
structures or premises in the performance of duties under this Code.
§ 13-105.5. Notices and Orders.
The Code Official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure
compliance with this Code.
§ 13-105.6. Department Records.
The Code Official shall keep official records of all business and activities of
the department specified in the provisions of this Code. Such records shall
be retained in the official records for the period required for retention of
public records.
§ 13-106. APPROVAL.
§ 13-106.1. Modifications.
Existing State of New Jersey law, code, regulations and rules shall govern
required repairs. In most circumstances, the repairs will be completed
under the auspices of the applicable Construction or subcode official (for
example: Fire or electrical subcode official and the regulations that govern
§ 13-105.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-106.1
1:448
them). The Construction or subcode official will have jurisdiction over the
permitting and repair process. Whenever there are practical difficulties
involved in carrying out the provisions of this Code, the Code Official
shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases upon
application of the owner or owner's authorized agent, provided the Code
Official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter
of this Code impractical, the modification is in compliance with the intent
and purpose of this Code and that such modification does not lessen health,
life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting
modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.
§ 13-106.2. Alternative Materials, Methods and Equipment.
Existing State of New Jersey law, code, regulations and rules shall govern
required repairs. In most circumstances, the repairs will be completed
under the auspices of the applicable Construction or subcode official (for
example: Fire or electrical subcode official and the regulations that govern
them). The Construction or subcode official will have jurisdiction over the
permitting and repair process. The provisions of this Code are not intended
to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of
construction not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided that any
such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of
construction shall be approved where the Construction official finds that
the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the
provisions of this Code, and that the material, method or work offered
is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in
this Code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and
safety. Where the alternative material, design or method of construction is
not approved, the Code Official shall respond in writing, stating the reasons
the alternative was not approved.
§ 13-106.3. Required Testing.
Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions
of this Code or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the
requirements of this Code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative
materials or methods, the Construction official shall have the authority to
require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the
jurisdiction.
§ 13-106.3.1. Test Methods.
Test methods shall be as specified in this Code or by other recognized
test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods,
the Construction official shall be permitted to approve appropriate testing
procedures performed by an approved agency.
§ 13-106.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-106.3.2
1:449
§ 13-106.3.2. Test Reports.
Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code Official for the period
required for retention of public records.
§ 13-106.4. Used Material and Equipment.
The use of used materials that meet the requirements of this Code for
new materials is permitted. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be
reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned
and tested where necessary, placed in good and proper working condition
and approved by the Construction official.
§ 13-106.5. Approved Materials and Equipment.
Materials, equipment and devices approved by the Construction official
shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval.
§ 13-106.6. Research Reports.
Supporting data, where necessary to assist in the approval of materials or
assemblies not specifically provided for in this Code, shall consist of valid
research reports from approved sources.
§ 13-107. VIOLATIONS.
§ 13-107.1. Unlawful Acts.
It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or
in violation of any of the provisions of this Code.
§ 13-107.2. Notice of Violation.
The Code Official shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance
with Section 108.
§ 13-107.3. Prosecution of Violation.
Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served
in accordance with Section 108 of this Code shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined by the local municipality. If
the notice of violation is not complied with, the Code Official shall institute
the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this Code or
of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the
authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the
real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
§ 13-106.3.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-107.4
1:450
§ 13-107.4. Violation Penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted
within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a new and
separate offense.
§ 13-107.5. Abatement of Violation.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the
legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to
restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business
or utilization of the building, structure or premises.
§ 13-108. NOTICES AND ORDERS.
§ 13-108.1. Notice to Person Responsible.
Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation of
this Code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, notice
shall be given in the manner prescribed in Sections 13-108.2 and 13-108.3
to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this Code. Notices
for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 13-108.3.
§ 13-108.2. Form.
§ 13-108.3. Method of Service.
a. Such notice prescribed in Section 13-108.1 shall be in accordance with
all of the following:
1. Be in writing.
2. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
3. Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the notice
is being issued.
4. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or
structure into compliance with the provisions of this Code.
5. Inform the property owner or owner's authorized agent of the right
to appeal.
6. Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
Section 13-107.3.
a. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:
1. Delivered personally;
§ 13-107.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-108.3
1:451
§ 13-108.4. Unauthorized Tampering.
Signs, tags or seals posted or affixed by the Code Official shall not be
mutilated, destroyed or tampered with, or removed without authorization
from the Code Official.
§ 13-108.5. Penalties.
Penalties for noncompliance with Orders and Notices shall be as set forth in
Section 13-107.3.
§ 13-108.6. Transfer of Ownership.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who
has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has
been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such
dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance
order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner
or the owner's authorized agent shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of
violation issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to the Code Official
a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee
or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice
of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for
making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation. The Department of Neighborhood Preservation and Code
Enforcement shall create, maintain and update forms to comply with this
section from time-to-time.
§ 13-108.7. Notice Requirements.
2. Sent by certified and first-class mail addressed to the last known
address; or
3. If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a
copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice.
a. Five Day Notice Period. A minimum five (5) day notice period prior to
the issuance of the Summons for the following violation:
1. Transfer of Title Without Disclosure to purchaser of existing
Violations.
b. Forty-Eight Hour Notice Period. A minimum forty-eight (48) hour notice
period prior to the issuance of a Summons for the following violations:
1. Failure to remove weeds or plant growth deemed as a nuisance, in
the discretion of the Code Official or officer.
2. Any other items or violations in the discretion of the Code Official
or officer, deemed compliant with this section.
§ 13-108.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-108.7
1:452
§ 13-109. UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.
§ 13-109.1. General.
When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official to be unsafe, or
when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful,
such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this Code.
c. No Notice Required. No notices of violation shall be required prior to
the issuance of a Summons for the following violations:
1. Failure to provide Required Utilities (Water);
2. Failure to provide Required Utilities (Electric and Heat);
3. Failure to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy before Occupancy or
Transfer of Title prior to closing of title;
4. Trash at curb on days when pickup is not scheduled and not in
compliance with the Solid Waste chapter of the City Code;
5. Failure to provide proper snow removal;
6. Prohibited occupancy of a placarded structure;
7. Sanitation (exterior property and premises to be maintained clean
and sanitary);
8. Grass, Weeds and plant growth in excess of 10 inches unless
previous direction or communication has been provided;
9. Accumulations of garbage or rubbish;
10. Failure to provide clean, sanitary disposal of rubbish in a container;
11. Failure to provide clean, sanitary disposal of garbage in a
container;
12. Overcrowding;
13. Occupying non-habitable spaces for sleeping purposes;
14. Failure to maintain a safe, unobstructed means of egress;
15. Accumulations of trash, rubbish or other materials blocking egress;
16. Tampering with a smoke or carbon monoxide detector;
17. Failure to provide operable smoke and carbon monoxide systems at
all times;
18. Any other items or violations deemed compliant with this section,
which, in the discretion of the Code Official or officer, affect the
health or safety concerns of the citizens.
§ 13-108.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-109.1.1
1:453
§ 13-109.1.1. Unsafe Structures.
An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health,
property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not
providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of
fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or
unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.
§ 13-109.1.2. Unsafe Equipment.
Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating equipment, elevator, moving
stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other
equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such
disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health,
property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or structure.
§ 13-109.1.3. Structure Unfit for Human Occupancy.
A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the Code Official finds
that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which
the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, roach,
vermin or rat infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation,
illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment
required by this Code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.
§ 13-109.1.4. Unlawful Structure.
An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by
more persons than permitted under this Code, or was erected, altered or
occupied contrary to law.
§ 13-109.1.5. Dangerous Structure or Premises.
a. For the purpose of this Code, any structure or premises that has any or
all of the conditions or defects described below shall be considered
dangerous:
1. Any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or other means of egress
that does not conform to the approved building or fire code of the
jurisdiction as related to the requirements for existing buildings.
2. The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway, exit or
other means of egress is so warped, worn loose, torn or otherwise
unsafe as to not provide safe and adequate means of egress.
3. Any portion of a building, structure or appurtenance that has been
damaged by fire, earthquake, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect,
abandonment, vandalism or by any other cause to such an extent
that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, or to become
detached or dislodged.
§ 13-109.1.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-109.1.5
1:454
4. Any portion of a building, or any member, appurtenance or
ornamentation on the exterior thereof that is not of sufficient
strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in
place so as to be capable of resisting natural or artificial loads of
one and one-half the original designed value.
5. The building or structure, or part of the building or structure,
because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction,
the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary
for the support, or for any other reason, is likely to partially or
completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or
underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give
way.
6. The building or structure, or any portion thereof, is clearly unsafe
for its use and occupancy.
7. The building or structure is neglected, damaged, dilapidated,
unsecured or abandoned so as to become an attractive nuisance to
children who might play in the building or structure to their danger,
becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or
enables persons to resort to the building or structure for
committing a nuisance or an unlawful act.
8. Any building or structure has been constructed, exists or is
maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition
applicable to such building or structure provided by the approved
building or fire code of the jurisdiction, or of any law or ordinance
to such an extent as to present either a substantial risk of fire,
building collapse or any other threat to life and safety.
9. A building or structure, used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes, because of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay,
damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light,
ventilation, mechanical or plumbing system, or otherwise, is
determined by the Code Official to be unsanitary, unfit for human
habitation or in such a condition that is likely to cause sickness or
disease.
10. Any building or structure, because of a lack of sufficient or proper
fire-resistance-rated construction, fire protection systems,
electrical system, fuel connections, mechanical system, plumbing
system or other cause, is determined by the Code Official to be a
threat to life or health.
11. Any portion of a building remains on a site after the demolition or
destruction of the building or structure or whenever any building
or structure is abandoned so as to constitute such building or
portion thereof as an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public.
§ 13-109.1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-109.2
1:455
§ 13-109.2. Closing of Vacant Structures.
If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and
is not in danger of structural collapse, the Code Official is authorized to post
a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed
up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon failure of the owner or
owner's authorized agent to close up the premises within the time specified
in the order, the Code Official shall cause the premises to be closed and
secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement
by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate and shall be collected by any other legal resource.
§ 13-109.2.1. Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities.
The Code Official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of
utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this Code
and the referenced codes and standards set forth in Section 13-102.7 in
case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to
life or property or where such utility connection has been made without
approval. The Code Official shall notify the serving utility and, whenever
possible, the owner or owner's authorized agent and occupant of the
building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to
taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnection the owner, owner's
authorized agent or occupant of the building structure or service system
shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.
§ 13-109.3. Notice.
Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure or equipment under
the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner,
owner's authorized agent or the person or persons responsible for the
structure or equipment in accordance with Section 13-107.3. If the notice
pertains to equipment, it shall be placed on the condemned equipment. The
notice shall be in the form prescribed in Section 13-107.2.
§ 13-109.4. Placarding.
Upon failure of the owner, owner's authorized agent or person responsible
to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the Code Official
shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the
word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying
the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
§ 13-109.4.1. Placard Removal.
The Code Official shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the
defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were
based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a
§ 13-109.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-109.4.1
1:456
condemnation placard without the approval of the Code Official shall be
subject to the penalties provided by this Code.
§ 13-109.5. Prohibited Occupancy.
Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the Code Official
shall be vacated as ordered by the Code Official. Any person who shall
occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment, and
any or person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy a
placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the
penalties provided by this Code.
§ 13-109.6. Abatement Methods.
The owner, owner's authorized agent, operator or occupant of a building,
premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the Code Official shall abate or
cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action.
§ 13-109.7. Record.
The Code Official shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe condition.
The report shall state the occupancy of the structure and the nature of the
unsafe condition.
§ 13-110. EMERGENCY MEASURES.
§ 13-110.1. Imminent Danger.
When, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is imminent danger of
failure or collapse of a building or structure that endangers life, or when
any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the
occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to
the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because
of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes,
gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the
Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the
occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The Code Official shall cause
to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows:
"This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the
Code Official." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure
except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required
repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
§ 13-110.2. Temporary Safeguards.
Notwithstanding other provisions of this Code, whenever, in the opinion of
the Code Official, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe condition,
the Code Official shall order the necessary work to be done, including the
boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether
or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall
§ 13-109.4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-110.2
1:457
cause such other action to be taken as the Code Official deems necessary to
meet such emergency.
§ 13-110.3. Closing Streets.
When necessary for public safety, the Code Official shall temporarily close
structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close,
sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures,
and prohibit the same from being utilized. The Code Official shall
immediately contact the Chief of Police (or highest ranking officer), Fire
Chief and the City Manager.
§ 13-110.4. Emergency Repairs.
For the purposes of this section, the Code Official shall employ the
necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as
expeditiously as possible. This work shall be then liened against the
property as to ensure complete reimbursement.
§ 13-110.5. Costs of Emergency Repairs.
Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the
jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the jurisdiction shall institute appropriate
action against the owner of the premises or owner's authorized agent where
the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.
§ 13-110.6. Hearing.
Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such
order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed
to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this Code.
§ 13-111. DEMOLITION.
§ 13-111.1. General.
The Code Official shall order the owner or owner's authorized agent of any
premises upon which is located any structure, which in the Code Official's
or owner's authorized agent judgment after review is so deteriorated or
dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
insanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such
that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs,
to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future
repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there
has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period
of more than two years, the Code Official shall order the owner or owner's
authorized agent to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until
future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend
beyond six months, unless approved by the Construction official.
§ 13-110.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-111.2
1:458
§ 13-111.2. Notices and Orders.
Notices and orders shall comply with Section 13-108.
§ 13-111.3. Failure to Comply.
If the owner of a premises or owner's authorized agent fails to comply with
a demolition order within the time prescribed, the Code Official shall cause
the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available
public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the
cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
§ 13-111.4. Salvage Materials.
When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the
governing body or other designated officer under said contract or
arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable
materials. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of
such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of
such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts
deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a
court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall
so state. All sales of materials shall be in accordance with the Local Public
Contracts Law or Court Order.
§ 13-112. MEANS OF APPEAL.
§ 13-112.1. Application for Appeal.
Any person directly affected by a decision of the Code Official or a notice or
order issued under this Code shall have the right to appeal to the court of
competent jurisdiction.
§ 13-113. STOP WORK ORDER.
§ 13-113.1. Authority.
Whenever the Code Official finds any work regulated by this Code being
performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this Code or in a
dangerous or unsafe manner, the Code Official is authorized to issue a stop
work order.
§ 13-113.2. Issuance.
A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the
property, to the owner's authorized agent, or to the person doing the work.
Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease.
The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions
under which the cited work is authorized to resume.
§ 13-111.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-113.3
1:459
§ 13-113.3. Emergencies.
Where an emergency exists, the Code Official shall not be required to give
a written notice prior to stopping the work.
§ 13-113.4. Failure to Comply.
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a
stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less or
more than established by Ordinance.
§ 13-113.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-113.4
1:460
ARTICLE 13-200
Definitions
[Ord. No. 2016-53; Ord. No. 2018-40]
§ 13-201. GENERAL.
§ 13-201.1. Scope.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purposes of this Code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
§ 13-201.2. Interchangeability.
Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
§ 13-201.3. Terms Defined in Other Codes.
Where terms are not defined in this Code and are defined in the code
of the State of New Jersey, the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,
the International Building Code, International Existing Building Code,
International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, International
Mechanical Code, International Plumbing Code, International Residential
Code, International Zoning Code, NFPA 70, or local definition, such terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes.
§ 13-201.4. Terms Not Defined.
Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this
section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the
context implies.
§ 13-201.5. Parts.
Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "dwelling," "premises," "building,"
"rooming house," "rooming unit," "housekeeping unit" or "story" are stated
in this Code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words "or any part thereof."
§ 13-202. GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter:
ANCHORED — Secured in a manner that provides positive connection.
APPROVED — Acceptable to the Code Official.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.
BATHROOM — A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or
shower.
§ 13-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-202
1:461
BEDROOM — Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
CODE OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative; such
as inspectors. Commonly referred to as: Director of the Department of
Neighborhood Preservation.
CONDEMN — To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
COST OF SUCH DEMOLITION OR EMERGENCY REPAIRS — The costs
shall include the actual costs of the demolition or repair of the structure less
revenues obtained if salvage was conducted prior to demolition or repair.
Costs shall include, but not be limited to, expenses incurred or necessitated
related to demolition or emergency repairs, such as asbestos survey and
abatement if necessary; costs of inspectors, testing agencies or experts
retained relative to the demolition or emergency repairs; costs of testing;
surveys for other materials that are controlled or regulated from being
dumped in a landfill; title searches; mailing(s); postings; recording; and
attorney fees expended for recovering of the cost of emergency repairs or
to obtain or enforce an order of demolition made by a Code Official, the
governing body or board of appeals.
DETACHED — When a structural element is physically disconnected from
another and that connection is necessary to provide a positive connection.
DETERIORATION — To weaken, disintegrate, corrode, rust or decay and
lose effectiveness.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
EASEMENT — That portion of land or property reserved for present or
future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above
a said lot or lots.
EQUIPMENT SUPPORT — Those structural members or assemblies of
members or manufactured elements, including braces, frames, lugs,
snuggers, hangers or saddles, that transmit gravity load, lateral load and
operating load between the equipment and the structure.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GUARD — A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that
minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
§ 13-202 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-202
1:462
HISTORIC BUILDING —
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — A room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet,
lavatory and bathtub or shower.
IMMINENT DANGER — A condition which could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which cannot be driven upon
the public streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved
under its own power.
LABELED — Equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed
a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized
testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with
product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production
of the above-labeled items and whose labeling indicates either that the
equipment, material or product meets identified standards or has been
tested and found suitable for a specified purpose.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant
to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
MANUFACTURER RECOMMENDATION — Equipment, materials or
products to which have been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other
identifying how they are to be property installed, maintained, etc.
NEGLECT — The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
OCCUPANCY — The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is
utilized or occupied.
OCCUPANT — Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
Listed or certified as eligible for listing, by the State Historic
Preservation Officer or the Keeper of the National Register of Historic
Places, in the National Register of Historic Places.
1.
2. Designated as historic under an applicable state or local law.
Certified as a contributing resource within a National Register or state
or locally designated historic district.
3.
§ 13-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-202
1:463
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person
if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
PEST ELIMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serve as their food or water; by other approved
pest elimination methods.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including
any structures thereon.
PUBLIC WAY — Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
REPAIRS; EMERGENT - COMPLETING OF — Any repairs authorized by a
third party and in accordance with the Local Public Contracts Law, by the
Code Official or other authorized City represented who shall have the power
to lien a property;
ROOMING HOUSE — A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or
without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family
dwelling.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for
cooking purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
SLEEPING UNIT — A room or space in which people sleep, which can
also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or
kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of
a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE — An offense in which the prosecution in a
legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its
case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was
prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required
to do.
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
§ 13-202 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-202
1:464
TENANT — A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
TOILET ROOM — A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a
bathtub or shower.
ULTIMATE DEFORMATION — The deformation at which failure occurs and
which shall be deemed to occur if the sustainable load reduces to 80 percent
or less of the maximum strength.
>VENTILATION — The natural or mechanical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
WORKMANLIKE — Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb,
level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a structure.
§ 13-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-202
1:465

ARTICLE 13-300
General Requirements
[Ord. No. 2016-53; Ord. No. 2018-40]
§ 13-301. GENERAL.
§ 13-301.1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the
responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and
exterior property.
§ 13-301.2. Responsibility.
The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior
property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise
provided for in this Code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or
permit another person to occupy premises that are not in a sanitary and
safe condition and that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are
responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of
the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control.
§ 13-301.3. Vacant Structures and Land.
Vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained
in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not
to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
§ 13-301.4. Manufacturer Recommendation.
All equipment, materials or products to which have been affixed a label,
seal, symbol or other identifying how they are to be property installed,
maintained, etc.
§ 13-301.5. More Stringent Regulation(s) to Apply - Code
Enforcement.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances, or rules, regulations, etc., in
conflict herewith with regards to Code Enforcement activities are hereby
repealed to the extent of such consistency, except where such other
ordinances or parts of ordinances provide for a higher or more stringent
standard, in which event, that higher or more stringent standard shall apply.
§ 13-301.6. More Stringent Regulation(s) to Apply - Other Code.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances, or rules, regulations, etc., in
conflict herewith with regards to other Federal, State, County or local are
hereby repealed to the extent of such consistency, except where such other
§ 13-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-301.6
1:467
ordinances or parts of ordinances provide for a higher or more stringent
standard, in which event, that higher or more stringent standard shall apply.
Nothing shall permit the Code Official to write a corrective action notice or
citation based upon these codes.
§ 13-301.7. Willful Damage.
Willful Damage. Every occupant shall be liable for willfully or maliciously
causing damage to any part of the premises that results in a violation of this
Code. Any adult occupant shall be responsible and liable for any violation of
this Code caused by minors under their care or custody occupying the same
unit of dwelling space, if the violations were permitted to continue with the
knowledge or acquiescence or consent of the adult member.
§ 13-302. EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
As used in this section:
Trash or debris shall mean and include the following:
Automobile left standing in an unlicensed and unusable state or condition,
or parts thereof left outside of an enclosed garage, scraps of metal, wood,
pieces of stone, cement, cans, bottles, scrap paper, or a combination
thereof, left in such a condition as to create an unsightly, unhealthful,
unsafe, or unsanitary condition, or in such manner as would constitute a fire
or health hazard.
§ 13-302.1. Sanitation.
Exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and
sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior
property that such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary
condition, free of trash or debris.
§ 13-302.2. Duties of Owners and Tenants.
It shall be the duty of any owner or tenant or person in possession of any
lands in the City:
a. To keep such lands free of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, where the
same are inimical to the preservation of public health, safety or general
welfare of the City, or which may constitute a fire hazard;
b. Where the lands abut or border upon any public street or alley in the
City, to remove all grass, weeds, brush and other debris from that part
of the street or alley bordering on their respective lands.
§ 13-301.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-302.3
1:468
§ 13-302.3. Grading and Drainage.
Premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil
and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
structure located thereon.
Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
§ 13-302.3.1. Filling of Land to Grade.
It is hereby declared to be the duty of the owner or owners of any and all
lots in this City to fill and cause each and every lot to be maintained properly
filled to grade at all times. This requirement shall apply to vacant lands,
areas of lands not plotted into lots and lots upon which improvements are
erected.
§ 13-302.4. Sidewalks and Driveways.
Sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas
shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazards.
§ 13-302.5. Weeds.
Premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds, moss,
algae or plant growth in excess of six inches. Noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject
to prosecution in accordance with Section 13-107.3 and as prescribed by
the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice
of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor
hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in
violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs
of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the
property. A bill may be sent or a lien placed upon said property.
Upon mailing date of the notice of violation, owner or agent having charge
of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service, the owner shall have
one calendar week to abate the issue and then the City shall be authorized
to enter the property. A bill may be sent or a lien placed upon said property.
§ 13-302.6. Rodent Harborage.
Structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage
and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health.
§ 13-302.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-302.6.1
1:469
§ 13-302.6.1. Rodent Harborage - Continuous Maintenance.
After pest elimination as per Section 13-309, proper precautions shall be
taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.
§ 13-302.7. Exhaust Vents.
Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam,
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes
directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of
another tenant.
§ 13-302.8. Accessory Structures.
Accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall
be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
§ 13-302.9. Motor Vehicles.
Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed
motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no
vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair,
or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.
§ 13-302.10. Defacement of Property.
No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public
property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an
approved state of maintenance and repair.
a. Automobile(s) left standing in an unlicensed and unusable state or
condition, or parts thereof left outside of an enclosed garage, so as to
be accessible to children, rodents, vermin, or insect pests, or in such
condition or location as to create an unsightly appearance to
neighboring property owners or the general public are prohibited.
Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed
inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for
such purposes.
b. No trailer of any size for vehicle repair which provides enclosed storage
shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises. This prohibition shall
not apply to trash, refuse or recycling containers or to any trailer owned
by the municipality or being used in connection with any temporary
function, including a circus or carnival, which is approved by the
municipality.
§ 13-302.6.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-302.10.1
1:470
§ 13-302.10.1. Graffiti Abatement.
§ 13-302.10.2. Purpose and Intent.
The City Council of the City of Asbury Park finds graffiti on public or private
property a blighting element, which leads to depreciation of the value of
property that has been targeted by such vandalism and depreciates the
value of the adjacent and surrounding properties to the extent that graffiti
creates a negative impact upon the entire City.
The City Council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public
nuisance, and must be eliminated by means of prevention, education and
abatement to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on the City and
its residents, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti.
The purpose and intent of the City Council, through the adoption of this
section, is to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and
private property from acts of vandalism and defacement. It is the further
intent of the City Council, through the adoption of this section, to provide
notice to all of those who disregard the property rights of others, that
the law enforcement agencies of the City, the Departments of Code
Enforcement and Neighborhood Preservation and the City Attorney, will
strictly enforce the law and vigorously prosecute those persons engaging in
violations of this section.
§ 13-302.10.3. Definitions.
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER — shall mean any aerosol container, which
is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance
capable of defacing property.
FELT-TIP MARKER — shall mean any tipped style marker or similar
implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is one-eighth (1/8) inch,
or greater.
GRAFFITI — shall mean any unauthorized inscribing, word, figure, or
design which is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted or
otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the
material of that structural component, to the extent the same was not
authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or despite advance
authorization, is otherwise deemed by the City Council to be a public
nuisance.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — shall mean an aerosol paint container, a felt tip
marker, or any other device containing any solution or substance capable
of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in
width upon any surface.
§ 13-302.10.4. Declaration of Nuisance.
a. The City Council hereby declares and finds graffiti to be a nuisance
subject to abatement according to the provisions and procedures herein
§ 13-302.10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-302.10.4
1:471
§ 13-302.10.5. Graffiti Prohibited.
§ 13-302.10.6. Possession of Graffiti Implements by Minors
Prohibited.
Possession of any graffiti implement by any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years with the intent to deface property while upon public
or private property shall be unlawful unless that minor has received the
consent of the owner of such private property whose consent to such
possession and presence is given in writing in advance or unless that minor
is accompanied by and under the supervision of a parent or legal guardian.
This provision shall not apply to the possession of felt tip markers by minors
attending, or traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled, if
the minor is participating in a class at said school, which formally requires
possession of such felt tip markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution
for violation of this subsection shall be upon the minor student to establish
the need to possess a felt tip marker.
§ 13-302.10.7. Possession of Graffiti Implements Prohibited in
Designated Public Places.
Possession of any graffiti implement by any person under the age of
eighteen (18) years with the intent to deface property while in any public
park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or while in or within
contained and as authorized by New Jersey Statutes N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq.
b. The existence of any surface of a structure on any privately owned
parcel of land which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more
than five (5) times in twelve (12) months is hereby deemed to be a
nuisance, and may be abated by the City by order of the City Council
requiring modifications thereto, or to the immediate area surrounding
same. Such modifications may include, but are not limited to
retrofitting of such surfaces at the expense of the property owner(s) of
said lot, with such features or qualities as may be established by the
City as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti,
or as necessary to permit more convenient, expedient or efficient
removal of graffiti therefrom.
a. No person shall place graffiti or other writing upon any public or
privately owned tree or structures including, but not limited to,
buildings, walls, fences, poles, sidewalks and signs, ("structures"
hereinafter in this section) located within the City. It shall also be
unlawful for any person to apply or affix any adhesive backed label,
sticker, "bumper sticker" or similar item, to any tree or structure not
owned or lawfully possessed by such person.
b. No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within
the City shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or remain on
any structure located on such property.
§ 13-302.10.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-302.10.7
1:472
ten (10) feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or other
similar type of infrastructure not normally used by the public shall be
unlawful except as may be authorized by the City or unless that minor is
accompanied by and under the supervision and control of a parent or legal
guardian.
§ 13-302.10.8. Accessibility to Graffiti Implements Prohibited.
Furnishing of Graffiti Implements to Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange,
give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given,
loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti implement to any minor without
the consent of the parent or lawful guardian which consent shall be given in
advance in writing.
§ 13-302.10.9. Right of City to Require Removal.
§ 13-302.10.10. Response to Order to Remove Graffiti from Property
Owner.
A property owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti shall respond to
the City by personal delivery or certified mail:
a. In the event graffiti is found, the City shall provide the owner of record
written notice of an order to remove said graffiti be certified mail and
regular mail, which order shall afford the owner the opportunity to
remove the graffiti within sixty (60) days of the date that the notice is
sent, however, any government agency or department shall be afforded
one hundred twenty (120) days from the date that the notice is sent to
remove graffiti from property owned by the agency or department.
b. The City's order to remove shall contain a form to be utilized by a
property owner to inform the City that the graffiti has been removed
and shall contain a certification stating that by affixing a signature to
the form indicating that the graffiti has been removed, the owner is
certifying that the facts set forth therein are true and that the
certification shall be considered as if made under oath and subject to
the same penalties as provided by law for perjury.
a. Any objection to the order, within thirty (30) days of the date of the
order;
b. Notice that the graffiti has been removed, within thirty (30) days of the
date of the order, or in the case of the State Department of
Transportation, within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of the
order.
§ 13-302.10.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-302.10.11
1:473
§ 13-302.10.11. Objection to Order to Remove Graffiti.
A property owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti may institute an
action challenging the order before a court of competent jurisdiction within
forty-five (45) days of the date of the order.
§ 13-302.10.12. Failure to Comply with Order to Remove Graffiti.
§ 13-302.10.13. Right of City to Remove.
a. If a property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within
sixty (60) days of the date of the order, or in the case of the Department
of Transportation, within one hundred twenty (120) days of the date of
the order, unless an action challenging the order to remove graffiti is
still pending, the City may remove the graffiti from that property and
present the property owner with a detailed itemization of the costs
incurred by the City, by certified mail and regular mail, for
reimbursement from the property owner.
b. Whenever the City undertakes the removal of graffiti from any building,
structure or other exposed surface, the City Council, in addition to
assessing the cost of removal as municipal lien against the premises,
may enforce the payment of such assessment, together with interest, as
a debt of the owner of the property and may authorize the institution of
an action at law for the collection thereof. The Superior Court shall
have jurisdiction of any such action.
a. Whenever the City becomes aware, or is notified and determines that
graffiti is so located on public or privately owned property viewable
from a public or quasi-public place within the City, the City shall be
authorized to use public funds for the removal of same, or for the
painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake to
provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that
where the graffiti is located, unless the City Manager, or designee,
determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be
repainted or repaired in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the
neighborhood or community, or unless the responsible party agrees to
pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.
Refer to 302.10.10.
b. Right of Entry on Private Property.
1. Securing Owner Consent. Prior to entering upon private property
or property owned by a public entity other than the City, for the
purposes of removal of graffiti, the City shall attempt to secure the
consent of the responsible party, and a release of the City from
liability for private or public property damage.
2. Failure to Obtain Owner Consent. If a responsible party fails to
remove the offending graffiti within the time herein specified, or if
the City shall have requested consent to remove or paint over the
§ 13-302.10.11 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-302.10.13
1:474
§ 13-302.11. Snow Removal.
All snow shall be removed within 24 hours from the termination of the snow
event and within 48 hours if a State of Emergency has been declared. No
snow shall be deposited within the Right-of-Way or within a City owner
roadway or alley.
§ 13-302.12. Placement of Dumpsters.
All dumpsters shall be set upon plywood to protect the surface against ruts.
This applies to dumpsters on private property, a roadway, alley, or within
the right-of-way. A property owner's use of a dumpster is subject to the
requirements of § 3-15.1 et seq. of the City Code.
§ 13-302.12.1. Use of Dumpsters.
All dumpsters shall be property specific and not to be shared unless by
adjacent properties.
§ 13-302.13. Trees and Root Systems.
Trees shall be maintained to a good visual standard or in accordance
with ANSI standards. All tree roots shall not impede or damage existing
infrastructure such as sidewalks or fences.
§ 13-302.14. Order to Remove.
Whenever any Code Official or Inspector, Police Officer or Special Police
Officer deems it necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public
health, safety, general welfare, or the elimination of a fire hazard, or upon
investigation of a complaint of any resident, officer or employee of the
City, he may order the owner, tenant or person in possession of any lands
on which any brush, grass, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or other debris are found to exist,
to remove same within three (3) days or to cause the removal thereof if the
order is not complied with.
§ 13-302.15. Service of Notice.
After an investigation of a complaint of any resident, officer or employee of
the City, or upon his own motion, any City Code Official or Inspector, Police
Officer or Special Police Officer or other City Official appointed or directed
offending graffiti and the responsible party shall have refused
consent for entry on terms acceptable to the City consistent with
the terms of this subsection, the City may commence abatement
and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti
pursuant to the nuisance abatement authority granted by the State
of New Jersey, which authority includes the recovery of all costs
incurred by the City in abating graffiti and recordation of lien as to
affected property.
§ 13-302.10.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-302.15
1:475
by the City Manager (or designee) shall proceed with regard to the manner
of service of notice to remove the contents thereof as provided in Section
13-107 et seq. herein.
§ 13-302.16. Removal by City; Costs Established as a Lien.
In the event the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in
question refuses or neglects to abate or remedy the condition complained
of within three (3) days after receipt of notice, any City Code Official or
Inspector, Police Officer or Special Police Officer may cause the condition
complained of to be abated and remedied by referral to the City Department
of Public Works, which Department shall then certify the cost thereof to
the City Tax Collector, who shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against the lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a
lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form a part of
the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, which shall be collected and enforced by
the Tax Collector in the same manner as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to
any penalties imposed for a violation of this section.
In the event that the order for removal of trash or debris is as a result of
the trash or debris being located on the City right-of-way and the owner,
tenant or person in possession of the lands in question refuses or neglects
to abate or remedy the condition complained of within forty-eight (48) hours
after receipt of notice, any City Code Official or Inspector, Police Officer or
Special Police Officer may cause the condition complained of to be abated
and remedied by referral to the City Department of Public Works, which
Department shall then certify the cost thereof to the City Tax Collector, who
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the lands. The
amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall
be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as
taxes, which shall be collected and enforced by the Tax Collector in the
same manner as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed
for a violation of this section.
§ 13-302.17. Exceptions.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to a regular established
and licensed business known as a towing operator's storage yard, which
business is subject to the special regulations provided in the City Code.
§ 13-302.18. Clear View at Intersections.
a. Violations and Penalties. All violators of this section shall be subject to a
penalty of no less than two hundred fifty ($250) dollars for each
violation or thirty (30) days community service or both.
Each and every day in which a violation of this section exists shall
constitute a separate violation subject to a penalty.
§ 13-302.15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-302.18.1
1:476
§ 13-302.18.1. Height Restricted.
It shall be the responsibility of any owner, tenant or occupant of any parcel
of land within the City to cut all brush, hedges and other plant life growing
within ten (10) feet of any roadway and within twenty-five (25) feet of any
intersection of two (2) roadways, to a height of not more than two and onehalf
(2 1/2) feet provided such shall be necessary and expedient for the
preservation of the public safety. The owner, tenant or occupant shall have
ten (10) days after notice to cut the same.
§ 13-302.18.2. Inspection and Determination by City.
At least once in each calendar year the Department of Neighborhood
Preservation may examine all roadways in the City and make a
determination of each parcel of land where it is necessary and expedient
for the preservation of the public safety to have any brush, hedges or other
plant life cut in accordance with this section of the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.26 and 40:48-2.27.
§ 13-302.18.3. Notice to Remove.
When the Department of Neighborhood Preservation ascertains that there
is a parcel of land on which exist the conditions described in this section, it
shall cause notice to be given to the owner, tenant or occupant of the land to
cut the brush, hedges or other plant life within ten (10) days after the notice
is given. The notice shall be given in writing, either personally or by the
United States certified mail. If neither method of giving notice is possible
or practical, notice may be given by posting it in a prominent place on the
parcel of land.
§ 13-302.18.4. Removal by City; Cost Established as Lien.
If the owner, tenant or occupant fails to cut the brush within ten (10) days,
the Public Works Director shall direct a City employee or arrange for an
independent contractor, to cut the brush, hedges or other plant life. Where
such cutting is done by the Public Works Director, or any other person, or
under his direction, he shall certify the cost thereof to the City Tax Collector
who shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against the land.
The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon the lands and
shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon the lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as
other taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in
the same manner as taxes.
§ 13-303. SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.
§ 13-303.1. Swimming Pools.
Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and
in good repair. All pools shall comply with existing zoning code and other
State and local statutes; the stricture regulation shall apply.
§ 13-302.18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-303.2
1:477
§ 13-303.2. Enclosures.
Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing water more than
24 inches (610 mm) in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence
or barrier not less than 48 inches (1219 mm) in height above the finished
ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates
and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the
self-latching device is not less than 54 inches (1372 mm) above the bottom
of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the
gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the
gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of
6 inches (152 mm) from the gatepost. No existing pool enclosure shall be
removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as
a safety barrier.
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F
1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
§ 13-304. EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.
§ 13-304.1. General.
The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally
sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or
welfare.
§ 13-304.1.1. Unsafe Conditions.
a. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be
repaired or replaced to comply with the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code as required for existing buildings:
1. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by
nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
2. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls
and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal
loads or load effects;
3. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
4. Siding and masonry joints including joints between the building
envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors and skylights are not
maintained, weather resistant or water tight;
5. Structural members that have evidence of deterioration or that are
not capable of safely supporting all nominal loads and load effects;
6. Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings, are
not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly
§ 13-303.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-304.1.1
1:478
anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and
resisting all load effects;
7. Exterior walls that are not anchored to supporting and supported
elements or are not plumb and free of holes, cracks or breaks and
loose or rotting materials, are not properly anchored or are not
capable of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load
effects;
8. Roofing or roofing components that have defects that admit rain,
roof surfaces with inadequate drainage, or any portion of the roof
framing that is not in good repair with signs of deterioration,
fatigue or without proper anchorage and incapable of supporting
all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
9. Flooring and flooring components with defects that affect
serviceability or flooring components that show signs of
deterioration or fatigue, are not properly anchored or are incapable
of supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
10. Veneer, cornices, belt courses, corbels, trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features not properly anchored or that are
anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects;
11. Overhang extensions or projections including, but not limited to,
trash chutes, canopies, marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes,
standpipes and exhaust ducts not properly anchored or that are
anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects;
12. Exterior stairs, decks, porches, balconies and all similar
appurtenances attached thereto, including guards and handrails,
are not structurally sound, not properly anchored or that are
anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects; or
13. Chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks and similar appurtenances
not structurally sound or not properly anchored, or that are
anchored with connections not capable of supporting all nominal
loads and resisting all load effects.
14. Other items deemed in accordance with this section:
b. Exceptions:
1. Where substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted where approved
by the Construction official.
§ 13-304.1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-304.2
1:479
§ 13-304.2. Protective Treatment.
Exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window
frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences, shall be
maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decayresistant
woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting
or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped
paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. Siding and masonry joints,
as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of
windows, doors and skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and
water tight. Metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to
inhibit such rust and corrosion, and surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be
stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains
shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization
by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. Any repairs and/or
replacement must match, or be similar to, the style and color of the existing.
§ 13-304.3. Premises Identification.
Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall
be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be not less than 3
inches (102 mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7
mm). Additional or more stringent State regulations may apply; the more
stringent regulations shall be the governing regulations.
§ 13-304.4. Structural Members.
Structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and shall
be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads. Any repairs
and/or replacement must match, or be similar to, the style and color of the
existing.
§ 13-304.5. Foundation Walls.
Foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and
breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of
rodents and other pests.
§ 13-304.6. Exterior Walls.
Exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting
materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where
required to prevent deterioration.
§ 13-304.7. Roofs and Drainage.
The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit
rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration
in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and
§ 13-304.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-304.7
1:480
downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions.
Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance. Any repairs and/or replacement must match, or be similar to, the
style and color of the existing.
§ 13-304.8. Decorative Features.
Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar
decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper
anchorage and in a safe condition.
§ 13-304.9. Overhang Extensions.
Overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies, marquees,
signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be
maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in
a sound condition. Where required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood
shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
§ 13-304.10. Stairways, Decks, Porches and Balconies.
Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances
attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair,
with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
§ 13-304.11. Chimneys and Towers.
Chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall
be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. Exposed
surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against
decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as
paint or similar surface treatment.
§ 13-304.12. Handrails and Guards.
Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
§ 13-304.13. Window, Skylight and Door Frames.
Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition,
good repair and weather tight.
§ 13-304.13.1. Glazing.
Glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.
§ 13-304.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-304.13.2
1:481
§ 13-304.13.2. Openable Windows.
Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be easily openable and
capable of being held in position by window hardware.
§ 13-304.14. Insect Screens.
Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of
habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas
where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption
are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with
approved tightly fitting screens of minimum 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per
25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a selfclosing
device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such
as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
§ 13-304.15. Doors (Exterior).
Exterior doors, door assemblies, operator systems if provided, and
hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to
dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on
means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 13-702.3.
§ 13-304.16. Basement Hatchways.
Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of
rodents, rain and surface drainage water. Handles shall be in good working
order.
§ 13-304.17. Guards for Basement Windows.
Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent
shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of
rodents or the elements.
§ 13-304.18. Building Security.
Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or
housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide
security for the occupants and property within.
§ 13-304.18.1. Doors (Interior).
Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping
unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock
designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be
made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have
a minimum lock throw of 1 inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be
installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in
§ 13-304.13.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-304.18.1
1:482
good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall
not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Bedrooms shall not have
exterior keys or locks.
§ 13-304.18.2. Windows.
Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above
ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling
unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be
equipped with a window sash locking device.
§ 13-304.18.3. Basement Hatchways.
Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit
or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with
devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
§ 13-304.19. Gates.
Exterior gates, gate assemblies, operator systems if provided, and hardware
shall be maintained in good condition. Latches at all entrances shall tightly
secure the gates.
§ 13-305. INTERIOR STRUCTURE.
§ 13-305.1. General.
The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in
good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall
keep that part of the structure that they occupy or control in a clean and
sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house,
housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two
or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary
condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.
§ 13-305.1.1. Unsafe Conditions.
a. The following conditions shall be determined as unsafe and shall be
repaired or replaced to comply with the International Building Code or
the International Existing Building Code as required for existing
buildings:
1. The nominal strength of any structural member is exceeded by
nominal loads, the load effects or the required strength;
2. The anchorage of the floor or roof to walls or columns, and of walls
and columns to foundations is not capable of resisting all nominal
loads or load effects;
3. Structures or components thereof that have reached their limit
state;
§ 13-304.18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-305.1.1
1:483
§ 13-305.2. Structural Members.
Structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable
of supporting the imposed loads.
§ 13-305.3. Interior Surfaces.
Interior surfaces, including but not limited to, windows, walls, and doors,
shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping,
flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or
loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected.
§ 13-305.4. Stairs and Walking Surfaces.
Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking surface
shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair. Peeling, chipping,
flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or
loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected.
§ 13-305.5. Handrails and Guards.
Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting
normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
§ 13-305.6. Interior Doors.
Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall
be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely
attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the
attachment hardware.
4. Structural members are incapable of supporting nominal loads and
load effects;
5. Stairs, landings, balconies and all similar walking surfaces,
including guards and handrails, are not structurally sound, not
properly anchored or are anchored with connections not capable of
supporting all nominal loads and resisting all load effects;
6. Foundation systems that are not firmly supported by footings are
not plumb and free from open cracks and breaks, are not properly
anchored or are not capable of supporting all nominal loads and
resisting all load effects.
b. Exceptions:
1. Where substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
2. Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted when approved
by the Code Official.
§ 13-305.1.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-305.7
1:484
§ 13-305.7. Cabinets and/or Shelves.
Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking, and cooking
equipment and utensils and of food that, under ordinary summer conditions,
does not require refrigeration for safe keeping; and a counter or table for
food preparation are required. All cabinets and/or shelves and counter or
table shall be of sound construction furnished with surfaces that are easily
cleanable and that will not impart any toxic or harmful effect on food.
§ 13-306. COMPONENT SERVICEABILITY.
§ 13-306.1. General.
The components of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained
in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
§ 13-306.1.1. Unsafe Conditions.
a. Where any of the following conditions cause the component or system
to be beyond its limit state, the component or system shall be
determined as unsafe and shall be repaired or replaced to comply with
the, existing State or local laws or regulations, International Building
Code or the International Existing Building Code as required for
existing buildings:
1. Soils that have been subjected to any, but not limited to, the
following conditions:
1.1. Collapse of footing or foundation system;
1.2. Damage to footing, foundation, concrete or other structural
element due to soil expansion;
1.3. Adverse effects to the design strength of footing, foundation,
concrete or other structural element due to a chemical
reaction from the soil;
1.4. Inadequate soil as determined by a geotechnical investigation;
1.5. Where the allowable bearing capacity of the soil is in doubt; or
1.6. Adverse effects to the footing, foundation, concrete or other
structural element due to the ground water table.
2. Concrete that has been subjected to any, but not limited to the
following conditions:
2.1. Deterioration;
2.2. Ultimate deformation;
2.3. Fractures;
2.4. Fissures;
§ 13-305.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-306.1.1
1:485
2.5. Spalling;
2.6. Exposed reinforcement; or
2.7. Detached, dislodged or failing connections.
2.8. Cracking
3. Aluminum that has been subjected to any, but not limited to the
following conditions:
3.1. Deterioration;
3.2. Corrosion;
3.3. Elastic deformation;
3.4. Ultimate deformation;
3.5. Stress or strain cracks;
3.6. Joint fatigue; or
3.7. Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or
3.8. Cracking
4. Masonry that has been subjected to any, but not limited to the
following conditions:
4.1. Deterioration;
4.2. Ultimate deformation;
4.3. Fractures in masonry or mortar joints;
4.4. Fissures in masonry or mortar joints;
4.5. Spalling;
4.6. Exposed reinforcement; or
4.7. Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or
4.8. Cracking
5. Steel that has been subjected to any, but not limited to the
following conditions:
5.1. Deterioration;
5.2. Elastic deformation;
5.3. Ultimate deformation;
5.4. Metal fatigue; or
5.5. Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or
§ 13-306.1.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-306.1.1
1:486
§ 13-307. HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS.
§ 13-307.1. General.
Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall
have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair,
landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface that is more
than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards.
Handrails shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height or more than
42 inches (1067 mm) in height measured vertically above the nosing of the
tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards
shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height above the floor of the
landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted
building code.
§ 13-308. RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
5.6. Cracking
6. Wood that has been subjected to any of, but not limited to, following
conditions:
6.1. Ultimate deformation;
6.2. Deterioration;
6.3. Damage from insects, rodents and other vermin;
6.4. Fire damage beyond charring;
6.5. Significant splits and checks;
6.6. Horizontal shear cracks;
6.7. Vertical shear cracks;
6.8. Inadequate support;
6.9. Detached, dislodged or failing connections; or
6.10. Excessive cutting and notching.
b. Exceptions:
Where substantiated otherwise by an approved method.
Demolition of unsafe conditions shall be permitted where approved by
the Code Official.
§ 13-306.1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-308.1
1:487
§ 13-308.1. Accumulation of Rubbish or Garbage.
Exterior property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be
free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
§ 13-308.2. Disposal of Rubbish.
Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
§ 13-308.2.1. Rubbish Storage Facilities.
The owner of every occupied premises shall supply approved covered
containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall be responsible
for the removal of rubbish.
§ 13-308.2.2. Refrigerators.
Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation shall not be discarded,
abandoned or stored on premises without first removing the doors.
§ 13-308.3. Disposal of Garbage.
Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal
facility or approved garbage containers.
§ 13-308.3.1. Garbage Facilities.
The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an approved
mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; an approved
incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in each dwelling
unit; or an approved leak proof, covered, outside garbage container.
§ 13-308.3.2. Containers.
The operator of every establishment producing garbage shall provide, and
at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak proof containers provided
with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed
from the premises for disposal.
§ 13-308.3.3. Containers - Standards.
a. All items to be collected from curbside will be placed at curbside in
upright container, plastic bags, tied in bundles, or otherwise contained
so as to not be loose - in no case shall any container, bag or bundle
exceed 60 pounds in weight or 55 gallons. Items secured in bundles (i.e.
branches, wood, hedge clippings, carpeting) shall not exceed 4 feet in
length. Household furniture placed at curb shall not exceed 120
pounds. Household odds and ends (i.e. a door, shutter, and window)
shall not exceed 120 pounds.
§ 13-308.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-308.3.3
1:488
§ 13-309. PEST ELIMINATION.
§ 13-309.1. Infestation.
Structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. Structures
in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by
approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. After pest
elimination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent re-infestation.
§ 13-309.2. Owner.
The owner of any structure shall be responsible for pest elimination within
the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
§ 13-309.3. Single Occupant.
The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for pest elimination on the premises.
§ 13-309.4. Multiple Occupancy.
The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a multiple
occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be
responsible for pest elimination in the public or shared areas of the
structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an
occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant and
owner shall be responsible for pest elimination.
b. Quantity to be collected from residential and non-residential premises
per pickup day shall conform to the following:
1. Type 10 Household Trash - Not more than five containers and/or
bags per dwelling unit and non-residential establishment, per
pickup day - Total aggregate per dwelling unit or non-residential
establishment not to exceed 300 pounds.
2. Type 13 Bulk Waste - No more than three large items - total
aggregate of items, bags, bundles or containers not to exceed 360
pounds per dwelling unit or non-residential establishment, per
pickup day. For premises having more than one dwelling unit or
more than one non-residential establishment, no more than six
large bulk items or an aggregate of 720 pounds are to be collected
per pickup per building.
3. Type 23 Yard Waste - No more than three bundles, bags or
containers per residential or non-residential unit or in the
aggregate more than 180 pounds, per pickup day. For Premises
having more than one dwelling or non-residential establishment no
more than six bundles, bags or containers (aggregate) weight not
to exceed 360 pounds are to be collected per pickup day.
§ 13-308.3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-309.5
1:489
§ 13-309.5. Occupant.
The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent
and pest-free condition of the structure.
Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure,
the owner shall be responsible for pest elimination.
§ 13-309.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-309.5
1:490
ARTICLE 13-400
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
[Ord. No. 2016-53; Ord. No. 2018-40]
§ 13-401. GENERAL.
§ 13-401.1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.
§ 13-401.2. Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and
space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall
not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any
premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 13-401.3. Alternative Devices.
In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed,
artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the International
Building Code shall be permitted.
§ 13-402. LIGHT.
§ 13-402.1. Habitable Spaces.
Every habitable space shall have not less than one window of approved
size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed
area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of such
room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any
room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such
window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court
and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area for the room.
Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing
areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to
the adjoining room shall be not less than 8 percent of the floor area of
the interior room or space, but a minimum of 25 square feet (2.33 square
meters). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area
being served.
§ 13-402.2. Common Halls and Stairways.
Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in
one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with not less than
a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19
§ 13-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-402.2
1:491
square meters) of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the
spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other
than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of
egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served
by the means of egress is occupied with not less than 1 footcandle (11 lux)
at floors, landings and treads.
§ 13-402.3. Other Spaces.
All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient
to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of
the space and utilization of the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
§ 13-403. VENTILATION.
§ 13-403.1. Habitable Spaces.
Every habitable space shall have not less than one openable window. The
total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to not less
than 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 13-402.1.
Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are
ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the
adjoining room shall be not less than 8 percent of the floor area of the
interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 square
meters). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total
floor area being ventilated.
§ 13-403.2. Bathrooms and Toilet Rooms.
Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation
requirements for habitable spaces as required by Section 13-403.1, except
that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a
mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation
system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and
shall not be recirculated.
§ 13-403.3. Cooking Facilities.
a. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not
be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking
facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming
unit or dormitory unit.
b. Exceptions:
1. Where specifically approved in writing by the Code Official.
2. Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be
considered cooking appliances.
§ 13-402.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-403.4
1:492
§ 13-403.4. Process Ventilation.
Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are
generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove
the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be exhausted to the exterior
and not be recirculated to any space.
§ 13-403.5. Clothes Dryer Exhaust.
Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems
and shall be exhausted outside the structure in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
Exception: Listed and labeled condensing (ductless) clothes dryers.
§ 13-404. OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.
§ 13-404.1. Privacy.
Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and
dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from
other adjoining spaces.
§ 13-404.2. Minimum Room Widths.
A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall be not less than 7 feet
(2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a minimum clear
passageway of 3 feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and appliances or
counterfronts and walls.
§ 13-404.3. Minimum Ceiling Heights.
a. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet
rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a minimum clear ceiling
height of 7 feet (2134 mm).
b. Exceptions:
1. In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less
than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting a maximum of 6
inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.
2. Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a
minimum ceiling height of 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm) with a
minimum clear height of 6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) under beams,
girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
3. Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes
and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a
minimum clear ceiling height of 7 feet (2134 mm) over not less than
one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the
§ 13-403.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-404.3
1:493
§ 13-404.4. Bedroom and Living Room Requirements.
Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the requirements of
Sections 404.4.1 through 404.4.5.
§ 13-404.4.1. Room Area.
Every living room shall contain not less than 120 square feet (11.2 square
meters) and every bedroom shall contain not less than 70 square feet (6.5
square meters) and every bedroom occupied by more than one person shall
contain not less than 50 square feet (4.6 square meters) of floor area for
each occupant thereof. Continuation of an existing nonconformance shall be
permitted pending compliance with all other applicable State and City laws,
codes and regulations.
§ 13-404.4.2. Access from Bedrooms.
Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms
or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from
other habitable spaces.
Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
§ 13-404.4.3. Water Closet Accessibility.
Every bedroom shall have access to not less than one water closet and
one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in
a dwelling unit shall have access to not less than one water closet and
lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
§ 13-404.4.4. Prohibited Occupancy.
Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
§ 13-404.4.5. Other Requirements.
Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this Code
including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height
and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and
water-heating facilities requirements of Section 13-500; the heating
facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of Section 13-600; and the
smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Section 13-700.
§ 13-404.5. Overcrowding.
Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by
the minimum area requirements of Table 13-404.5.
floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a
minimum clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524 mm) shall be included.
4. Confliction with other State codes.
§ 13-404.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-404.5
1:494
TABLE 13-404.5
MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS
Space
1- 2
Occupants
3 - 5
Occupants 6 or more
Living Room a,b No requirement 120 150
Dining Room a,b No requirement 80 100
Bedrooms Shall comply with Section
13-404.4
For SI: 1 square foot = 0.093 square meters
§ 13-404.5.1. Sleeping Area.
The minimum occupancy area required by Table 13-404.5 shall not be
included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy area for
sleeping purposes. Sleeping areas shall comply with Section 13-404.4.
§ 13-404.5.2. Combined Spaces.
Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the
requirements of Table 13-404.5 if the total area is equal to that required for
separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination
living room/dining room.
§ 13-404.6. Efficiency Unit.
a. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from
meeting the following requirements:
1. A unit occupied by not more than one occupant shall have a
minimum clear floor area of 120 square feet (11.2 square meters).
A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a
minimum clear floor area of 220 square feet (20.4 square meters).
A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a minimum clear
floor area of 320 square feet (29.7 square meters). These required
areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by Items 2 and 3.
2. The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a minimum clear working
space of 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation
conforming to this Code shall be provided.
3. The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
4. The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
§ 13-404.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-404.7
1:495
§ 13-404.7. Food Preparation.
All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain
suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary
manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary
disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary
storage.
§ 13-404.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-404.7
1:496
ARTICLE 13-500
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
[Ord. No. 2016-53; Ord. No. 2018-40]
§ 13-501. GENERAL.
§ 13-501.1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum plumbing systems,
facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
§ 13-501.2. Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing
facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements.
A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person
to occupy any structure or premises that does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 13-502. REQUIRED FACILITIES.
§ 13-502.1. Dwelling Units.
Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or shower, lavatory, water
closet and kitchen sink, refrigerator, and stove that shall be maintained in
a sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same
room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading
directly into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink
shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
The stove, for cooking food, and a refrigerator or refrigerator-freezer shall
be required. Said refrigerator shall be capable of maintaining safe storage
of food at temperatures less than 45 degrees Fahrenheit but more than 32
degrees Fahrenheit. Said stove and refrigerator, and/or refrigerator-freezer
shall be properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary,
and efficient operation and shall be maintained in good working condition.
Said equipment need not be installed while a dwelling unit is not occupied.
Cabinets and/or shelves: Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating,
drinking, and cooking equipment and utensils and of food that, under
ordinary summer conditions, does not require refrigeration for safe
keeping; and a counter or table for food preparation are required. All
cabinets and/or shelves and counter or table shall be of sound construction
furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable, reachable, and that will
not impart any toxic or harmful effect on food.
§ 13-502.2. Rooming Houses.
Not less than one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied for each four rooming units.
§ 13-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-502.3
1:497
§ 13-502.3. Hotels.
Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one
water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a
public hallway shall be provided for each 10 occupants.
§ 13-502.4. Employees' Facilities.
Not less than one water closet, one lavatory and one drinking facility shall
be available to employees.
§ 13-502.4.1. Drinking Facilities.
Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water
cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking
facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.
§ 13-502.5. Public Toilet Facilities.
Public toilet facilities shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and working
condition in accordance with the International Plumbing Code. Except for
periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use shall be provided
to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises.
§ 13-503. TOILET ROOMS.
§ 13-503.1. Privacy.
Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute
the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door
and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared
bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
§ 13-503.2. Location.
Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory
units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than
one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.
§ 13-503.3. Location of Employee Toilet Facilities.
Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area.
The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story
above or below the employees' working area and the path of travel to
such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee
facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public
facilities.
Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures
or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same
§ 13-502.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-503.3
1:498
ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet
(152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the facilities.
§ 13-503.4. Floor Surface.
In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to
be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily
kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ 13-504. PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES.
§ 13-504.1. General.
Plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working
order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be
capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are
designed. Plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and
functional condition.
§ 13-504.2. Fixture Clearances.
Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.
§ 13-504.3. Plumbing System Hazards.
Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
inadequate venting, cross connection, back siphonage, improper
installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the Code
Official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
§ 13-505. WATER SYSTEM.
§ 13-505.1. General.
Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or
other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water
system or to an approved private water system. Kitchen sinks, lavatories,
laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or
tempered and cold running water in accordance with the International
Plumbing Code.
§ 13-505.2. Contamination.
The water supply shall be maintained free from contamination, and all
water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-level
rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other
hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be
protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved
permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
§ 13-503.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-505.3
1:499
§ 13-505.3. Supply.
The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a
supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in
sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to
function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
§ 13-505.4. Water Heating Facilities.
Water heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained and capable
of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required
sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a minimum
temperature of 110°F. (43°C.). A gas-burning water heater shall not be
located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room
normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An
approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve and relief
valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water
heaters.
§ 13-506. SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
§ 13-506.1. General.
Plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer
system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
§ 13-506.2. Maintenance.
Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly
and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
§ 13-506.3. Grease Interceptors.
Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal devices shall be
maintained in accordance with this Code and the manufacturer's
installation instructions. Grease interceptors and automatic grease removal
devices shall be regularly serviced and cleaned to prevent the discharge
of oil, grease, and other substances harmful or hazardous to the building
drainage system, the public sewer, the private sewage disposal system or
the sewage treatment plant or processes. Records of maintenance, cleaning
and repairs shall be available for inspection by the Code Official.
§ 13-507. STORM DRAINAGE.
§ 13-507.1. General.
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas
on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public
nuisance.
§ 13-505.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-507.1
1:500
ARTICLE 13-600
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
[Ord. No. 2016-53; Ord. No. 2018-40]
§ 13-601. GENERAL.
§ 13-601.1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
§ 13-601.2. Responsibility.
The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and
electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements.
A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to
occupy any premises that does not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
§ 13-602. HEATING FACILITIES.
§ 13-602.1. Facilities Required.
Heating facilities shall be provided in structures as required by this section.
§ 13-602.2. Residential Occupancies.
If the lease requires the landlord to provide heat, the landlord must give
you the amount of heat required by the state codes and the local town
or City ordinance. Under the state housing codes, from October 1 to May
1, the landlord must provide enough heat so that the temperature in the
apartment is at least 68 degrees from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m. between the hours
of 11 p.m. and 6 a.m., the temperature in the apartment must be at least 65
degrees. Cite: N.J.A.C. 5:10-14 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.12(m).
§ 13-602.3. Heat Supply.
a. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one
or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat to
maintain a minimum temperature of 68°F. (20°C.) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
b. Exceptions:
1. When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system
is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of
the International Plumbing Code.
§ 13-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-602.3
1:501
§ 13-602.4. Occupiable Work Spaces.
§ 13-602.5. Room Temperature Measurement.
The required room temperatures shall be measured 3 feet (914 mm) above
the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet (610 mm) inward from the
center of each exterior wall.
§ 13-603. MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
§ 13-603.1. Mechanical Appliances.
Mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking
appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing
the intended function.
§ 13-603.2. Removal of Combustion Products.
Fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved
chimney or vent.
Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances that are labeled for
unvented operation.
§ 13-603.3. Clearances.
Required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.
§ 13-603.4. Safety Controls.
Safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective
operation.
2. In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F.
(-1°C.), a minimum temperature of 65°F. (18°C.) shall be
maintained.
a. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat are to
maintain a minimum temperature of 65°F. (18°C.) during the period the
spaces are occupied.
b. Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
§ 13-602.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-603.5
1:502
§ 13-603.5. Combustion Air.
A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the
space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be provided for the fuelburning
equipment.
§ 13-603.6. Energy Conservation Devices.
Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption by attachment to a fuel -
burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or
vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose
and the installation is specifically approved.
§ 13-604. ELECTRICAL FACILITIES.
§ 13-604.1. Facilities Required.
Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in
compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 13-605.
§ 13-604.2. Service.
The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for
determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with NFPA 70.
Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase
electrical service having a minimum rating of 60 amperes.
§ 13-604.3. Electrical System Hazards.
Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service,
improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper
wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, the
Code Official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the
hazard.
§ 13-604.3.1. Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with
Water Exposure.
The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of
electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to water.
§ 13-604.3.1.1. Electrical Equipment.
Electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment,
transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground fault circuit
interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage
fuses, luminaires, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling and
communication equipment that have been exposed to water shall be
replaced in accordance with the provisions of the International Building
Code.
§ 13-603.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-604.3.1.1
1:503
Exception: The following equipment shall be allowed to be repaired where
an inspection report from the equipment manufacturer or approved
manufacturer's representative indicates that the equipment has not
sustained damage that requires replacement:
Enclosed switches, rated a maximum of 600 volts or less;
Busway, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
Panelboards, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
Switchboards, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
Fire pump controllers, rated a maximum of 600 volts;
Manual and magnetic motor controllers;
Motor control centers;
Alternating current high-voltage circuit breakers;
Low-voltage power circuit breakers;
Protective relays, meters and current transformers;
Low- and medium-voltage switchgear;
Liquid-filled transformers;
Resin transformers;
Wire or cable that is suitable for wet locations and whose ends have not
been exposed to water;
Wire or cable, not containing fillers, that is suitable for wet locations and
whose ends have not been exposed to water;
Luminaires that are listed as submersible;
Electronic control, signaling and communication equipment.
§ 13-604.3.2. Abatement of Electrical Hazards Associated with Fire
Exposure.
The provisions of this section shall govern the repair and replacement of
electrical systems and equipment that have been exposed to fire.
§ 13-604.3.2.1. Electrical Equipment.
Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water
heating, security system and power distribution circuits that have been
exposed to fire, shall be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the
International Building Code.
§ 13-604.3.1.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-604.3.2.1
1:504
Exception: Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures that shall be
allowed to be repaired where an inspection report from the equipment
manufacturer or approved manufacturer's representative indicates that the
equipment has not sustained damage that requires replacement.
§ 13-605. ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
§ 13-605.1. Installation.
Electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and
maintained in a safe and approved manner.
§ 13-605.2. Receptacles.
Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain not less than two separate
and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall contain not less
than one grounding-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault
circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain not less than one
receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault
circuit interrupter protection. All receptacle outlets shall have the
appropriate faceplate cover for the location.
§ 13-605.3. Luminaires.
Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry
room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain not less than one electric
luminaire. Pool and spa luminaires over 15 V shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter protection.
§ 13-605.4. Wiring.
Flexible cords shall not be used for permanent wiring, or for running
through doors, windows, or cabinets, or concealed within walls, floors, or
ceilings.
§ 13-606. ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS.
§ 13-606.1. General.
Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance
with ASME A17.1. The most current certificate of inspection shall be on
display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or
dumbwaiter, be available for public inspection in the office of the building
operator or be posted in a publicly conspicuous location approved by the
Code Official. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than
the periodic intervals listed in ASME A17.1, Appendix N, except where
otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction.
§ 13-604.3.2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-606.2
1:505
§ 13-606.2. Elevators.
In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, not less than one elevator
shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.
Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted to
have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.
§ 13-607. DUCT SYSTEMS.
§ 13-607.1. General.
Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and shall be capable
of performing the required function. All duct systems shall be installed to
manufacturers' specifications.
§ 13-606.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-607.1
1:506
ARTICLE 13-700
Fire Safety Requirements
[Ord. No. 2016-53; Ord. No. 2018-40]
§ 13-701. GENERAL.
§ 13-701.1. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises,
including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
§ 13-701.2. Responsibility.
The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety
facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person
shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any
premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 13-702. MEANS OF EGRESS.
§ 13-702.1. General.
A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from
any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall
comply with the International Fire Code.
§ 13-702.2. Aisles.
The required width of aisles in accordance with the International Fire Code
shall be unobstructed.
§ 13-702.3. Locked Doors.
Means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which
egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or
effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the
International Building Code.
§ 13-702.4. Emergency Escape Openings.
Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance
with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following.
Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from
the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates
or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and
rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with
the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall
be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or
§ 13-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-702.4
1:507
force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape
and rescue opening.
§ 13-703. FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS.
§ 13-703.1. Fire-Resistance-Rated Assemblies.
The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops,
shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.
§ 13-703.2. Opening Protectives.
Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition.
Fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire
doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or
otherwise made inoperable.
§ 13-704. FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
§ 13-704.1. General.
Systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or
suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in
an operable condition at all times in accordance with the International Fire
Code.
§ 13-704.1.1. Automatic Sprinkler Systems.
Inspection, testing and maintenance of automatic sprinkler systems shall be
in accordance with NFPA 25.
§ 13-704.1.2. Fire Department Connection.
Where the fire department connection is not visible to approaching fire
apparatus, the fire department connection shall be indicated by an
approved sign mounted on the street front or on the side of the building.
Such sign shall have the letters "FDC" not less than 6 inches (152 mm) high
and words in letters not less than 2 inches (51 mm) high or an arrow to
indicate the location. Such signs shall be subject to the approval of the Fire
Code Official.
§ 13-704.2. Single- and Multiple-Station Smoke Alarms.
Single-and multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in existing
Group I-1 and R occupancies in accordance with Sections 13-704.2.1
through 13-704.2.3.
§ 13-704.2.1. Where Required.
a. Existing Group I-1 and R occupancies shall be provided with singlestation
smoke alarms in accordance with Sections 13-704.2.1.1 through
§ 13-702.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-704.2.1
1:508
§ 13-704.2.1.1. Group R-1.
§ 13-704.2.1.2. Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1.
13-704.2.1.4. Interconnection and power sources shall be in accordance
with Sections 13-704.2.2 and 13-704.2.3.
b. Exceptions:
1. Where the code that was in effect at the time of construction
required smoke alarms and smoke alarms complying with those
requirements are already provided.
2. Where smoke alarms have been installed in occupancies and
dwellings that were not required to have them at the time of
construction, additional smoke alarms shall not be required
provided that the existing smoke alarms comply with requirements
that were in effect at the time of installation.
3. Where smoke detectors connected to a fire alarm system have been
installed as a substitute for smoke alarms.
a. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in all of the
following locations in Group R-1:
1. In sleeping areas.
2. In every room in the path of the means of egress from the sleeping
area to the door leading from the sleeping unit.
3. In each story within the sleeping unit, including basements. For
sleeping units with split levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper
level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the
lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.
a. Single- or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed and
maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and I-1 regardless of occupant load
at all of the following locations:
1. On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the
immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
2. In each room used for sleeping purposes.
3. In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements but not
including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or
dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door
between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper
level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the
lower level is less than one full story below the upper level.
§ 13-704.2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-704.2.1.2
1:509
§ 13-704.2.1.3. (Reserved)
§ 13-704.2.1.4. Installation Near Bathrooms.
Smoke alarms shall be installed not less than 3 feet (914 mm) horizontally
from the door or opening of a bathroom that contains a bathtub or shower
unless this would prevent placement of a smoke alarm required by Section
13-704.2.1.1 or 13-704.2.1.2.
§ 13-704.2.2. Interconnection.
§ 13-704.2.3. Power Source.
4. Photoelectric smoke alarms shall not be installed less than 6 feet
(1829 mm) horizontally from a permanently installed cooking
appliance.
a. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an
individual dwelling or sleeping unit, the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will
activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. Physical interconnection
of smoke alarms shall not be required where listed wireless alarms are
installed and all alarms sound upon activation of one alarm. The alarm
shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels
with all intervening doors closed.
b. Exceptions:
1. Interconnection is not required in buildings that are not
undergoing alterations, repairs or construction of any kind.
2. Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the
removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure,
unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available that
could provide access for interconnection without the removal of
interior finishes.
a. Single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary power from the
building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial
source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms with
integral strobes that are not equipped with battery backup shall be
connected to an emergency electrical system. Smoke alarms shall emit
a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and
without a disconnecting switch other than as required for over-current
protection.
b. Exceptions:
1. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
existing buildings where no construction is taking place.
§ 13-704.2.1.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-704.2.3
1:510
2. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
buildings that are not served from a commercial power source.
3. Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that
do not result in the removal of interior walls or ceiling finishes
exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or
basement available that could provide access for building wiring
without the removal of interior finishes.
(a) The fire alarm system shall comply with all applicable
requirements in Section 907 of the International Fire Code.
(b) Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit
shall initiate alarm notification in the dwelling or sleeping unit
in accordance with Section 907.5.2 of the International Fire
Code.
(c) Activation of a smoke detector in a dwelling or sleeping unit
shall not activate alarm notification appliances outside of the
dwelling or sleeping unit, provided that a supervisory signal is
generated and monitored in accordance with Section 907.6.5
of the International Fire Code.
§ 13-704.2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-704.2.3
1:511

ARTICLE 13-800
Abandoned and Vacant Properties
[Ord No. 2016-53; Ord. No. 2018-40]
§ 13-801. IDENTIFICATION OF ABANDONED PROPERTIES.
§ 13-801.1. City List of Abandoned Properties.
§ 13-802. REGISTRATION OF VACANT PROPERTY.
§ 13-802.1. Definitions.
As used in this section:
MUNICIPAL OFFICER — shall mean the Director of Property Improvement
and Neighborhood Preservation/Code Enforcement or such official within
that department as may be designated by the Director in writing.
OWNER — shall include the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity that
a. The Director of Property Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation
or the City Manager's designee is hereby directed to identify
abandoned properties with the City, place said properties on an
abandoned property list established as provided in Section 36 of P.L.
1996, c. 62 (C. 55:19-55), as amended by Section 28 of P.L. 2003, c. 210,
and provide such notices and carry out such other tasks as are required
to effectuate an abandoned property list as provided by law.
b. The abandoned property list shall apply to the City of Asbury Park as a
whole.
c. The Director of Property Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation
or the City Manager's designee is hereby designated as the public
officer for the purpose of carrying out the responsibilities established
by this section and shall have all the responsibilities and powers
provided by law.
d. The Director of Property Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation
or the City Manager's designee shall exercise the authority granted the
City pursuant to Section 13 of P.L. 2003, c. 210, to designate qualified
rehabilitation entities to act as the designee of the City with respect to
the provisions of that section.
e. The Director of Property Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation
or the City Manager's designee shall provide a report to the Mayor and
City Council every six (6) months, with respect to the number and
location of properties on the abandoned property list, the status of
those properties, and any actions taken by the City or by any qualified
rehabilitation entity designated pursuant to the authority granted to the
public officer with respect to any property on the list or any other
abandoned property within the City.
§ 13-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-802.1
1:513
has filed a notice with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to the provisions of C.
46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17 as amended by P.L. 2009, c. 296), or
any other entity determined by the public officer of the City of Asbury Park
to have authority to act with respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — shall mean any building or structure which is not
at present legally occupied or at which all lawful business or construction
operations or residential or other occupancy have substantially ceased, and
which is in such condition that it cannot legally be re-occupied without
repair or rehabilitation, including but not limited to any property meeting
the definition of abandoned property in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80; provided,
however, that any habitable property where all building systems are in
sound working order, where the building and grounds are maintained in
good condition, and which is being actively marketed by its owner for sale
or rental, shall not be deemed a vacant property for purposes of this section.
§ 13-802.2. Registration of Vacant Property Required; Term; Fee
Waivers.
a. As of the effective date of this section (this section adopted by Ord. No.
2015-10 on 4-22-15), the owner of any vacant property as defined
herein shall, within 30 days after the building becomes vacant property
or within 30 days after assuming ownership of the vacant property,
whichever is later; or within 10 days of receipt of notice from the City,
file a registration statement for such vacant property with the
municipal officer on forms provided for that purpose by the municipal
officer along with any fee required by this section. Failure to receive
notice from the municipality shall not constitute grounds for failing to
register the property.
b. Each property having a separate tax block and lot number shall be
registered separately.
c. The registration shall include the information required under §
13-802.4, the insurance certificate required under § 13-802.7, as well as
any additional information that the municipal officer may reasonably
require.
d. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building remains vacant property and shall pay a
registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in § 13-802.5 for
each vacant property registered.
e. The municipal officer may establish for purposes of efficient
administration that all registrations shall be renewed by a single date in
each year, which date shall be established by the municipal officer in
which case the initial registration fee shall be pro-rated for registration
statements received less than 10 months prior to that date.
f. 1. Any owner of vacant property who plans to restore the property to
productive use and occupancy during the twelve (12) month period
§ 13-802.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-802.2
1:514
§ 13-802.3. City Access for Inspections.
At any time after filing a registration statement or a renewal of a
registration statement, the owner of any vacant property shall provide
access to the City to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the
building to determine compliance with municipal codes, on reasonable
notice to the property owner or the designated agent.
§ 13-802.4. Registration Application Content.
following the date of the initial registration of the property shall
file a detailed statement of the owner's plans for restoration of
the property with the registration statement and shall be exempt
from payment of the registration fee, but shall comply with all
other provisions of this section. In the event that the property has
not been restored to productive use and occupancy at the end of
the twelve (12) month period, the owner shall be liable for any
fee waived. The municipal officer, after consultation with the City
Council and with the approval of a majority thereof, may extend
the waiver of the registration fee for not more than one additional
year in response to a written request by the property owner where
the municipal officer finds that compelling conditions outside the
owner's control made it impossible for the owner to restore the
property within the initial twelve (12) month period.
2. Where the owner is an entity experienced in rehabilitation or
redevelopment of vacant properties, and where the property
subject to this section is being held for a project of rehabilitation or
redevelopment consistent with municipal plans and ordinances,
and where by virtue of financing, market or other conditions that
project may require more than one year for realization, the
municipal officer, after consultation with the City Council and with
the approval of a majority thereof, may extend the waiver of the
registration fee on an annual basis without limitation upon written
request by the owner as long as the municipal officer finds that the
owner is making reasonable progress toward completion of the
project. The owner shall provide the municipal officer with such
documentation, which may include plans, financing applications,
applications for land use approval or other evidence of progress.
g. The owner shall notify the municipal officer within 30 days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the municipal officer for such purpose.
h. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner
or owners of the building.
a. The registration statement shall include (1) the name, street address, email
address and telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age
§ 13-802.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-802.4
1:515
§ 13-802.5. Fees.
or older, designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent
for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code; and (2) the name, street address, e-mail address and
telephone number of the firm or individual responsible for maintaining
the property. The individual or a representative of the firm responsible
for maintaining the property shall be available by telephone or in
person on a 24 hour per day, seven (7) day per week basis. The two
entities may be the same or different persons. Both entities shown on
the statement must maintain offices in the State of New Jersey or reside
within the State of New Jersey.
b. An owner who is a natural person and who maintains offices in the State
of New Jersey or resides within the State of New Jersey may designate
him or herself as agent or as the individual responsible for maintaining
the property.
c. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
municipal officer in writing of a change of authorized agent or until the
owner files a new annual registration statement.
d. Any owner who fails to register a vacant property under the provisions
of this section shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting
at the building, any and all notices of code violations and all process in
an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the building.
a. The registration and renewal fee for each building shall be as follows:
Initial registration $500 or prorated amount per §
802-1.2
First renewal $1,000
Second renewal $1,750
Any subsequent renewal $2,500
b. One hundred (100%) percent of all fee income resulting from the
application of this section shall be used for the sole purpose of carrying
out municipal activities with respect to vacant and distressed
properties, including but not limited to code enforcement, abatement of
§ 13-802.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-802.5
1:516
§ 13-802.6. Maintenance of Vacant Property Required.
The owner of any structure that has become vacant property, and any
person responsible for maintaining any such building that has become
vacant, shall within 30 days of the structure becoming vacant or 30 days of
the owner taking title to the property:
§ 13-802.7. Insurance Requirements.
The owner of any vacant property shall acquire or otherwise maintain
liability insurance, in an amount of not less than $300,000 for buildings
designed primarily for one to four unit residential use and not less than
$1,000,000 for any other building, including, but not limited to, buildings
designed for multifamily, manufacturing, storage or commercial uses,
covering any damage to any person or any property caused by any physical
condition of or in the building. Any insurance policy acquired or renewed
after the building has become vacant shall provide for written notice to
the municipal officer within 30 days of any lapse, cancellation or change in
coverage. The owner shall attach evidence of the insurance to the owner's
registration statement. Any registration statement submitted that does not
include such evidence shall not be deemed to be a valid registration.
§ 13-802.8. Online Registry.
The City of Asbury Park may establish an online registry of all properties
registered with the City under this section, which shall include a procedure
by which citizens can provide the municipal officer with information on
unregistered properties that may be subject to this section through
electronic means.
§ 13-802.9. Additional Rules and Regulations.
The municipal officer may issue rules and regulations for the administration
of the provisions of this section, after consultation with the City Council and
with the approval of a majority thereof.
nuisance conditions, stabilization, rehabilitation, and other activities
designed to minimize blight and further productive reuse of properties.
a. Enclose and secure the structure as provided in the applicable codes of
the City of Asbury Park or as set forth in rules and regulations adopted
by the municipal officer to supplement those codes.
b. Ensure that the grounds of the structure, including yards, fences,
sidewalks, walks and driveways, are well-maintained and kept free from
trash or debris; and
c. Maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition, keep the
grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition until the building is
again occupied or demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of the
building is complete.
§ 13-802.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-802.10
1:517
§ 13-802.10. Violations and Penalties.
§ 13-803. UPKEEP OF VACANT AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTIES IN FORECLOSURE.
§ 13-803.1. Definitions.
CREDITOR — shall mean, consistent with § 3 of P.L. 2008, c. 86, a State
chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan association or any credit
union, or any person required to be licensed under the provisions of the
"New Jersey Residential Mortgage Lending Act," and any entity acting on
behalf of the Creditor named in the debt obligation, including but not
limited to, mortgage loan servicers.
PUBLIC OFFICER — shall mean the Director of Property Improvement and
Neighborhood Preservation/Code Enforcement or such official within that
department as may be designated by the Director, in writing.
§ 13-803.2. Creditor Responsibility for Vacant and Abandoned
Properties; In-State Representative Required.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this section or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than one thousand
($1,000) dollars and not more than two thousand ($2,000) dollars for
each offense. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this section shall be
recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on the property.
b. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 days after a building becomes vacant property or within 30
days after assuming ownership of a vacant property, whichever is later;
or within 10 days of receipt of notice by the City, failure to provide
correct information on the registration statement, failure to comply
with the provisions of §§ 13-802.6 and 13-802.7, or such other matters
as may be established by the rules and regulations of the municipal
officer shall be deemed to be violations of this section.
a. Any Creditor filing a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
on any residential property within the City shall be immediately
responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of that property, in the event it is determined to be vacant and
abandoned property.
b. Where a Creditor is located out-of-State, the Creditor shall be
responsible for appointing an in-State representative or agent to act on
the Creditor's behalf for the purpose of satisfying the requirements of
Subsection a. above. Notice of said representative or agent shall be
provided to the City Clerk and the Public Officer (as defined in this
section, in a manner that is consistent with Subsection a. of Section 17
of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (the "Save New Jersey Homes Act of 2008"), and
§ 13-802.10 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-803.2
1:518
§ 13-803.3. Notice.
§ 13-803.4. Violations and Penalties.
shall further include the full name and contact information of the in-
State representative or agent.
c. All foreclosing creditors, and, in the case of an out-of-state foreclosing
Creditor, their in-State representatives, shall be responsible to comply
with the requirements of all other ordinances adopted by the City of
Asbury Park and the Code of the City relating to vacant and/or
abandoned property, in the same manner as those ordinances and the
Code of the City pertain to the title owners of such vacant and/or
abandoned property.
a. The City's public officer shall be authorized to issue a notice to a
Creditor that has filed a summons and complaint in an action to
foreclose on a residential property within the City, if the public officer
determines that the Creditor has violated this section by failing to
provide for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior
of the property. Where a Creditor is an out-of-State Creditor, the notice
shall be issued to the representative or agent that has been identified
by the Creditor pursuant to § 13-4.2 and the Save New Jersey Homes
Act of 2008.
b. The notice referenced in Subsection a. above shall require the Creditor
to correct the violation(s) within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or
within 10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents an
imminent threat to public health and safety.
c. The issuance of a notice pursuant to Subsection a. above shall
constitute proof that a residential property is "Vacant and Abandoned"
for the purposes of this section.
a. A Creditor subject to this section that is found by the municipal court of
the City, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in
violation of the requirement to correct a "care, maintenance, security,
or upkeep violation" cited in a notice issued pursuant to this section,
shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation. Any
fines imposed pursuant to this subsection shall commence 31 days
following the Creditor's receipt of the notice, except where the violation
is deemed to present an imminent risk to the public health and safety, in
which case any fines shall commence 11 days following receipt of the
notice.
b. An out-of-state Creditor subject to this section that is found by the
municipal court of the City, or by any other court of competent
jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to appoint an in-State
representative or agent shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day
of the violation. Any fines imposed on an out-of-state Creditor for the
failure to appoint an in-State representative or agent shall commence
§ 13-803.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-803.4
1:519
on the day after the 10-day period set forth in paragraph (1) of
Subsection a. of Section 17 of P.L. 2008, c. 127 (C. 46:10B-51), for
providing notice to the City Clerk that a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
c. No less than one hundred percent (100%) of any money collected
pursuant to this section shall be utilized by the City of Asbury Park for
purposes relating to its City code enforcement purposes.
§ 13-803.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-803.4
1:520
ARTICLE 13-900
Referenced Standards
[Ord. No. 2016-53; Ord. No. 2018-40]
§ 13-900.1. Standards.
This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of
this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency
of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title and
the section or sections of this document that reference the standard. The
application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in Section
13-102.7. The original list can be found in the IPMC Book in the Code
Department.
§ 13-900.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-900.1
1:521

ARTICLE 13-1000
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-900.1
1:523

ARTICLE 13-1100
(Reserved)
APPENDIX A BOARDING STANDARDS [Ord. No. 2016-53; Ord. No.
2018-40]
§ 13-A101. GENERAL.
§ 13-A101.1. General.
Windows and doors shall be boarded in an approved manner to prevent
entry by unauthorized persons and shall be painted to correspond to the
color of the existing structure.
§ 13-A102. MATERIALS.
§ 13-A102.1. Boarding Sheet Material.
Boarding sheet material shall be minimum 1/2-inch-thick (12.7 mm) wood
structural panels complying with the International Building Code.
§ 13-A102.2. Boarding Framing Material.
Boarding framing material shall be minimum nominal 2-inch by 4-inch
(51 mm by 102 mm) solid sawn lumber complying with the International
Building Code.
§ 13-A102.3. Boarding Fasteners.
Boarding fasteners shall be minimum 3/4-inch-diameter (9.5 mm) carriage
bolts of such a length as required to penetrate the assembly and as required
to adequately attach the washers and nuts. Washers and nuts shall comply
with the International Building Code.
§ 13-A103. INSTALLATION.
§ 13-A103.1. Boarding Installation.
The boarding installation shall be in accordance with Figures A103.1(1)
and A103.1(2) and Sections A103.2 through A103.5 of the IPMC which is
available for inspection.
§ 13-A103.2. Boarding Sheet Material.
The boarding sheet material shall be cut to fit the door or window opening
neatly or shall be cut to provide an equal overlap at the perimeter of the
door or window.
§ 13-A101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-A103.3
1:525
§ 13-A103.3. Windows.
The window shall be opened to allow the carriage bolt to pass through or
the window sash shall be removed and stored. The 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm
by 102 mm) strong back framing material shall be cut minimum 2 inches
(51 mm) wider than the window opening and shall be placed on the inside
of the window opening 6 inches (152 mm) minimum above the bottom and
below the top of the window opening. The framing and boarding shall be
predrilled. The assembly shall be aligned and the bolts, washers and nuts
shall be installed and secured.
§ 13-A103.4. Door Walls.
The door opening shall be framed with minimum 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm
by 102 mm) framing material secured at the entire perimeter and vertical
members at a maximum of 24 inches (610 mm) on center. Blocking shall
also be secured at a maximum of 48 inches (1219 mm) on center vertically.
Boarding sheet material shall be secured with screws and nails alternating
every 6 inches (152 mm) on center.
§ 13-A103.5. Doors.
Doors shall be secured by the same method as for windows or door
openings. One door to the structure shall be available for authorized entry
and shall be secured and locked in an approved 2008, c. 127 (C. 46:10B-51),
for providing notice to the City Clerk that a summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose on a mortgage has been served.
§ 13-A103.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-A103.5
1:526
Part 2
RENTAL PROPERTY
ARTICLE 13-1200
Owners of Certain Rental Properties Required to Post Bond or
Security
Editor's Note: Prior history includes Ord. No. 2578 as codified in the 2015
Code at Section 12-13. Ord. No. 2016-33 amended and relocated provisions
requiring bonds/security on certain rental properties/units to Chapter XIII.
§ 13-1200.1. Procedures to Require an Owner of Rental Property
Which Has Become the Source of at Least Two (2) Substantiated
Complaints to Post a Bond or Equivalent Security to Compensate
for Any Future Damage or Expense Suffered from Future Repetition
of Disorderly, Indecent, Tumultuous or Riotous Conduct; Legislative
Findings. [Ord. No. 2016-33]
The City Council finds, determines and declares that:
§ 13-1200.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-33]
For the purpose of this section, the following meanings shall apply:
HEARING OFFICER — shall mean a licensed attorney of the State of New
Jersey appointed by the Mayor and Council. The hearing officer shall not
own or lease any real property within the City of Asbury Park, nor hold
any interest in the assets of or profits arising from the ownership of such
property.
LANDLORD — shall mean the person or persons who own or purport to
own any building in which there is rented or offered for rent housing space
a. Asbury Park is a resort community and its citizens have experienced
disturbances, damage and public expense resulting from carelessly
granted and inadequately supervised rentals to irresponsible tenants
and/or vacationers by inept or indifferent landlords.
b. This section is enacted to preserve the peace and tranquility of the
community for its permanent residents, and to maintain the
municipality as a viable vacation resort for all persons and families
availing themselves of the facilities in the community.
c. The enactment of this section is necessary and desirable to provide a
means to curb and discourage those occasional excesses arising from
irresponsible rentals, seasonal or otherwise.
d. The Legislature of the State of New Jersey enacted N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.12(n), et seq., to enable certain communities to take effective
action to assure that excesses, when they occur, shall not be repeated,
and that landlords be held to sufficient standards of responsibility.
§ 13-1200.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1200.2
1:527
for living or dwelling under either a written or oral lease, which building
contains no more than four (4) dwelling units.
SEASONAL RENTAL — shall mean any rental of residential
accommodations for a term of less than one (1) year and includes any part
of the period extending from May 15 to September 15.
SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT — shall mean a complaint which may form
the basis for proceedings in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 13-1200.3. Hearing, Penalty. [Ord. No. 2016-33]
a. If, in any twenty-four (24) month period, two (2) or more complaints, on
separate occasions, of conduct, including by way of example, but not
limited to, simple assault, assault, terroristic threats, harassment,
lewdness, urinating in public, criminal mischief, or excessive noise,
upon or in proximity to any rental premises, and attributable to the acts
or incitements of any of the tenants of those premises, have been
substantiated by prosecution and conviction in any court of competent
jurisdiction as a violation of any provision of Title 2C of the New Jersey
Statutes or any municipal ordinance governing disorderly conduct, the
City Manager or his/her designee may institute proceedings to require
the landlord of the rental premises to post a bond against the
consequences of future incidents of the same character.
b. Notice to Landlord.
1. In the event a tenant is convicted of any of the conduct described in
Subsection a. above, the City Manager shall cause notice advising
that the conduct specified has occurred to be served on the
landlord, in person or by registered mail, at the address appearing
on the tax records of the City.
2. The City Manager or his/her designee shall cause to be served upon
the landlord, in person or by registered mail, to the address
appearing on the tax records of the City, notice advising of the
institution of such proceedings, together with particulars of the
substantiated complaint(s) upon which those proceedings are
based, and of the time and place at which the hearing will be held
in the matter, which shall be in the Municipal Building or Municipal
Court, and which shall be no sooner than thirty (30) days from the
date upon which the notice is served or mailed.
c. At the hearing convened pursuant to Subsection b. above, the hearing
officer shall give full hearing to both the complaint of the City and to
any evidence in contradiction or mitigation that the landlord, if present
or represented or offering such evidence, may present. The hearing
officer may consider, to the extent deemed relevant by the hearing
officer, prior complaints about the residents of the property, even if
those complaints did not result in a conviction. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether the landlord shall
be required to post a bond in accordance with the terms of this section.
§ 13-1200.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-1200.3
1:528
§ 13-1200.4. Bond Forfeiture, Extension. [Ord. No. 2016-33]
d. Any bond required to be posted shall be in accordance with the
judgment of the hearing officer, in light of the nature and extent of the
offenses indicated in the substantiated complaints upon which the
proceedings are based, to be adequate in the case of subsequent
offenses to make reparation for:
1. Damages likely to be caused to public or private property
consequent upon disruption of affected residents' rights of fair use
and quiet enjoyment of their premises;
2. Securing the payment of fines and penalties likely to be levied for
such offenses; and
3. Compensating the City for the costs of repressing and prosecuting
such incidents of disorderly behavior; provided, however, no such
bond shall be in an amount less than five hundred ($500) dollars
nor more than five thousand ($5,000) dollars. The City may enforce
the bond thus required by an action in the Superior Court, and shall
be entitled to an injunction prohibiting the landlord from making or
renewing any lease of the affected premises for residential
purposes until that bond or equivalent security, in satisfactory form
and amount, has been deposited with the City.
4. Any bond or other security deposited in compliance with
Subsection d3 above shall remain in force for a period of four (4)
years. Upon the lapse of the four (4) year period, the landlord shall
be entitled to the discharge of the bond, unless prior thereto
further proceedings leading to a forfeiture or partial forfeiture of
the bond or other security shall have been had under § 13-1200.4
below, in which case the security shall be renewed in an amount
and for a period that shall be specified by the hearing officer. A
transfer of ownership or control of the property shall not void a
requirement of security imposed under this section. The person or
persons to whom ownership or control is transferred shall maintain
that security, and shall be subject to injunctive proceedings as
authorized by Subsection d. above in the same manner as the
landlord upon which the requirement was originally imposed;
provided however, the Mayor and Council may by resolution
shorten the period for which security is required to not less than
one (1) year from the date of the transfer of ownership or control, if
during that year no substantiated complaints are recorded with
respect to the property in question.
a. If during the period for which a landlord is required to give security
pursuant to § 13-1200.3 above, a substantiated complaint is recorded
against the property in question, the City Manager or his/her designee
may institute proceedings against the landlord for the forfeiture or
partial forfeiture of the security, for an extension of the period for which
§ 13-1200.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1200.4
1:529
the security is required, or for an increase in the amount of security
required, or for any or all of those purposes.
b. Any forfeiture or partial forfeiture of security shall be determined by
the hearing officer solely in accordance with the amount deemed
necessary to provide for the compensatory purposes set forth in §
13-1200.3d above. Any decision by the hearing officer to increase the
amount or extend the period of the required security shall be
determined in light of the same factors set forth in § 13-1200.3d above,
and shall be taken only to the extent that the nature of the
substantiated complaint or complaints out of which proceedings arise
under this action indicates the appropriateness of such change in order
to effectually carry out the purposes of this section. The decision of the
hearing officer in such circumstances shall be enforceable in the same
manner as provided in § 13-1200.3d above.
§ 13-1200.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-1200.4
1:530
ARTICLE 13-1300
Short-Term Rentals
§ 13-1300. SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
§ 13-1300.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2017-40 § 13-1000.1]
The Asbury Park City Council finds and declares that the short-term rental
of limited residential dwelling units within the City benefits the local
community by affording owners of such units the ability to garner additional
income from their real property (also referenced as "property") in order to
diminish the financial burden of carrying costs and maintenance expenses
related to the property, as well as providing travelers with an alternative
option for accommodations in the City, thereby promoting the local travel
and tourism industry, and contributing to the economic vitality of the City.
Notwithstanding those benefits, the City Council also finds and declares
that certain transitory uses of residential property tend to affect the
residential character of the community and, if unregulated, can be injurious
to the health, safety and welfare of the community.
The intended purposes of this Section are to: a) balance the rights of the
owners of residential dwelling units proposed for short-term rental use and
the City's business community affected by the allowance and existence of
short-term rentals; b) protect the public health, safety and general welfare
of individuals and the community at large; c) provide for an organized
and reasonable process for the short-term rental of certain defined
classifications of residential dwelling units in the City; d) monitor and
provide a reasonable means for the mitigation of impacts created by such
transitory uses of residential properties within the City of Asbury Park; e)
preserve and protect the long-term housing market stock in the City; f)
implement rationally based and reasonably tailored regulations to protect
the integrity of the City's residential neighborhoods, and g) ensure that
the short-term rental property inventory in the City satisfies basic property
maintenance standards, in order to protect the safety of occupants and the
citizens of the City.
The Asbury Park City Council has therefore determined that it shall be
unlawful for any owner of any property within the geographic bounds of
the City of Asbury Park, New Jersey, to rent or operate a short-term rental
contrary to the procedures and regulations established in this Section, or
applicable State statute.
§ 13-1300.2. Authority. [Ord. No. 2017-40 § 13-1000.2]
In accordance with New Jersey law, a municipality may make and enforce
within its limits all ordinances and regulations not in conflict with general
laws, as it may deem necessary and proper for the good government, order
and protection of persons and property, and for the preservation of the
public health, safety and welfare of the municipality and its inhabitants. The
§ 13-1300 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1300.2
1:531
City of Asbury Park hereby adopts the within Ordinance in accordance with
said authority.
§ 13-1300.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-40 § 13-1000.3]
As used in this Section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated below:
HOTEL — Establishments as defined in N.J.A.C. 18:24-3.4, as amended from
time to time.[Added 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
OWNER — shall mean an individual or entity holding title to a property
proposed for short-term rental, by way of a legally recorded Deed.
OWNER-OCCUPIED — shall mean the owner of the property resides in the
short term rental property (also referenced as "STRP"), or in the principal
residential unit with which the STRP is associated on the same lot, and
identifies same as his or her principal residence as that term is defined in
this Section. For purposes of this Section, if the owner of the property is
an entity other than an individual or individuals, then at least one principal
or member of the owner entity must reside in the STRP, or in the principal
residential unit with which the STRP is associated on the same lot, and
identify same as his or her principal residence as that term is defined in this
Section.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — shall mean the address: (1) where at least one
of the property owners spends the majority of his or her non-working time,
and (2) which is most clearly the center of his or her domestic life, and
(3) which is identified on his or her driver's license, voter registration or
state identification card as being his or her legal address. All the above
requirements must be met in order for an address to constitute being a
principal residence for purposes of this Section. [Amended 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-16]
PROPERTY — shall mean a parcel of real property located within the
boundaries of the City of Asbury Park, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — shall mean both the short-term rental property
owner and a person (property manager) designated by the owner to be
called upon and be responsible at all times during the period of a short-term
rental and to answer for the maintenance of the property, or the conduct
and acts of occupants of the short-term rental property, and, in the case of
the property manager, to accept service of legal process on behalf of the
owner of the short-term rental property.
SECTION — shall mean Article 13-1300, Entitled "Short-Term Rentals,"
as contained within Part 2, "Rental Property," of Chapter XIII, "Property
Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation - Property Maintenance
Code," of the Code of the City of Asbury Park, New Jersey.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL (also referenced as "STR") — shall mean the
accessory use of a dwelling unit for occupancy by someone other than
the unit's owner or permanent resident for a period of thirty (30) or less
consecutive days, up to a cumulative total period of not to exceed one
§ 13-1300.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-1300.3
1:532
hundred eighty (180) days in a calendar year, which dwelling unit is
regularly used and kept open as such for the lodging of guests, and which is
advertised or held out to the public as a place regularly rented to transient
occupants, as that term is defined in this Section.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY (also referenced as "STRP") — shall
mean a residential dwelling unit as defined in Chapter XIII of the Code of
the City of Asbury Park, that is used and/or advertised for rent as a shortterm
rental by transient occupants as guests, as those terms are defined
in this Section. Dwelling units rented to the same occupant for more than
thirty (30) continuous days, licensed Bed and Breakfast establishments,
licensed rooming or boarding houses, hotels, and motels shall not be
considered Short-Term Rental Property.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY AGENT — shall mean any New Jersey
licensed real estate agent or other person designated and charged by the
owner of a short-term rental property, with the responsibility for making the
STR application to the City on behalf of the owner, and fulfilling all of the
obligations in connection with completion of the short-term rental property
permit application process on behalf of the owner. Such person shall be
available for, and responsive to contact on behalf of, the owner, at all times.
TRANSIENT OCCUPANT — shall mean any person or a guest or invitee of
such person, who, in exchange for compensation, occupies or is in actual
or apparent control or possession of residential property, which is either:
(1) registered as a short-term rental property, or (2) satisfies the definition
of a short-term rental property, as such term is defined in this Section. It
shall be a rebuttable presumption that any person who holds themselves out
as being an occupant or guest of an occupant of the short-term rental is a
transient occupant.
§ 13-1300.4. Regulations Pertaining to Short-Term Rentals. [Ord.
No. 2017-40 § 13-1000.4]
a. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any property within the geographic
bounds of the City of Asbury Park, New Jersey, to rent or operate a
short-term rental contrary to the procedures and regulations
established in this Section or applicable State statute.
b. Short-term rentals shall be permitted to be conducted in the following
classifications of property in the City of Asbury Park:
1. Condominium units, where the Condominium Association By-Laws
or Master Deed permit a short-term rental, and where the owner of
the unit legally identifies the address as his or her principal
residence;
2. Individually or collectively owned single-family residences, which
one of the owners legally identifies as the address of his or her
principal residence, as that term is defined herein;
§ 13-1300.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1300.4
1:533
3. Up to two separate units within a two-family residential dwelling,
where one of the two units is occupied by the owner and identified
by the owner as his or her principal residence, as that term is
defined herein; [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
4. Not more than two separate units in any multifamily residential
dwelling, where one other unit in the same dwelling is occupied by
the owner and identified by the owner as his or her principal
residence, as that term is defined herein; and [Amended 5-8-2019
by Ord. No. 2019-16]
5. Not more than two bedrooms within a single-family residential
dwelling unit, where the bedrooms share common kitchen and
bathroom facilities with the occupant of the dwelling unit, and the
remainder of the single-family dwelling unit is occupied by the
owner and identified by the owner as his or her principal residence,
as that term is defined herein. [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-16]
c. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection b. above, short-term
rentals shall not be permitted in boarding or rooming houses,
dormitories, foster homes, adult family care homes, assisted living
facilities, community residences for developmentally disabled persons,
community shelters for victims of domestic violence, or nursing homes.
Further, short term rental of the following properties is prohibited:
1. Condominiums or townhomes, where the Condominium Association
By-Laws or Master Deed, or Condominium Rules and Regulations,
do not permit such short-term rental of condominium units in the
development;
2. An individually or collectively owned single-family residential
dwelling unit, which address none of the owners legally identifies
as his or her principal residence;
3. A unit in a two-family residential dwelling, where the other unit is
not occupied by the owner nor legally identified by the owner as his
or her principal residence;
4. Two or more units in a multi-family residential dwelling, and where
one of the other units is not occupied by the owner nor legally
identified by the owner as his or her principal residence;
5. A room within a single-family, two-family or multi-family residential
dwelling unit, where the room shares common kitchen and
bathroom facilities with the occupant(s) of the dwelling unit in
which it is located, which occupant(s) is neither the owner of the
dwelling unit nor identifies the remainder of the dwelling unit in
the single-family, two-family or multi-family residence as his or her
principal residence.
§ 13-1300.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-1300.4
1:534
6. Two or more individual rooms within a single-family, two-family or
multi-family residential dwelling unit, where the rooms share
common kitchen and bathroom facilities with the occupant(s) of the
dwelling unit(s) in which they are located, which occupant(s) is
neither the owner of the dwelling unit nor identifies the remainder
of the dwelling unit in the single-family, two-family or multi-family
residence as his or her principal residence.
d. Notwithstanding the prohibitions set forth in Subsections c1 through c6
above, in the event that a property owner was eligible under, and
complied with the regulations of, the prior Summer Rental License
Ordinance (which was found at former Section 12-8 of the City Code)
during the calendar year 2017, and that owner made application for,
registered and received a valid Summer Rental License in 2017
pursuant to the (former) Summer Rental License Ordinance, then that
property owner, if intending to apply for a short-term rental permit
pursuant to this Section, shall be exempt from the specific requirement
set forth above which mandates that the short-term rental property
must be the principal residence of the owner applying for a short-term
rental permit.
e. The exemption and right specified in Subsection d. above, however,
shall be limited and restricted only to the owner of the property that
received a valid 2017 Summer Rental License, and shall not run with
the land to subsequent purchasers, grantees or transferees, unless
otherwise stated in Subsection g below. This exemption shall extinguish
upon the occurrence of any of the following: [Amended 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-16]
1. The owner of the property allowing the expiration of the STR
permit, without having made a timely application for renewal of the
permit prior to its expiration date; or
2. The revocation of the STR permit for any violation(s) as set forth in
this Section; or
3. The sale or transfer of title to the property to any other individual,
or entity, whether or not any of the current owner(s) is a principal
or member in the grantee entity.
In the event of the occurrence of any of the above events, then the
property shall no longer be afforded the benefit of this exemption,
and the owner must comply with all of the requirements of this
Section, including the principal residence provision, in order to
obtain a valid STR permit.
f. The provisions of this Section shall apply to short-term rentals as
defined in § 13-1300.3 above. The following do not qualify as a
privately-owned residential dwelling unit, as that term is used herein,
and therefore do not need to obtain a short-term rental permit pursuant
to this Section: any hotel, motel, studio hotel, rooming house,
§ 13-1300.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1300.4
1:535
§ 13-1300.5. Short-Term Rental Permit, Permit Registration Fee/
Application, and Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2017-40
§ 13-1000.5]
dormitory, public or private club, bed and breakfast inn, convalescent
home, rest home, home for aged people, foster home, halfway house,
transitional housing facility, or other similar facility operated for the
care, treatment, or reintegration into society of human beings; any
housing owned or controlled by an educational institution and used
exclusively to house students, faculty or other employees with or
without their families; any housing operated or used exclusively for
religious, charitable or educational purposes; or any housing owned
by a governmental agency and used to house its employees or for
governmental purposes.
g. A property owner shall be able to transfer a legal short-term rental to
family, an estate, etc., upon death and not lose the rights vested as per
this section. [Added 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
a. In addition to any land use requirement(s) set forth by the City of
Asbury Park Land Use Regulations, the owner/operator of a short-term
rental property shall obtain a short-term rental permit from the City of
Asbury Park Department of Property Improvement and Neighborhood
Preservation, before renting or advertising for rent any short-term
rental.
b. No person or entity shall operate a STRP, or advertise a residential
property for use as a STRP, without the owner/operator of the property
first having obtained a STR permit issued by the City of Asbury Park
Department of Property Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation.
The failure to obtain a valid STR permit prior to advertising the shortterm
rental property in any print, digital, or internet advertisement or
web-based platform, and/or in the MLS or any realtor's property listing
shall be a violation of this Section. No STR permit issued under this
Section may be transferred or assigned or used by any person or entity,
other than the owner to whom it is issued, or at any property location or
dwelling unit other than the property for which it is issued.
c. An owner of property intended to serve as a short-term rental property,
as defined herein, or any agent acting on behalf of the owner, shall
submit to the City of Asbury Park Department of Property Improvement
and Neighborhood Preservation, a short-term rental permit application
provided by the City, along with an annual application/registration fee
of $500. Said fee shall be non-refundable, including in the event that
the application is denied. The fee shall also constitute the required fee
for the rental Certificate of Occupancy application, referenced below.
[Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
d. The short-term rental permit, if granted, shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of issuance.
§ 13-1300.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-1300.5
1:536
§ 13-1300.6. Application Process for Short-Term Rental Permit and
Inspections. [Ord. No. 2017-40 § 13-1000.6]
e. The owner of a short-term rental property, as defined herein, or any
agent acting on behalf of the owner, who intends to rent all of the
property, or any permitted part thereof as a short-term rental, shall also
make application to the Department of Property Improvement and
Neighborhood Preservation, in conjunction with the short-term rental
permit application, for the issuance of a rental Certificate of Occupancy
for the short-term rental property, on such forms as required by that
Department.
f. A short-term rental permit and rental Certificate of Occupancy shall be
renewed on an annual basis, based upon the anniversary of the original
permit issuance, by submitting to the Department of Property
Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation, a short-term rental
permit application and rental Certificate of Occupancy application and
a renewal registration fee of $100. A reinspection fee of $85 shall apply
for each failed reinspection. [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-16]
g. The short-term rental permit shall expire automatically when the shortterm
rental property changes ownership, and a new initial application
and first-time registration fee will be required in the event that the new
owner intends to use the property as a short-term rental property. A
new application and first-time registration fee shall also be required for
any short-term rental that had its short term rental permit revoked or
suspended.
a. Applicants for a short-term rental permit shall submit, on an annual
basis, an application for a short-term rental permit to the City of Asbury
Park Department of Property Improvement and Neighborhood
Preservation. The application shall be furnished, under oath, on a form
specified by the City Manager, accompanied by the non-refundable
application fee as set forth in § 13-1300.5 above. Such application shall
include:
1. The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
owner(s) of record of the dwelling unit for which a permit is sought.
If such owner is not a natural person, the application must include
and identify the names of all partners, officers and/or directors of
any such entity, and the personal contact information, including
address and telephone numbers for each of them;
2. The address of the unit to be used as a short-term rental;
3. A copy of the driver's license, voter registration or state
identification card of the owner of the short-term rental property,
confirming, as set forth in this section, that the property is the
principal residence, as that term is defined herein, of the owner
§ 13-1300.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1300.6
1:537
making application for the STR permit; [Amended 5-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-16]
4. The owner's sworn acknowledgement that they comply with the
requirement that the short-term rental property constitutes the
owner's principal residence, as defined in § 13-1300.3 above, or
that the owner is entitled to an exemption from that requirement as
set forth in § 13-1300.4d above;
5. The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
short-term rental property agent, which shall constitute his or her 7
day a week, 24- hour a day contact information;
6. The name, address, telephone number and email address of the
short-term rental property responsible party, which shall constitute
his or her 7 day a week, 24-hour a day contact information;
7. The owner's sworn acknowledgement that he or she has received a
copy of this Section, has reviewed it, understands its requirements
and certifies, under oath, as to the accuracy of all information
provided in the permit application;
8. The number and location of all parking spaces available to the
premises, which shall include the number of legal off-street parking
spaces and on-street parking spaces directly adjacent to the
premises. The owner shall certify that every effort will be made to
avoid and/or mitigate issues with on-street parking in the
neighborhood in which the short-term rental is located, resulting
from excessive vehicles generated by the short-term rental of the
property, in order to avoid a shortage of parking for residents in the
surrounding neighborhood;
9. The owner's agreement that all renters of the short-term rental
property shall be limited to one (1) vehicle per two occupants in the
short-term rental property;
10. The owner's agreement to use his or her best efforts to assure that
use of the premises by all transient occupants will not disrupt the
neighborhood, and will not interfere with the rights of neighboring
property owners to the quiet enjoyment of their properties; and
11. Any other information that this Section requires a property owner
to provide to the City in connection with an application for a rental
certificate of occupancy. The City Manager or his designee shall
have the authority to obtain additional information from the STRP
owner/applicant or amend the permit application to require
additional information, as necessary, to achieve the objectives of
this Section.
b. Every application for a short-term rental permit shall require annual
inspections for the STRP's compliance with the City's fire safety
regulations and Property Maintenance Code. In addition, each
§ 13-1300.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-1300.6
1:538
application is subject to review to verify the STRP's eligibility for use
as a short-term rental and compliance with the regulations in this
section. Failure to abate any outstanding violations prior to occupancy
can result in a summons. [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
c. For a condominium short-term rental permit application, a letter of
approval by the condominium association must be submitted with the
application.
d. A zoning permit, which states that the premises are not being occupied
or used in violation of the City's Land Use Regulations and Zoning
Ordinance, shall be required. [Amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-16]
e. A sworn statement shall be required that there have been no prior
revocations or suspensions of this or a similar license, in which event a
license shall not be issued, which denial may be appealed as provided
hereinafter.
f. Attached to and concurrent with submission of the permit application
described in this Section, the owner shall provide:
1. Proof of the owner's current ownership of the short-term rental
unit;
2. Proof of general liability insurance in a minimum amount of
$500,000;
and
3. Written certifications from the short-term rental property agent
and responsible party that they agree to perform all of the
respective duties specified in this Section.
g. The STRP owner/permit holder shall publish the short-term rental
permit number issued by the City in every print, digital, or internet
advertisement, and/or in the Multiple Listing Service (hereinafter
"MLS") or other real estate listing of a real estate agent licensed by the
NJ State Real Estate Commission, in which the short-term rental
property is advertised for rent on a short term basis.
h. Each and every time there is a change of occupancy by transient
occupants during the year when the permit is active, the STRP owner,
or short-term rental property agent must provide the City with
information as to the identity of all transient occupants who will be
occupying the STRP, on a form to be made available by the Department
of Property Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation or in
electronic format on the City website. The intent is that the City shall
have basic identifying information of all occupants of the STRP at all
times, just as required by the City in conjunction with any standard
rental Certificate of Occupancy application, which information shall
include the occupant's or occupants' names and ages, and the dates of
§ 13-1300.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1300.6
1:539
§ 13-1300.7. Issuance of Permit and Appeal Procedure. [Ord. No.
2017-40 § 13-1000.7]
§ 13-1300.8. Short-Term Rental Operational Requirements. [Ord.
No. 2017-40 § 13-1000.8]
the commencement and expiration of the term of each short-term rental
period of the respective occupant(s).
i. In no event shall a short-term rental property be rented to anyone
younger than twenty-one (21) years of age. The primary occupant of all
short-term rentals executing the agreement between the owner and the
occupant must be over the age of twenty-one (21), and must be the
party who will actually occupy the property during the term of the
short-term rental. The primary occupant may have guests under the age
of twenty-one (21) who will share and occupy the property with them.
Both the primary occupant executing the short-term rental agreement
and the STRP owner shall be responsible for compliance with this
provision, and shall both be liable for a violation, where the property is
not occupied by at least one adult over the age of twenty-one, during
the term of the short term rental;
j. The City Manager or their designee may waive irregularities within this
Section upon its implementation. [Added 5-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-16]
a. Once an application is submitted, complete with all required
information and documentation and fees, the Department of Property
Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation, following any necessary
investigation for compliance with this Section, shall either issue the
short-term rental permit and Certificate of Occupancy, or issue a
written denial of the permit application (with the reasons for such
denial being stated therein), within ten (10) business days.
b. If denied, the applicant shall have ten (10) business days to appeal in
writing to the City Manager, by filing the appeal with the City
Manager's Office.
c. Within thirty (30) days thereafter, the City Manager or his designee
shall hear and decide the appeal.
d. A permit shall only be issued after all outstanding violations have been
abated. [Added 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
a. All short-term rentals must comply with all applicable rules, regulations
and ordinances of the City of Asbury Park and all applicable rules,
regulations and statutes of the State of New Jersey, including
regulations governing such lodging uses, as applicable. The STRP
owner shall ensure that the short-term rental is used in a manner that
complies with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to
the use and occupancy of a short term rental.
§ 13-1300.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-1300.8
1:540
b. A dwelling unit shall be limited to a single short-term rental contract at
a time.
c. The owner of a STRP shall not install any advertising or identifying
mechanisms, such as signage, including lawn signage, identifying the
property for rent as a short-term rental property.
d. Transient occupants of the STRP shall comply with all ordinances of the
City of Asbury Park including, but not limited to those ordinances
regulating noise and nuisance conduct. Failure of transient occupants
to comply shall subject the transient occupants, the owner of the STRP,
the Responsible Party and the Short-Term Rental Agent listed in the
short term rental permit application, to the issuance of fines and/or
penalties, and the possibility of the revocation or suspension of the
STRP permit.
e. The owner of a STRP shall post the following information in a prominent
location within the short term rental:
1. Owner name; if owner is an entity, the name of a principal in the
entity, and phone number for the owner (individual);
2. The names and phone numbers for the Responsible Party and the
Short-Term Rental Agent (as those terms are defined in this
Section);
3. The phone numbers for the Asbury Park Police Department, the
Asbury Park Fire Department, the City of Asbury Park Department
of Code Enforcement and the City of Asbury Park Department of
Property Improvement and Neighborhood Preservation;
4. The maximum number of parking spaces available on site;
5. Trash and recycling pick-up day, and all applicable rules and
regulations regarding trash disposal and recycling;
6. A copy of the City of Asbury Park Animal House Ordinance and this
Section; and
7. Notification that a guest, Transient Occupant, the Short-Term
Rental Property Agent, the Responsible Party or STRP owner may
be cited or fined by the City of Asbury Park Police Department or
the City of Asbury Park Department of Property Improvement and
Neighborhood Preservation, for violations of, and in accordance
with any applicable Ordinance(s) of the City of Asbury Park;
f. In the event any complaints are received by the Asbury Park Police
Department or the Department of Property Improvement and
Neighborhood Preservation regarding the short-term rental and/or the
Transient Occupants in the STRP, and the owner of the STRP is
unreachable or unresponsive, both the Responsible Party and the Short-
Term Rental Agent listed in the short-term rental permit application
shall have the responsibility to take any action required to properly
§ 13-1300.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1300.8
1:541
resolve such complaints, and shall be authorized by the STRP owner to
do so.
g. While a STRP is rented, the owner, the Short-Term Rental Agent, or the
Responsible Party shall be available twenty-four hours per day, seven
days per week for the purpose of responding within two (2) hours to
complaints regarding the condition of the STRP premises, maintenance
of the STRP premises, operation of the STRP, or conduct of the guests at
the STRP, or nuisance complaints from the Asbury Park Police
Department or neighbors, arising by virtue of the short-term rental of
the property.
h. If the STRP is the subject of two (2) or more substantiated civil and/or
criminal complaints, the City Manager or his designee may revoke the
short-term rental permit issued for the property, in which case, the
STRP may not be the subject of a new STRP permit application for one
(1) year following the date of revocation of the permit.
i. Failure to make application for, and to obtain the issuance of, a shortterm
rental permit prior to advertising the STRP in print publications or
newspapers, on any internet-based booking platforms, or online, and/or
in the MLS or other real estate listing of a real estate agent licensed by
the NJ State Real Estate Commission, shall be equivalent to operation
of the STRP without a permit, and shall constitute a violation of this
Code, and will result in enforcement action and the issuance of a
Summons, and shall subject the STRP owner, the Short-Term Rental
Agent, and the Responsible Party to issuance of fines and/or penalties.
j. The person offering a dwelling unit for short-term rental use must be
the owner of the dwelling unit. A tenant of a property may not apply for
a short-term rental permit, nor shall the property or any portion thereof
be sub-leased by the tenant on a short-term basis, or operated as a
STRP by the tenant. This STRP regulation shall supersede any
conflicting provision in a private lease agreement permitting subleasing
of the property, or any portion of the property. Violation of this
Section will result in enforcement action against the tenant, the STRP
owner, the Short Term Rental Agent, and the Responsible Party, and will
subject all such parties to the issuance of a Summons and levying of
fines and/or penalties.
k. In the event that the City receives three (3) substantiated complaints
concerning excessive vehicles belonging to the transient occupants of a
STRP, the short-term rental permit for the property is subject to
revocation by the City Manager or his designee.
l. The STRP owner must be current with all tax and sewer charges
assessed to the property prior to the issuance of a short-term rental
permit. In the event that any code violations have been issued by the
City relating to the STRP, a short-term rental permit shall not be issued
until such time as such violations have been properly abated. The STRP
§ 13-1300.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 13-1300.8
1:542
§ 13-1300.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-40
§ 13-1000.9; amended 5-8-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-16]
owner must also close any open construction permits for the property
prior to the issuance of a short-term rental permit.
m. All fines or penalties issued by the Municipal Court for the City of
Asbury Park for any past code violations relating to the STRP, including
penalties for failure to appear in Court, must be satisfied in full prior to
the issuance of a short-term rental permit.
a. A violation of any provision of the within section may subject the STRP
owner, transient occupant(s), the short-term property rental agent, and
the responsible party or their agents to fines assessed by the Court up
to $2,000 per violation, per day that the violation exists.
b. Any ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent herewith shall be amended
and supplemented to conform to the provisions contained herein.
c. If any part of this section is declared unconstitutional or illegal by any
court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue
in full force and effect.
d. This section shall take effect upon final passage and publication in
accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, following the
required twenty-day period after adoption, as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:69A-181(b).
§ 13-1300.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-1300.9
1:543
Chapter 14
FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
§ 14-1. ENFORCEMENT OF THE UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY ACT.
§ 14-1.1. Local Enforcement. [2000 Code § 14-1.1]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383)
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be enforced locally within the
established limits of the City of Asbury Park.
§ 14-1.2. Agency Designation. [2000 Code § 14-1.2]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Asbury Park Bureau of Fire
Prevention, within the Asbury Park Fire Department.
§ 14-1.3. Duties. [2000 Code § 14-1.3]
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the City of Asbury Park,
other than owner-occupied one (1) and two (2) family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 14-1.4. Life Hazard Uses. [2000 Code § 14-1.4]
The local agency established by subsection 14-1.2 of this section shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 14-1.5. Organization. [2000 Code § 14-1.5]
The local enforcing agency established in subsection 14-1.2 shall be a
part of the Asbury Park Fire Department and shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the Fire Official who will be under the direct
supervision and control of the Fire Chief.
§ 14-1.6. Appointments, Supervision and Duties. [2000 Code
§ 14-1.6]
a. Appointments.
1. The Fire Official within the City of Asbury Park will have Civil
Service Status and will be appointed by the City Manager and will
serve at the pleasure of the City Manager, based on
recommendations from the Chief of the Fire Department. The Fire
Official will be under the direct supervision of the Fire Chief.
§ 13-1300.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 14-1.6
1:544
§ 14-1.7. Additional Required Inspections and Fees. [See Ord. No.
2968]
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Uniform Fire
Safety Act and the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the
following additional inspections and fees shall be required.
2. Inspectors and staff shall be appointed by the City Manager and
shall be under the supervision of the Fire Official.
b. Duties.
1. Fire Official. The duties of the Fire Official shall include supervision
of the Bureau of Fire Prevention including inspectors and staff,
making inspections required by this section, reporting to the Chief
of the Fire Department on a regular basis or as required by the
Chief of the Fire Department, keeping and maintaining such
records and making such written reports as may be required by law
or the Chief of the Fire Department, and such other duties as may
be required by the Chief of the Fire Department.
2. Inspectors. The duties of the Inspectors shall include making
inspections and reports and to perform such other duties as may be
assigned by the Fire Official.
3. Staff. The duties of Staff shall include performing such clerical,
administrative, and office duties and such other duties as may be
assigned by the Fire Official.
a. All structures, businesses and activities required to secure a mercantile
license under Chapter IV, General Licensing, and all amendments and
supplements thereto and all structures or part thereof occupied by any
professional activity or use licensed or for which a permit is issued by
any department, branch, division or agency of the State of New Jersey
shall be inspected pursuant to this section prior to issuance of
mercantile license or in the case of a non-mercantile licensed structure,
business or activity as aforesaid, there shall be an annual inspection.
The owners and occupants of all structures shall within two (2) weeks of
a written request supply such information as may be required by the
Fire Official or his designee for the enforcement of this section.
b. The following fees are hereby established:
1. For Multiple Family (including non-owner occupied one- and twounit
dwellings), the following annual inspection fees shall be
assessed:
(a) Non-owner occupied one- and two-family dwellings: $50.00
(b) Three (3) to six (6) units (per building): $75.00
(c) Seven (7) to twelve (12) units (per building): $75.00
§ 14-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-1.7
1:545
(d) Thirteen (13) to twenty (20) units (per building: $100.00
(e) More than twenty (20) units (per building): $200.00
2. For Mercantile/Non-Life Hazard Uses, the Annual Inspection Fee
Schedule shall be established based on the square footage of the
structure as set forth in Schedule A, which may be found on file in
the City officers.
3. The following fees shall apply for reinspection of Multiple Family
dwellings:
(a) Initial reinspection: No Fee
(b) Second reinspection (which abated violations): $25.00
(c) If violations remain unabated on the second reinspection and
no extension has been requested and granted, penalties shall
be issued in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code.
4. The following administrative fees and costs shall apply:
(a) Copy of Fire Report:
(1) For letter sized pages and smaller: $0.05 per page.
(2) For legal sized pages $0.07 per page.
(3) Where actual costs to produce paper copies exceed the
$0.05 and $0.07 rate, the City may charge the actual cost
of duplication.
(4) For electronic records (i.e. records sent via e-mail and fax):
No fee.
(5) For records in another medium (i.e. computer disc, CDROM,
DVD): the actual cost.
(b) Application fee for a variance: $100.00
(c) Application fee for appeals (Fees are paid directly to the
Monmouth County Construction Board of Appeals): No Fee
(d) Certificate of Fire Code Status: $25.00
(e) Duplicate Certificate of Inspection: $10.00
5. The following fees for Special Events shall apply:
(a) When determined by the Fire Official to be necessary for the
purpose of public safety to have a fire inspector or fire
inspectors present during special events, the owner, operator,
organizer, sponsor, person or organization responsible for said
events shall pay the costs of said inspector or inspectors for the
§ 14-1.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 14-1.7
1:546
§ 14-1.8. Board of Appeals. [2000 Code § 14-1.8]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Monmouth County.
§ 14-2. FIRE ALARMS.
duration of the event. The rates shall be in accordance with the
City ordinances governing special events.
c. Permits. The permit fees established by the Uniform Fire Code shall be
amended to be as follows:
Type 1 $42.00
Type 2 $166.00
Type 3 $331.00
Type 4 $497.00
d. Convention Hall and Paramount Theater as follows:
1. Permits and fees shall be required pursuant to the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code whenever the auditorium, stage, promenade or
arcade of Convention Hall or the Paramount Theater is occupied for
the purpose of assembly, entertainment, displaying of motor
vehicles, motorized equipment, boats, trailers, sporting equipment,
ceramics or any saleable merchandise.
2. Application for a permit shall be made to the Fire Official,
accompanied by plans or drawings for evaluation of the application.
All plans and drawings shall be submitted no less than fourteen
(14) days prior to any event.
3. The Fire Official or his/her designated representative may deny any
permit or disapprove any plans or drawings when in his/her opinion
the safety of the occupancy or the integrity of the premises has
been compromised or such plans are in violation of any applicable
Codes or regulations. Any deviation from an approved plan, without
the approval of the Fire Official, or any false statement or
misrepresentation as to material fact in the application or plans on
which the permit or approval was based shall result in revocation of
permit and may result in notice of violation.
4. Permit fees may be waived by the Fire Official when such
application is made by any Board of Education for graduation
exercises, nonpolitical civic groups or any civic activity when there
is no charge to participants or admission fees to the general public.
Permit fees may also be waived for recognized charitable
organizations when both State and Federal Tax Exempt numbers
are submitted. [2000 Code § 14-1.7; Ord. No. 2968; Ord. No.
2999; New]
§ 14-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-2.1
1:547
§ 14-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2999 § 14-2.1]
As used in this section:
ALARM COMPANY — shall mean a business, licensed by the State, which
sells, installs, monitors, maintains, serves, or responds to alarms systems or
supervises such actions.
ALARM SYSTEM — shall mean any device designed, when actuated, to
produce or emit a sound or transmits a signal or message for the purpose
of alerting others to the existence of an emergency situation requiring
immediate investigation by alarms, fire or other agent. Alarm system does
not include an alarm installed on a vehicle, unless the vehicle is
permanently located at a site.
ALARM USER — shall mean any person who owns, operates or manages
any premises in the City on which an alarm system has been installed and
operates.
FALSE ALARM — shall mean the activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, accident, malfunction, misuse, improper activation or
negligence. False alarms shall not include alarms caused by acts of God or
other cause which are beyond control of the alarm agent, alarm business or
alarm user.
§ 14-2.2. Alarm Company Requirements. [Ord. No. 2999 § 14-2.2]
§ 14-2.3. Notification of Installation or Alteration of an Alarm
System. [Ord. No. 2999 § 14-2.3]
Each time an alarm business installs or alters a residential or commercial
fire alarm system within the City, the alarm business shall submit to the City
Construction Department two (2) sets of system plans and specifications
for review and approval prior to system installation. The plans and
specifications shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. Each alarm company conducting business within the City shall
document that they are legal to operate in the State of New Jersey.
b. Each alarm company that installs, maintains or services alarms within
the City shall be registered with the State of New Jersey.
a. A floor plan indicating the location of all alarm-initiating and alarmsignaling
devices;
b. Alarm control and trouble-signaling equipment;
c. Annunciation devices;
d. Power connections and calculations, including battery and voltage drop
calculations;
e. Conductor types and sizes;
§ 14-2.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 14-2.3
1:548
§ 14-2.4. Equipment Maintenance; Responsibility of Alarm User and
Owner. [Ord. No. 2999 § 14-2.4]
§ 14-2.5. Interference or Tampering with Fire Systems Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 2999 § 14-2.5]
Blocking access to, or interfering, disabling, tampering with, decreasing
the effectiveness of, or causing malicious damage to, any fire alarm,
suppression system, fire communications system, fire detection, first-aid,
firefighting system, device, unit or part thereof is hereby prohibited.
§ 14-2.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2999 § 14-2.6]
f. Manufacturer model numbers and listing shall be submitted for all
devices and materials; and
g. All work shall comply with the New Jersey Construction Code and
Standards.
a. Each alarm owner or user, at his or her expense, is required to maintain
all components of his or her alarm system in good working order at all
times to insure that the sensory mechanism used in connection with
such device be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire or smoke
conditions so that the device will not be activated by impulses due to
short flashes of light, wind, noises, vehicular noise or other forces
unrelated to genuine alarms.
b. Whenever or wherever any device, equipment, system, condition,
arrangement, level of protection or any other feature is required for
compliance with the provisions of this section or the International Fire
Code, the New Jersey edition, such device, equipment, system,
condition, arrangement, level of protection or other feature shall
thereafter by continuously maintained in accordance with applicable
National Fire Protection Association requirements or as directed by the
Fire Official.
c. The building owner shall be responsible for ensuring that the fire and
life safety system are maintained in an operable condition at all times.
Service personnel shall meet the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:74. A
written record shall be maintained and shall be made available to the
Fire Official.
a. The provisions set forth in this section may be enforced by the Fire
Official (as pertains to the New Jersey Fire Safety Act or the
International Fire Code, New Jersey Edition), the Construction Official
(as pertains to the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code), or their
designee(s).
b. Fire alarm activations shall be investigated by the Fire Official or the
officer in charge on duty to determine whether or not a false activation
has occurred.
§ 14-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-2.7
1:549
§ 14-2.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2999 § 14-2.6]
a. Failure to maintain all components of an alarm system in good working
order at all times, including but not limited to instances where the
failure to properly maintain equipment results in a false alarm, shall
subject the violator to a monetary penalty per occurrence per day, as
set forth in the New Jersey Fire Safety Act, which may be assessed by
the Fire Official or his/her designee.
b. An activation of a fire alarm system, which results in the response of the
City of Asbury Park Fire Department, when no fire or emergency exists,
shall be deemed a violation of a City ordinance, and shall be punishable
with the following specific penalties, which may be assessed by the Fire
Official or his/her designee:
1. Each accidental activation of a fire alarm system by an alarm
service employee or representative, upon the second or subsequent
occurrence, without first notification to the Fire Official and/or Fire
Department shall be punishable by a penalty of not less than one
hundred ($100.00) dollars.
2. Each activation or malfunction of an alarm system or device due to
a lack of action on the part of building personnel or management,
shall, after the first malfunction of the same device, be subject to
penalty of not less than one hundred ($100.00) dollars for the first
and second offenses, and not less than two hundred fifty ($250.00)
dollars for each offense thereafter.
3. Failure to maintain a fire alarm system in a building where it is
required, shall result in the issuance of a penalty of not less than
five hundred ($500.00) dollars per day, for each twenty-four (24)
hour period said system is not operational. When any fire alarm
system or device becomes or is found inoperative, a fire alarm
system company must be working to restore said system or device
to operational status within eight (8) hours of discovery, after which
said penalty shall be assessed.
4. Penalties for false alarms transmitted from single-family or twofamily
owner occupied dwellings, including detached dwellings,
individual townhouses and condominium unit dwellings, shall be as
follows:
Number of Alarms Within a
Calendar Year Penalty
1st Warning only
2nd Not less than $100.00
3rd Not less than $200.00
4th Not less than $300.00
5 or more Not less than $500.00
§ 14-2.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 14-3
1:550
§ 14-3. FIRE ZONES AND FIRE LANES.
§ 14-3.1. Purpose. [2000 Code § 14-3.1]
Various approvals issued by the Planning Board and/or Board of Adjustment
of the City have required certain areas to be set aside as fire zones, also
known as fire lanes, which terms are used interchangeably herein.
Certain structures and uses have not heretofore had areas designated as
fire lanes, and it is desirable for the protection of life and property for fire
lanes to be established where practicable.
§ 14-3.2. Establishment and Maintenance Required. [2000 Code
§ 14-3.2]
The owner or owners of property are hereby required to establish and
maintain fire lanes, which may have heretofore been required, or which
may be required in the future by the Planning Board and/or the Board of
Adjustment of the City in connection with approval of use, improvement
and/or development of property in the City.
§ 14-3.3. Designation. [2000 Code § 14-3.3]
With respect to any shopping centers, commercial structures, places of
public assembly, multiple-dwelling structures and groups, individual parks,
office buildings, hotels, motels, schools, condominiums, cooperative
housing, nursing homes, homes for the physically or mentally impaired, or
any property and structure used for the purposes similar to the aforesaid,
the owner or owners of such property or properties, upon which any of the
aforesaid activities take place and for which fire lanes have not heretofore
been required, where practical, shall designate areas as fire lanes where
such fire lanes shall be required by the Bureau of Fire Prevention for the
City within which such property or activity is located.
§ 14-3.4. Definitions. [2000 Code § 14-3.4]
As used in this section:
FIRE LANES or FIRE ZONES — shall mean a lane or zone no less than ten
(10) feet in width nor more than fifty (50) feet in width which runs from
a public street or right-of-way to any improvement or structure and which
may also run alongside or abut such improvement or structure. Where strict
enforcement of this section may not be practicable, the Bureau of Fire
Prevention may allow deviation in the location and establishment of fire
lanes.
§ 14-3.5. Required Markings and Signs; Maintenance. [2000 Code
§ 14-3.5]
Fire lanes shall be striped in yellow letters on paved surfaces and bear
the words "Fire Lane or "Fire Zone," and in either event shall also bear
§ 14-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-3.5
1:551
the words "No Parking or Obstruction." Curbs on edges of fire zones shall
be painted yellow. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall provide the owner
with a sketch of the required markings and location of any required signs.
The Bureau shall require, where practicable, metal signs setting forth the
designation of "Fire Zones" so as to inform the public of the location of fire
zones. The markings shall be legible at all times and shall be maintained by
the owner or owners of such property.
§ 14-3.6. Basis for Requirements of Bureau of Fire Prevention.
[2000 Code § 14-3.6]
In establishing and requiring fire lanes, the Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall take into consideration the size, type and location of the building or
buildings on the premises regulated, the type of activity or activities, the
number of parking spaces which may be required by law, traffic patterns,
existing means of ingress and egress, the total area of the premises, and
area available for fire lanes and such other means of ingress to the structure
or structures in the event of fire or other emergency.
§ 14-3.7. Purpose of Fire Lanes. [2000 Code § 14-3.7]
The purpose of establishing fire lanes is to allow access to premises and
structures for firefighting and emergency vehicles and equipment in the
event of a fire emergency.
§ 14-3.8. Obstruction Prohibited. [2000 Code § 14-3.8]
No person shall at any time park a vehicle or in any other manner obstruct
a driveway or any other area that has been designated as a fire zone or fire
lane.
§ 14-3.9. Conference with Fire Official; Ruling. [2000 Code § 143.9]
Upon notice from the Bureau of Fire Prevention, an owner or owners of
property wherein a fire lane has not heretofore been required shall confer
with the Fire Official or his/her agent of the Bureau of Fire Prevention in
order to establish a fire lane in accordance with this section. After such
conference or in the event the owner does not so confer, the Fire Official or
his/her agent shall direct the establishment of the fire zone.
§ 14-3.10. Written Notice Required; Notice of Appeal. [2000 Code
§ 14-3.10]
The Fire Official or his/her agent shall give written notice of the owner or
owners specifically setting forth the location or dimensions of the required
fire zone, such notice shall be by Certified Mail, return receipt requested.
The owner or owners may appeal from the requirements of the notice by
filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Monmouth County Board of
Construction Appeals and the Clerk shall schedule a hearing thereon.
§ 14-3.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 14-3.11
1:552
§ 14-3.11. Time Requirement for Establishment. [2000 Code
§ 14-3.11]
In the event no such appeal is filed within fourteen (14) calendar days of
the date of the notice from the Fire Official or his/her agent, the owner or
owners shall establish the fire zone within sixty (60) days of the date of the
notice.
§ 14-3.12. Decision by County Board of Construction Appeals. [2000
Code § 14-3.12]
In the event an appeal is taken to the Monmouth County Board of
Construction Appeals and a decision is rendered requiring the
establishment of a fire zone, the Monmouth County Board of Construction
Appeals shall give written notice of its decision by mailing the same by
Certified Mail, return receipt requested to the owner and the owner shall
within sixty (60) days of mailing of the notice establish a fire zone as
required by the Monmouth County Board of Construction Appeals.
§ 14-3.13. Owner's Failure to Comply. [2000 Code § 14-3.13]
Any owner or owners of property who fail to comply with the terms of this
section shall be subject to a fine of up to fifty ($50.00) dollars a day together
with court costs enforceable in the Municipal Court.
§ 14-3.14. Violations and Penalties. [2000 Code § 14-3.14]
In addition to the aforesaid, any owner or owners in violation of this section
shall be subject to such legal and equitable relief as is allowed by law, in
which case such owner or owners shall be responsible for the payment of
reasonable attorney fees and Court costs together with all other expenses
incurred to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 14-3.15. Penalty for Obstruction of Fire Lane. [2000 Code
§ 14-3.15; Ord. No. 2726; Ord. No. 2968]
Any person who shall at any time park a vehicle or in any other manner
obstruct a fire zone or fire lane shall be subject to a fine of sixty ($60.00)
dollars. There shall be no court appearance required unless the individual
wishes to plead not guilty. If the individual chooses to contest this fine, he/
she may plead his/her case in the Municipal Court. All Court costs shall be
paid by the contesting individual.
§ 14-3.16. Removal of Obstructions; Costs. [2000 Code § 14-3.16]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention and the Police Department of the City are
hereby authorized to tow and remove motor vehicles and all obstructions
from any fire zone and/or fire lane. All such motor vehicles and/or
obstructions which are so removed may be stored in an area and the cost
of removal and storage shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle and/or
other obstruction and the charges shall be paid prior to the release of the
§ 14-3.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 14-3.16
1:553
vehicle or obstruction. Reasonable steps shall be taken to identify the owner
of the vehicle or vehicles or obstruction or obstructions removed, and to
give the owner notice as soon as conveniently may be done of the removal
and storage of such vehicle or obstruction.
§ 14-3.17. Penalties to Be Cumulative. [2000 Code § 14-3.17]
All remedies and fines provided in this section shall be cumulative and not
in exclusion of each other and shall be deposited in the Bureau of Fire
Prevention of the City account.
§ 14-3.18. Enforcement Authorized. [2000 Code § 14-3.18]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention and the Police Department of the City are
hereby authorized to enforce this section.
§ 14-4. RAPID ENTRY SYSTEMS.
§ 14-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2728 § 14-4.1]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING and/or STRUCTURE — shall mean: (1) all hotels, motels or
multiple dwellings that have locked main entrances for security purposes
and/or have common corridors to living units or spaces; (2) any structure
which has an automatic fire suppression system or fire alarm system, except
that one-family residential dwellings are not included; and (3) any structure
which is industrial, commercial, retail or similar business building or
structure consisting of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet or more.
§ 14-4.2. Rapid Entry Systems Required. [Ord. No. 2728 § 14-4.2]
The owner, tenant, and/or occupant of all buildings and/or structures
located with the City of Asbury Park are required to have installed on the
same a rapid entry box and key system to allow access to same and access
to boiler rooms, sprinkler control valves, electrical rooms, elevators and
elevator control rooms, and other locked areas of the premises as may
be required by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in which the building or
structure is located, the said Bureau to make said determination on the
basis of immediate need for access in the event of a fire alarm or what
appears to be a possible fire emergency. Notwithstanding the provisions
of any other section of this ordinance, no official, employee or member of
the Fire Prevention Bureau or Fire Department shall request, nor shall an
owner be required to provide, a key to any self contained individual living
space area, unit or room.
§ 14-3.16 ASBURY PARK CODE § 14-4.3
1:554
§ 14-4.3. Specifications for Rapid Entry Systems. [Ord. No. 2728
§ 14-4.3]
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall prescribe specifications as to the
required rapid entry box and key system and location. The Bureau of Fire
Prevention shall approve the type of rapid entry key system to be installed
prior to the purchase and installation of same.
§ 14-4.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2728 § 14-4.4]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
City of Asbury Park of a violation of the terms of this section shall be subject
to a fine of not more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or imprisonment
for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, at the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge. Any fines collected shall be forwarded to the Bureau
of Fire Prevention.
Chapter 15
(RESERVED)
Chapter 16
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SIDEWALK SIGNS; WORK
WITHIN CITY RIGHT-OF-WAY AREAS
§ 16-1. STREET OPENINGS.
Editor's Note: Prior source history includes Ord. No. 2721 and Ord. No.
2768
§ 16-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and fees for the
opening of municipal streets within the City of Asbury Park.
§ 16-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
As used in this section:
EXTENSIVE OPENING — shall mean an opening, tearing up or excavating,
for any purpose, of a City road of fifty (50) feet or more of roadway length
or where connecting lateral openings are made at average intervals of less
than fifty (50) feet along the roadway length or an opening which disturbs
twenty (20%) percent or more of the pavement area.
OWNER — shall mean any person, corporation, public utility or other entity
on whose behalf a street opening is performed by a permittee.
PERMITTEE — shall mean any person, firm or corporation granted a permit
hereunder.
§ 14-4.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.2
1:555
PUBLIC UTILITY — shall mean telephone, telecommunications, electric,
water, gas and cable television companies or any other entity having either
the power of eminent domain or subject to the regulations by the Public
Utilities Commission of the State of New Jersey.
SMALL OPENING — shall mean any opening, tearing up or excavating, for
any purpose, of a City road, which is not an extensive opening.
STREET — shall mean any street, road or other public way dedicated to and
accepted by the City of Asbury Park, and shall include all of the area thereof
lying within the bounds of the dedicated right-of-way.
§ 16-1.3. Permit Required; Bond Requirements. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
a. No person, persons or corporation, municipal or private, nor any utility
company, public or private, shall for any purpose open, tear up,
excavate, bore, tunnel or drive under or in any way impair the surface
or sub-surface within the limits of the right-of-way of any street in the
City of Asbury Park without first obtaining a road permit from the
Department of Public Works of the City.
b. Only such persons, firms or corporations to whom or to which permits
have been granted shall be permitted to perform such work and then
only in the manner herein required and only as specifically allowed in
the permit. Assignment of rights under any permit issued hereunder is
prohibited and permits purportedly assigned shall be immediately void.
Contracting or subcontracting work to a person, firm or corporation to
whom or to which no permit has been granted is prohibited and
complying with the requirements set forth by this section.
c. Any corporation which is a public utility, subject to regulation by the
Board of Public Utility Commissioners of the State of New Jersey, or a
municipal corporation or any department thereof, and which desires to
obtain permits under the provisions of this section, shall, in lieu of the
provisions hereof requiring deposits under this section 16-1, make a
bond, and which may be the bond of such public utility solely, in the
penal sum of one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollars. If the public
utility anticipates more than ten (10) street openings per annum, then
such utility will be required to submit a bond in the penal sum of ninety
thousand ($90,000.00) dollars supplemented with a ten thousand
($10,000.00) dollar cash deposit which shall be held in escrow by the
City. All bonds shall run in favor of the City and will be placed on file
with the City Clerk. Such bond shall be conditioned upon compliance
with the applicable provisions of this section in respect to each street
opening which shall be made by such public utility in the City and the
obligation of such bond shall be a continuing obligation to the full
amount thereof in respect to each such street opening. If a deficient
street opening is identified, the public utility shall be notified in writing
and given fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of notification to
repair same. Failure by the utility to repair the deficiency will result in
use of the cash deposit by the City to repair the same. If the cash
§ 16-1.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-1.3
1:556
§ 16-1.4. Work Performed by and for the City. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any work done by the City
of Asbury Park or under a contract with the City for the construction of
waterlines, sewer lines or street improvements.
§ 16-1.5. Proof of Notification of Underground Utilities. [Ord. No.
2016-43]
No person or corporation shall be issued a road opening permit until he
presents satisfactory proof in the form of the authorization number from the
One-Call Damage Prevention System as required by N.J.S.A. 48:2-73 et seq.
§ 16-1.6. Certain Openings Restricted. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
No street, road or paved area constructed, reconstructed or repaved within
ten (10) years, based upon the useful life of the New Jersey Bond Law, of the
time that the road is sealed, other than a planned development approved
by the Planning Board of the City or other regulatory authority, can be
excavated, built or patched except in the case of emergency, which includes
but is not limited to gas leaks, water main leaks and sewer breaks.
deposit is insufficient to repair the deficiencies, then the City shall seek
reimbursement from the respective utility and/or bonding company
for the additional amount. If such reimbursement is not received by
the City within thirty (30) calendar days of written notification, then
an additional assessment of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per day may
be added to the reimbursement amount as determined by the City
Manager. Any use of the ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars escrow
cash deposit must be replenished by the public utility within thirty
(30) days of written notification by the City. No permits will be issued
until the escrow deposit is replenished. Any utility which posts their
performance security via one hundred thousand ($100,000.00) dollar
utility bond will also be given fourteen (14) calendar days to repair
any deficient road opening. If there are more than three (3) occasions
whereby the deficient street opening is not repaired within fourteen
(14) calendar days, then such utility will be required to revise their form
of bonding to a ninety thousand ($90,000.00) dollar utility bond and a
ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollar cash deposit which shall be held in
escrow by the City.
The City will maintain the requisite permit logs to monitor the number
of permits issued to each utility. Any utility which posts the one hundred
thousand ($100,000.00) dollar bond, and exceeds its threshold of ten
(10) street openings per annum, will be required to revise their form of
bonding to a ninety thousand ($90,000.00) dollar utility bond, and a ten
thousand ($10,000.00) dollar cash deposit prior to the City's issuance
of any additional permits beyond the threshold.
§ 16-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.7
1:557
§ 16-1.7. Marking of Utilities Required. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
Certification of all underground facilities having been previously located
and marked using standard color codes for gas, water and other utilities.
Certification must indicate marking authorization number. Final line
striping and pavement markings must be restored immediately to original
or better condition. The standard for the City of Asbury Park for line
striping and traffic markings is the application of 6" min. width hot extruded
thermoplastic.
§ 16-1.8. Application Requirements; Procedure; Issuance of Permit.
[Ord. No. 2016-43]
a. Form.
1. Application for a permit shall comply with the "City of Asbury Park,
Department of Public Works Operations Road Opening Permit
Policy Requirements" and shall be made in writing on forms
prescribed by the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works and issued by the said Department and shall be filed at least
one (1) week prior to the commencement of any work unless it is an
emergency. The application shall specify the name and address of
the applicant; the specific location of the proposed excavation and
the width, length and depth thereof; the type of road or other
surface; and the individual(s), firm or corporation for whose benefit
the excavation is to be made and shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee for the issuance of the permit as hereinafter
provided, together with the charges as hereinafter set forth.
2. Applications for extensive openings shall require, in addition to the
above, information regarding:
(a) All improvements.
(b) Typical details and sections of construction procedure.
(c) Plans, profiles and other details necessary to accurately depict
the work.
3. No work may commence by the permittee until the date set forth in
the issued permit.
b. Emergency Road Opening.
1. In the event that an emergency condition exists requiring
immediate action by any person, firm or corporation required to
obtain a permit pursuant to this section, the person may
immediately cause the roadway to be entered and emergency
measures taken without first obtaining a permit, provided that:
(a) A true emergency exists and the person(s) doing the work
notifies the City of Asbury Park Police and Fire Departments
§ 16-1.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-1.8
1:558
prior to start of work; the Police and Fire Departments shall
log the emergency.
(b) A permit is applied for within twenty-four (24) hours of the
road opening or on the next business day, whichever is more
practical.
(c) All work is performed in accordance with the provisions of
subsections 16-1.9, 16-1.10, 16-1.11 and 16-1.12.
(d) The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
City Engineer shall be notified within twenty-four (24) hours of
a road opening. If a road opening commences on a Saturday or
Sunday as a result of emergency road work, the Police
Department of the City shall be notified prior to start of work,
and the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or
City Engineer shall be notified on the morning of the first
business day thereafter.
(e) In the event of an emergency opening, the person, company, or
utility shall apply for a permit no later than the next business
day. Any opening that is found without a permit issued will be
subject to a $1,000.00 application fee and a $75.00 inspection
fee. No exceptions.
2. The City reserves the right to issue a written stop work order
where same is deemed appropriate by the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or City Engineer.
c. Review of the Application of Small Openings. Prior to the issuance of a
permit, copies of the application therefor shall be referred to the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the City Engineer
who shall, within five (5) working days, note any objections to the
issuance of a permit or any conditions which shall be satisfied prior to
or be imposed as conditions upon the issuance of the permit, as
appropriate.
d. Applicant. The applicant must be a licensed contractor or agent of a
public utility, whether corporate, individual or partnership, who will be
actually engaged in the performance of the work to ensure the safety of
the public and that the work is done in accordance with City
specifications. The application shall be made for and on behalf of the
owner for whom such work is being done and shall be countersigned by
such owner. Permits will not be issued directly to private owners or
developers without specific written approval of the Mayor and City
Council.
e. Agreement. Except where otherwise provided by law, the owner shall
agree, as a condition of the issuance of a permit, that any facilities,
pipes or poles or other object(s) to be installed within the City right-ofway
pursuant to the permit shall be promptly relocated at the owner's
expense, except where otherwise provided by law, as required by the
§ 16-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.8
1:559
§ 16-1.9. Work Requirements. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
City of Asbury Park, to accommodate the installation of City facilities.
Such agreement shall be in writing and contained on the face of the
application form and permit.
f. Review of Application for Small and Extensive Openings. All small and
extensive openings shall first be reviewed and approved by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, and extensive
openings shall subsequently be reviewed and approved by the City
Engineer prior to the issuance of a permit.
g. Issuance. Street opening permits shall be issued by the Public Works
Department once reviewed and approved as provided for herein;
provided, however, that no permit shall be issued until an application
fee and an engineering fee, both of which are nonrefundable, have been
paid to the City.
a. Generally. The New Jersey State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, with all
amendments and supplements, shall govern all of the work performed
under City of Asbury Park road opening permits, except as
supplemented below.
1. No City road shall be closed to traffic without prior written consent
of the Police Department. In the event that a road is closed,
uniformed police may be required to act as traffic directors.
Maintenance and protection of pedestrian and traffic control is the
responsibility of the applicant and must conform to NJDOT and
MUTCD standards along with the requirements of the local
municipality. All costs of providing uniformed police shall be the
responsibility of the permittee or the owners. In the event that a
detour is deemed necessary by the permittee, application shall be
made to the Chief of Police, who shall determine the necessity for
such detour and the route to be followed. In emergency situations,
notification by phone to the Police Department shall be done prior
to start of work.
2. Any work under an issued permit must be commenced within three
(3) months from the date of issue and completed forty-five (45) days
from commencement, or the permit shall be deemed void, and
reapplication shall be required.
3. With the exception of emergencies and weather permitting, work
commenced under a permit shall be continued without interruption
during normal working hours until completed.
The City reserves the right for "emergency" road openings to
permit work to be undertaken upon a "24/7" basis.
4. The applicant shall notify the City Clerk; Police Chief and the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the City
§ 16-1.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-1.9
1:560
Engineer forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the actual
commencement of any work under a permit.
5. The existing pavement must be cut with a compressor, wet saw, or
an approved mechanical cutting device, in a straight line and to the
full depth of pavement before excavation. All City storm drains and
catch basins will be protected at all times. Any damage will be
repaired by the applicant at his expense.
6. All fill removed from trench is to be discarded by applicant. The
trench must be of suitable width to obtain proper mechanical
compaction. All backfill is to be done with quarry process stone
Type 1-5 or DGA, or other suitable material if approved by the City
Engineer, for the full depth of the trench. First lift of fill, twelve (12)
inches above pipe, shall be compacted using a Jumping Jack or
Vibratory Tamper. Successive lifts shall be compacted by
mechanical means such as tamping, vibrating or rolling. A vibra
plate tamper is not acceptable.
7. For Bituminous concrete roadways, upon completion of the proper
backfill, a compacted 10 inch layer of bituminous concrete
stabilized Base mix 1-2 shall be utilized in lifts of no more than
three (3) inches (compacted thickness) in all trench areas.
For concrete roadways, upon completion of the upon completion of
the proper backfill, pavement shall be restored utilizing 10 inches
of Class B concrete with double wire reinforcing.
The specific requirements relative to the restoration of concrete
roadways is covered in Section 16-1.12; Construction
Specifications.
For both bituminous concrete and concrete roadways, the top
surface shall be flush with the adjacent pavement and be uniformly
contoured to the existing surrounding surface.
For concrete roadways, the concrete material shall be "plated"
in accordance with the requirements of this section for a 28 day
period to assure proper curing.
If "High Early" concrete is utilized, the excavation shall be "plated"
for a minimum of 14 days.
Under the provisions of this section, to assure proper curing, prior
to the possibility of the City needing to apply de-icing materials,
concrete may not be installed after October 20th.
Should a roadway opening be made after that date, the pavement
shall be restored using 10 inches of bituminous concrete stabilized
Base Mix 1-2 installed in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
§ 16-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.9
1:561
The bituminous concrete stabilized based pavement shall be
removed after April 1st of the subsequent calendar year and
standard concrete pavement installed.
8. Applicant must install and maintain temporary line striping and
pavement markings.
9. The applicant further agrees to keep the trench filled to the level of
surrounding pavement until settlement has ceased. City of Asbury
Park shall be held harmless in any and all accidents arising out of
trench defects.
10. (a) After the Superintendent of Public Works has determined that
the excavation has had a sufficient time period for settlement,
final restoration will be undertaken using 2 inches (compacted
thickness) of bituminous concrete surface course Mix 1-5 to be
placed over the entire area of stabilized base as determined by
the City. The surface pavement shall be "infra-redded" to
assure a seamless transition between existing pavement and
the road opening.
(b) The resulting milled surface shall then be swept and tack coat
material applied before the two (2) inch compacted surface
course is laid. This course shall be thoroughly compacted flush
with the surrounding surface by vibratory rolling and be
uniformly contoured to the adjacent pavement.
(c) When using infrared resurfacing application, all stabilized base
material in the road opening plus a minimum of twelve (12)
inches surrounding the edge of the opening require heating
and raking to a depth of one (1) inch. All raked material to be
discarded and replaced by fresh hot FABC top mix.
(d) All manhole frames and covers installed within the pavement
area shall be set to finished grade. Any scaring or road damage
to any other part of a City roadway caused by this permit shall
be repaired as per the above conditions.
11. When necessary to cross over, or under existing bridges or culverts
under the jurisdiction of the County, no work whatsoever shall be
performed until the City engineer has approved filed plans. There
shall be a minimum of 12 inches separation between the City
drainage system and the utility line.
12. The City requires an extended maintenance period of up to two
years after permanent restoration and an additional maintenance
bond depending upon the nature of the work involved. This
additional obligation will be released upon completion and
acceptance of the work by the City. The maintenance bond shall be
executed by the permittee as principle and Surety Company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey as surety.
§ 16-1.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-1.9
1:562
13. No road opening permit will be issued between November 15th and
March 15th unless an emergency exists. In the event an emergency
exists and a permit is issued during this period, the applicant, by
accepting this permit, assumes all responsibility for the safe
maintenance of said opening and further assumes all liability for
damages resulting from or any way connected to this project.
14. The use of steel plates on City roadways between November 15th
and March 15th is prohibited. All steel plates that are installed on
City roadways are to be countersunk, pinned, and ramped.
15. Applicant is responsible for complete and total restoration of
opening and surrounding roadway for a period of up to two years
after permanent paving. There are no exceptions. All escrow
monies and bonds will be released at that time when all
workmanship connected with this project is deemed acceptable.
16. Certification of all underground facilities having been previously
located and marked using standard color codes for gas, water and
other utilities. Certification must indicate marking authorization
number. Final line striping and pavement markings must be
restored immediately to original or better condition. The standard
for the City of Asbury Park for line striping and traffic markings is
the application of 6" min. width hot extruded thermoplastic.
17. Additional Extensive Road Opening Requirements.
(a) Permanent pavement will be milled and paved from curb line to
yellow center line from start to finish. If laterals are 100' apart
or less, the entire road shall be milled and paved from curb to
curb start to finish. Laterals that are more than 100' apart shall
have infrared paving repairs.
(b) Traffic lines with thermoplastic glass beads must be replaced.
(c) Backfill quarry process with dust shall be compacted every 10
inches by mechanical vibratory compactor. The utility
company/contractor shall be responsible for a period of two
years to make repairs related to any settlement.
(d) Before crossing over, or under existing bridges, drainage
structures or culverts under City jurisdiction, the applicant
must notify the City and no work whatsoever shall be
performed until the City engineer has approved filed plans.
(Every effort must be made to have a minimum separation of
12 inches between the outside of the permittee's pipes and the
City's drainage structures).
b. Guard. The applicant shall keep the work site properly guarded both
day and night and shall have lights, barriers and adequate safety
devices as described in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
placed thereat and maintained throughout the performance of the work
§ 16-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.9
1:563
and shall interfere as little as possible with traffic along the street or
road within the City, and only that part of any such street or road as is
set forth in the permit shall be opened.
c. Minimum Cover. All utilities shall be constructed with a minimum cover
as shown in Table I set forth below to provide protection for the utilities
in the event that future City road construction, repair or modification
necessitates excavation, undercutting or installation of facilities in the
area where the utility is located. This location will in no way relieve the
utility owner of the responsibility of relocating the utility at the utility
owner's expense in case of conflict with future construction,
reconstruction or modification of related facilities, except as otherwise
specified herein. The aforementioned minimum cover may be waived by
the Superintendent of Public Works or City Engineer if the applicant
prepares and files certified plans indicating the location, extent and
depth of the facilities and the plans are approved by the Superintendent
of Public Works or City Engineer. This subsection shall apply only to
new construction.
Table I
Utility Designation
Minimum Cover*
(inches)
Cable television 18
Electric 18
Gas 30
Telephone 18
Water 48
*NOTE: Measured from top of pipe, conduit, duct or cable to finished
pavement or ground surface.
d. Protection of Existing Structures. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to give proper notice of the proposed street opening to any
person, firm or corporation whose pipe, conduits or other structures are
laid in the portion of the street to be opened. The notice shall be given
to all utilities by calling the One-Call Damage Prevention System at
telephone number 1/800/272-1000 as provided by law, and the
permittee shall restore same, at his own expense, to the condition it was
in prior to commencement of work.
e. All excavations shall be completely backfilled at the end of each
working day unless it would constitute a hardship to the permittee or
where the size of the excavation makes it impossible to backfill at the
end of each working day, in which event a waiver may be granted by the
Superintendent of Public Works or City Engineer. In the event that a
waiver is granted, the contractor or owner shall cover the excavation
with heavy one (1) inch thick plates secured to existing pavement to
prevent rattles and movement and erect appropriate barriers and lights
§ 16-1.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-1.9
1:564
§ 16-1.10. Maintenance of Work Site; Removal of Debris. [Ord. No.
2016-43]
§ 16-1.11. Inspections; Stop Work Order; Action by City. [Ord. No.
2016-43]
The Superintendent of Public Works or City Engineer shall periodically
inspect all road openings and the repair and resurfacing thereof for the
purpose of determining compliance with the conditions imposed on the
issuance of the permit and the specifications. The City may, upon the
recommendation of either of them:
around the entire excavation and arrange to provide appropriate
security protection, if such security is necessary, at his own cost, and
such other safeguards as may be needed to protect the public from
an open excavation. If plates are placed for over a weekend or for an
extended period, all edges are to be macadam-sealed and sloped. In
no event shall an excavation be left open for more than seventy-two
(72) hours unless an emergency exists and permission has been secured
from the Chief of Police, Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works, City Engineer or their designated representatives.
a. The permittee shall be liable for any damage to the roadway leading to
or adjacent to the work site.
b. The permittee shall, on a continuing basis, maintain all streets and
other property affected by the construction in a clean condition free
from all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris. Upon completion
of all work under the permit, the permittee shall again clean the
affected property and remove all debris and unused material. In the
event that the permittee fails to act as provided herein, the City, upon
twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the permittee, may clean and remove
all rubbish, excess earth, rock, debris and unused material and charge
the permittee the cost thereof. If the permittee fails to reimburse the
City for the costs incurred, the costs shall be deducted from the
permittee's deposit held by the City Clerk.
a. Order a temporary stop to any road opening.
b. Order that the applicant perform or correct work in accordance with
the directions of the City.
c. Order a stop to any work and revoke the permit, in which event the City
of Asbury Park shall complete the work, or cause it to be completed, and
either declare the applicant's deposit forfeited or notify the applicant's
surety of an intent to file claim on the bond.
d. Authorize the correction of any work after notification to the permittee
and after the neglect or the refusal of the permittee to make such
corrections within twenty-four (24) hours and, after the completion of
§ 16-1.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.11
1:565
§ 16-1.12. Construction Specifications. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
No road opening shall be permanently paved until a final inspection has
been made by the City Engineer or Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works and final approval given.
same, either declare the permittee's deposit forfeited or notify the
permittee's surety of an intent to file a claim on the bond.
e. Take any other action deemed reasonable under the circumstances to
protect the City's interests.
a. For all openings:
1. The paved roadway surfaces shall be saw-cut or blade-cut vertically
on a straight line with approved pneumatic equipment before
excavating.
2. The material excavated from the trench opening shall not be
replaced as backfill unless expressly authorized by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or City
Engineer. Excavated materials must be removed from the work site
the day of excavation.
3. The backfill of dense graded aggregated or bank run sand, where
permitted, shall be furnished from outside sources.
4. The uncompleted length of road opening allowed under a permit at
any one time shall not exceed fifty (50) linear feet unless a special
need can be established by the permittee and approval to exceed
this limitation is secured from the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or City Engineer. Such special need
shall be noted in writing to the Superintendent of the Department
of Public Works or City Engineer before such permission is granted,
except in unusual cases and/or emergencies. In that event, such
special need shall be documented in writing after approval is
granted.
5. Where existing manholes are located in the shoulder areas, a
minimum of two (2) inches (compacted thickness) of Hot Mix
Asphalt Surface Pavement, Mix I-5 shall be placed for eight (8) feet
on both sides of the manhole casting on four (4) inches of
compacted dense graded aggregate stone sub-base. The width of
the Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement Mix #I-5, shall vary to the
dimensions of the existing shoulder.
6. All backfill shall be placed in six (6) inch layers, with each layer
thoroughly compacted by mechanical means to the satisfaction of
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or City
Engineer. The Superintendent or City Engineer shall have the right
to require a compaction test to be performed by an independent
laboratory at the expense of the permittee.
§ 16-1.11 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-1.12
1:566
7. After proper compaction and cutback of the road, the entire width
of the trench plus a four (4) inch overlap shall be paved with the
temporary pavement.
b. Asphalt Pavement Openings.
1. For openings in bituminous concrete or penetration macadam
pavements, backfill material shall be deposited in one (1) foot
layers and thoroughly compacted to a level twelve (12) inches
below the surface level of the adjacent paved surfaces. The opening
shall be cut back six (6) inches beyond the edges of the trench
opening. The sub-base course shall be dense graded aggregate four
(4) inches compacted thickness. The base course shall be Hot Mix
Asphalt Mix I-2 (stabilized base six (6) inches thick (compacted
thickness) placed in three (3) lifts. The surface course shall be two
(2) inches (compacted thickness) of Hot Mix Asphalt Surface
Pavement Mix I-5 with all joints between the existing pavement and
the bituminous concrete surface course to be sealed with a tack
coat.
2. When road openings are in sequence or are within three (3) feet of
another opening, the surface area of the combined openings will be
paved to form one (1) continuous surface. The surface course shall
be two (2) inches (compact thickness) of Hot Mix Asphalt Surface
Pavement, Mix I-5 with all joints between the existing pavement
and the bituminous concrete surface course shall be sealed with a
tack coat.
3. The temporary pavement shall consist of four (4) inches
(compacted thickness) dense graded aggregate sub-base and the
Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement Mix I-2 (stabilized base) course
described herein.
The temporary pavement shall be placed and compacted one (1)
inch below the finished surface of the existing pavement and shall
be maintained at this level by the permittee by the addition of
Hot Mix Asphalt Surface Pavement, Mix I-5 until final settlement
has occurred. After the City Engineer and/or Superintendent of
Public Works has determined that final settlement has occurred,
the pavement shall be completed by the placing and compaction
of additional Hot Mix Asphalt Surface Pavement, Mix I-5, level
with the existing pavement. Prior to placing the additional Hot Mix
Asphalt Pavement, the pavement shall have "tack" applied. This
section applies to all openings, including those completed by a
public utility. The public utility shall work the City to ensure the
temporary pavement is replaced in a timely fashion.
c. Concrete Pavement Surface Openings. For all openings in concrete
surfaces, the trench backfill shall be compacted in one (1) foot layers to
a level four (4) inches below the top of the adjacent paved surface. The
openings shall be cut back six (6) inches beyond the edges of the trench
§ 16-1.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.12
1:567
opening. Four (4) inch (compacted thickness) of Hot Mix Asphalt
Pavement Mix I-2 (stabilized base) temporary pavement shall then be
placed in two (2) inch lifts, compacted level with the existing pavement
and shall be maintained by the permittee to a pavement, level with
the existing pavement by adding additional Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement
material until final settlement has occurred. After the City Engineer
and/or Superintendent of Public Works have determined that final
settlement has occurred, the temporary Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement
shall be removed and the opening excavated to a depth of ten (10)
inches and a pavement of Class "B" concrete, ten (10) inches in depth
shall be constructed level with the existing pavement surface. The Class
"B" concrete pavement shall be reinforced with a double level of 6 x 6,
No. 6 gauge wire mesh reinforcing and shall be placed in the opening
and extend fully into the cutback shelf. The "bottom" wire reinforcing
shall be set eight (8) inches from the roadway surface. The "upper"
reinforcing shall be set two (2) inches from the pavement surface.
The concrete pavement shall be "finished" to "match" the roadway
surface or with a "broom" finish as directed by the City Engineer or
Superintendent of Public Works.
After the concrete has been placed and if the roadway is to be opened
to traffic prior to full "curing" of the concrete pavement, the roadway
shall be "plated" with standard highway plates capable of supporting
H20 loading. The plate shall extend a minimum of six (6) inches beyond
the limits of the new concrete pavement. The plates shall be secured
and installed in accordance with current New Jersey Department of
Transportation specifications including temporary ramping and shall
remain in place for a minimum of twenty-eight (28) days to permit
curing of the concrete.
If "high early" concrete is utilized, the plates shall remain in place a
minimum of fourteen (14) days.
d. Nonpaved Area. All grass or graveled area or sidewalk areas disturbed
within the City right-of-way shall be reconstructed, topsoiled, seeded
and mulched within fourteen (14) days of completion of excavation. All
concrete areas will be thoroughly compacted. These limits may be
waived by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
City Engineer only when abnormal temperatures or inclement weather
necessitates the same.
e. All work shall be guaranteed for a period of twelve (12) months.
f. Openings Undertaken Within Ten Years of Resurfacing. If a utility
opening is undertaken less than ten (10) years after a roadway has been
resurfaced, the utility shall be required to profile and resurface that
portion of the roadway deemed necessary by the City Engineer and/or
Superintendent of Public Works.
g. All roadway excavations be "sawcut."
§ 16-1.12 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-1.12
1:568
§ 16-1.13. Insurance; Deposits. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
h. Roadway openings shall be restored using infrared pavement
restoration.
a. Insurance. The applicant shall present evidence satisfactory to the Risk
Manager of insurance sufficient to indemnify and save harmless the
City, its agents and servants against and from all suits and costs of
every kind and from all personal injury or property damage resulting
from negligence or from any phase of operations performed under the
permit.
b. The minimum policy limit of such insurance shall be as follows:
1. Bodily injury liability coverage with limits of not less than one
million ($1,000,000.00) dollars for bodily injury, including
accidental death, to any one person, and subject to that limit for
each person, in an amount not less than one million
($1,000,000.00) dollars for each accident; and property damage
coverage in the amount of not less than five hundred thousand
($500,000.00) dollars for each accident;
2. One person in any one accident — amount of one million
($1,000,000.00) dollars;
3. Two or more persons in any one accident — amount of three
hundred thousand ($300,000.00) dollars; and
4. Property damage in any one accident — amount of five hundred
thousand ($500,000.00) dollars with aggregate property damage
limit of one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars.
c. Where there is an extensive opening, the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or the City Engineer may request
additional insurance if it is deemed necessary under the circumstances.
d. Security.
1. A permit shall not be issued unless the applicant has deposited as
security for faithful performance a certified check made payable to
the City of Asbury Park or filed a bond with a surety satisfactory to
the City Attorney, the amount thereof to be based upon the security
deposit fee schedule as contained in subsection 16-1.14 for the
work to be performed.
2. A public utility applicant may, in lieu of the security required above,
deposit an annual corporate bond in the amount of at least twenty
thousand ($20,000.00) dollars. The surety bond shall be renewed
annually. In the event that a public utility applicant applies for a
permit for road opening and/or road openings and the required
security deposit fee set forth in subsection 16-1.14 exceeds the
twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars the public utility applicant
§ 16-1.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.13
1:569
shall file a surety bond in an amount equal to the difference
between the twenty thousand ($20,000.00) dollars and the
required security deposit. For all nonpublic utility applicants, the
surety bond shall be at least one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars. A
certified check for a lesser amount may be deposited, however,
in the amount provided by subsection 16-1.14 for the work to be
performed.
3. Upon satisfactory completion of all work permitted or required
under the permit for extensive openings, if the security deposit is
two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars or less, the City of Asbury Park
will retain one hundred (100%) percent of the security deposit as
security for maintenance of the work for a period not to exceed one
(1) year from the date of completion, provided that if the security
deposit is in the form of a certified check, the permittee may
deposit a surety bond of two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars
satisfactory to the City Attorney in lieu of the certified check. If the
security deposit is greater than two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars,
then the City will release or refund sixty (60%) percent or more of
the same with the approval of the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or City Engineer, and the surety bond
will be deposited for the maintenance as set forth above. All bonds
and certificates of insurance shall contain a provision that the same
shall remain in full force and effect for a period not to exceed one
(1) year after the last work under any permit has been completed
and accepted by the City.
4. In the case of a small opening, the City shall retain the security
deposit for six (6) months after satisfactory completion of all work
permitted or required under the permit, provided that if the
security deposit is in the form of a certified check, the permittee
may deposit a security bond in lieu of the check.
e. Application Fee and Escrow Deposit.
1. The applicant shall also pay, by separate money order, certified
check or, if the applicant is a public utility as herein defined, by a
corporate check, a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in
subsection 16-1.14. Applications other than a public utility shall
pay, by separate money order or certified check, a refundable
escrow deposit fee for inspection and professional services as set
forth in subsection 16-1.14. Should the escrow deposit fee account
at any time become insufficient to cover the actual or anticipated
inspection and professional expenses, the fund shall be subject to
increase on demand of the Department of Public Works or the Chief
Financial Officer.
2. The City shall pay from the escrow deposit fee any costs incurred
by its designated representatives or professional consultants for
inspection or other engineering services or legal fees required in
§ 16-1.13 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-1.13
1:570
§ 16-1.14. Fees. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
Fees shall be as follows:
connection with the proposed opening or excavation at the rate
established.
a. Application fee, Nonrefundable (Other Than Public Utilities).
1. Road opening:
(a) Width of road opening.
(1) Two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars for one-half (1/2) the
width of the road being opened.
(2) Five hundred ($500.00) dollars for the full width of the
road being opened.
(b) Length of road opening.
(1) Five ($5.00) dollars per linear foot.
(c) From twenty-five (25) linear feet to fifty (50) linear feet by
three (3) feet wide: an additional forty ($40.00) dollars.
(d) Extensive openings: seventy-five ($75.00) dollars.
2. Boring, tunneling or driving under road: lump sum minimum of
seventy-five ($75.00) dollars.
3. Curb, gutter, apron, sidewalk or driveway: lump sum of fifteen
($15.00) dollars when affected by excavation.
4. Application fees shall be accumulated in one (1) account for each
public utility, and the funds can be utilized for the payment of
expenses incurred by the City for any work performed for the
permittee without restriction as to which application the funds
were originally posted for.
5. In lieu of individual application fees, public utilities may pay fees of
two hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars.
b. Application Fee, (Utilities).
1. Road Opening: Public Utilities shall pay an annual flat fee of two
thousand five hundred ($2,500.00) dollars per year, on or before
January 15th of each year.
c. Security deposit fee for guaranteeing restoration, pavement curbing or
topsoil:
1. Opening paved area, curb, gutter, sidewalk or driveway:
(a) Base charge: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
§ 16-1.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1.14
1:571
§ 16-1.15. Return of Deposit Upon Completion of Work. [Ord. No.
2016-43]
Upon the completion of any such work, the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or City Engineer shall file a report on a form
to be furnished for that purpose, which report shall contain the date of
completion, the amount of deposit, the cost to the City for resurfacing the
area so excavated or opened, if the same shall have been necessary, and
the balance, if any, due to the applicant. Upon receipt of the report by the
balance due, if any, to the applicant on account of any deposit shall be
forthwith returned.
(b) Charge for each square yard of trench opened: fifteen ($15.00)
dollars.
(c) Charge for each square yard of paving: five ($5.00) dollars.
(d) Charge for each linear foot of curb: seven ($7.00) dollars.
2. Opening shoulders and roadside areas:
(a) Base charge: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
(b) Charge for each square yard of trench opened: five ($5.00)
dollars.
3. Boring, tunneling or driving under the road:
(a) Base charge: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars.
(b) Charge per linear foot of boring: one ($1.00) dollar.
d. Escrow Deposit Fee for Engineering and Legal Costs.
1. All road openings, excavations, borings and other work as stated on
the permit application:
The minimum escrow amount shall be $2,500.00.
2. Actual payment from the escrow deposit fee fund shall be based
upon the following rates:
(a) Professional engineering services: to be billed at the current
hourly rate of the City Engineer.
(b) Attorney: minimum fee of ninety-five ($95.00) dollars per hour.
(c) An inspection fee of $225.00 covering a minimum of 3
inspections, ($75.00 per hour will be charged for any
additional inspections).
§ 16-1.14 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-1.16
1:572
§ 16-1.16. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-43]
Any person, who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
In case of failure to restore pavements or roads or streets as hereinabove
provided, after written notice by the City Clerk to do so, each day that such
pavements, roads or streets remain unrestored shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 16-2. CURB AND SIDEWALK IMPROVEMENTS; MAINTENANCE;
RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER; PERMIT.
§ 16-2.1. Compliance Required. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.1; New]
Curbing and sidewalks shall be constructed, improved and repaired on both
sides of every street in the City, and all such curbing and sidewalks laid
shall conform to the provisions of this chapter, and to those of Chapter XXX,
Land Development Regulations or shall conform to construction details as
specified by the City Engineer.
§ 16-2.2. Width. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.2]
Except where otherwise provided, sidewalks shall not be less than four
(4) feet wide, and shall be constructed of the material and in the manner
prescribed by the Superintendent of Public Works or the City Engineer.
Reconstructed sidewalks must match the greater width of any of the
adjacent sidewalks if such width exceeds four (4) feet.
§ 16-2.3. Corners. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.3]
All corners at street intersections shall be laid on a curve with a radius
of not less than six (6) feet, but the radius at any specific corner shall
be determined by the municipal officer or the City Engineer. Concrete
curbing shall be in accordance with specifications provided by the City
Engineer, including those for the location and construction of depressed
curbs required for compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA).
a. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every property owner in the
City to maintain the curbing and sidewalk adjacent to their property at
all times. Any deteriorated, uprooted, cracked or dilapidated sidewalks,
walkways or curbs shall be repaired by the owner.
b. All sidewalks, walkways, driveways, curbs and similarly paved public
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free of
hazardous conditions. This shall be an ongoing duty of the property
owner, whether or not an official notice to repair has been issued by the
City.
c. A permit as required under Section 16-1 shall be required for all
sidewalk and curb construction, improvement or repair.
§ 16-1.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2.4
1:573
§ 16-2.4. Condemnation of Curbing and Sidewalk. [Ord. No. 2721
§ 16-2.4]
The City Engineer or the Superintendent of Public Works may condemn any
curbing or sidewalk which is unfit or is not of the required width or material,
or not laid to proper grade and require it to be laid in accordance with this
section.
§ 16-2.5. Established Grade. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.5]
The grades established for sidewalks shall be the established grade of onequarter
(1/4) inch per foot from the outer edge of the curb. For sidewalks of
width of ten (10) feet to three (3) feet, the outer or street edge of the work
shall be laid three (3) feet from the curbline. For sidewalks of a width of
thirteen (13) feet, the walk shall be laid five (5) feet six (6) inches from the
curbline. For sidewalks of a width of eighteen (18) feet to twenty-five (25)
feet, the walk shall be laid eight (8) feet from the curbline. All walks when
laid shall be trimmed to a straight line on both sides or edges.
§ 16-2.6. Lowering of Curbs. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.6]
The curb on all driveways or entrances to properties shall be lowered
four (4) inches. In no case shall depressed curb be less than one (1) inch
nor more than one and one-half (1 1/2) inches above the adjacent gutter/
roadway.
§ 16-2.7. Curblines. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.7]
The curblines of all sidewalks and curbs shall be those established on the
Official Map of the streets and sidewalks of the City on file in the City
Clerk's Office and all walks and curbs shall be laid in conformity to the
established grade lines.
§ 16-2.8. Procurement of Grade and Lines. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.8]
No walk or curb shall be laid until the owner or person laying the same
first procures from the City Engineer grades and lines for walk or curb. The
owner will be accountable for procuring the services of an engineer under
the direction of the City Engineer and the walk and curb, when completed,
shall be laid to the actual grade lines as established.
§ 16-2.9. Notice to Repair. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.9]
The City Engineer or the official authorized by the City Manager shall serve
upon the owner of any lot or land in front of which any sidewalk is to
be constructed, reconstructed, curbed, re-curbed, improved or repaired, a
notice in writing, which notice shall contain a description of the property
affected sufficiently definite in terms to identify the same, as well as a
description of the required improvements. The notice shall state that unless
improvements are completed within thirty (30) days after the service
thereof, it is the intention of the City to make such improvements or to have
§ 16-2.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-2.9
1:574
them performed pursuant to law. The notice shall be served pursuant to law.
Failure to make repairs or complete improvements within the time specified
by the Municipal officer shall constitute a violation of this section and shall
be punishable by a penalty not to exceed a fine of one thousand ($1,000)
dollars and/or up to ninety (90) days in jail, with each day that the violation
remains unabated to be considered a separate violation.
§ 16-2.10. Improvements Made by the City. [Ord. No. 2721
§ 16-2.10]
If any owner of any lot or land affected fails to construct, reconstruct,
improve or repair any sidewalk or curbing as directed in the notice provided
for in subsection 16-2.9 within thirty (30) days after the service of such
notice, the Mayor and Council may cause the improvements to be made
under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works or the City
Engineer, or award one (1) or more contracts for the making of such
improvements.
§ 16-2.11. Cost of Improvements to Be Lien on Premises. [Ord. No.
2721 § 16-2.11]
Upon the completion of the improvements, an account of the cost thereof
shall kept and proportioned among the several properties improved in
proportion to the frontage of their respective lands, and a statement of such
costs, under oath or affirmation, shall be filed by the Superintendent of
the Public Works with the City Clerk. The Mayor and Council, after notice,
shall examine the account, and if the account is properly made shall confirm
the same and file the report with the Tax Collector. The Tax Collector
shall record the sidewalk or curbing assessment in the same book as other
assessments, and shall proceed to collect such assessments in the same
manner as other assessments are collected. The owner shall have five (5)
years within which to pay the same, one-fifth (1/5) to be paid each year with
interest thereon to accrue from the date of making of such assessment.
§ 16-2.12. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.12]
As used in this section:
SIDEWALK — shall mean that part of the street right-of-way between the
back of the curb or driveway apron and the closest streetline or right-of-way
line. The sidewalk may be entirely paved with concrete or consist of street
trees and/or grass between the paved walkway and the curb. The area of
the sidewalk between the paved walkway and the streetline or right-of-way
line along adjoining properties shall be landscaped with grass except where
penetrated by a driveway.
WALK — shall mean the improved portion of the sidewalk designed for use
of pedestrians.
§ 16-2.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2.13
1:575
§ 16-2.13. Parking on Sidewalks Prohibited; Obstruction of
Sidewalk. [Ord. No. 2721 § 16-2.13]
It shall be unlawful to cause vehicles of any kind to be parked on any part
of a public sidewalk, as defined herein, or to park a vehicle in a driveway in
such a manner that blocks the path of pedestrians using the paved walkway
portion of the sidewalk. Vehicles shall be parked only in permitted areas
on street or in designated parking areas on private/public parking lots.
Violations of this section are enforceable by both the Asbury Park Police
Department and any other municipal officer or inspector authorized by the
City Manager.
§ 16-2.14. Sidewalk Closures; Guidelines and Fees. [Ord. No. 2721
§ 16-2.14]
Partial closure of sidewalk within City right-of-way, must be reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer. The minimum clear pedestrian path for
partial closures shall be four (4) feet wide and eighty (80) inches tall. All
pedestrian notification signage for these closures must conform to the latest
edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Full closure of
City sidewalk requires approval by the City Manager per the City Engineer's
recommendation. The City Council must be notified of all sidewalk closures
in excess of sixty (60) calendar days for review and comment. A Certificate
of Insurance must be filed pursuant to subsection 16-1.4 for all sidewalk
closures.
The permit fee for sidewalk closures shall be one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
An additional fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each thirty (30)
day period beyond the first month of date of permit issuance, is required
for full sidewalk closures. No additional fee will be required for partial
sidewalk closures. This additional fee will not be prorated for a portion
of the thirty (30) day period. In addition, the applicant must post a one
thousand ($1,000.00) dollar cash deposit guaranteeing prompt removal of
sidewalk closure material and/or equipment prior to the permit expiration
date. If the permittee has not removed the enclosure and equipment by
the permit expiration date, the City will assess an additional fee of twentyfive
($25.00) dollars per day to be deducted from one thousand ($1,000.00)
dollar cash deposit.
§ 16-2.15. Permit Expiration and Repair Timeframes. [Ord. No.
2721 § 16-2.15]
All curb and sidewalk permits expire the sooner of sixty (60) days after
the permit issuance date. All permanent repairs must occur prior to permit
expiration date. Failure to begin work prior to permit expiration will require
application for a new permit pursuant to subsection 16-1.3, and payment
of new permit fees. Failure to complete work before the stipulated permit
expiration date will require application for a permit extension. Only one
(1) thirty (30) day permit extension will be granted by the City. Any work
which extends beyond the extension date shall require application for a
§ 16-2.13 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-2.15
1:576
new permit, and the payment of permit fees as stipulated elsewhere in this
section.
§ 16-3. INSTALLATION OF PUBLIC TELEPHONE BOOTHS ON
SIDEWALKS.
§ 16-3.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 16-3.1]
As used in this section:
DISTRIBUTOR — shall mean any person responsible for placing and
maintaining a pay telephone.
MUNICIPALITY — shall mean the City of Asbury Park.
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — shall mean the City Manager. The implementation
of processing of all functions and activities under this section shall be
performed by the municipal official.
PAY TELEPHONE — shall mean any self-service or coin or credit card
operated telephone or bank of such telephones placed adjacent to such
other, located in or over a public sidewalk or street.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, business, firm, corporation,
association, partnership or other organization or group of persons.
SIDEWALK — shall mean that area dedicated to public use for pedestrian
traffic.
STREET — shall mean all that area dedicated to public use for public street
purposes and shall include but not limited to roadways, parkways, alleys
and sidewalks.
§ 16-3.2. Permit Required, Fee for a Permit, Indemnity and
Insurance. [2000 Code § 16-3.2]
a. No person, association, partnership or corporation may place or
maintain any pay telephone on or above any public street or sidewalk
without having first obtained a permit as provided in this section.
Permits shall be issued by the municipal official subject to approval of
the location and placement of the pay telephone as set forth in
subsection 16-3.5 hereinafter. Permits or denial thereof shall be issued
within fifteen (15) working days of application for such permits. Permit
denials shall be in writing, setting forth the specific reasons for denial.
Distributors shall have thirty (30) days within which to cure deficiencies
or defects in their applications without the necessity for re-application.
Denial subsequent to an attempt to cure shall entitle the distributor to
the hearing procedures set forth in subsection 16-3.7 hereinafter.
b. Before installation, a plan or sketch of the pay telephone shall be
prepared by the applicant and furnished to the municipal official in
sufficient detail to describe the location and placement of the pay
telephone.
§ 16-2.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.2
1:577
§ 16-3.3. Telephone Rates to Be Posted; Emergency Calls. [2000
Code § 16-3.3]
§ 16-3.4. Standards for Maintenance, Installation and Operation;
Working Condition; Outgoing Calls. [2000 Code § 16-3.4]
c. For applicants who are members of an organization which has in effect
an approved self-policing enforcement compliance program, the fee for
a permit shall be one hundred ($100.00) dollars for the first year and
fifty ($50.00) dollars for each year thereafter.
1. For all other applicants, the fee for a permit shall be two hundred
($200.00) dollars for the first year and one hundred ($100.00)
dollars for each year thereafter.
d. Before receiving a permit, an applicant shall:
1. Execute an indemnification agreement substantially as follows:
The applicant and any other person on whose behalf the application
is made agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the
municipality against liability for all claims for damage to property,
or injury to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the
issuance of the permit or the control, maintenance or ownership or
use of each pay telephone.
2. File with the agency evidence of a general liability insurance policy
of one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars for bodily injury and fifty
thousand ($50,000.00) dollars for property damage naming the
City of Asbury Park as additional insured against any injury, loss or
damage that may result from placing or maintaining the pay
telephone on or above the sidewalk.
a. Pay telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed without
charge except as may be otherwise provided by applicable tariffs filed
with the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
1. Calls to the 911 emergency number;
2. Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the Police
and Fire Departments;
3. Calls for emergency purposes placed through operator assistance
to the Police and Fire Departments by members thereof.
b. Current local coin call initial rates shall be posted on the pay telephone
or on the pay telephone booth.
a. Pay telephones shall comply with the following standards:
1. No booth surrounding a telephone shall exceed eight (8) feet in
height, four (4) feet in width or four (4) feet in depth.
§ 16-3.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-3.4
1:578
§ 16-3.5. Location and Placement of Pay Telephones. [2000 Code
§ 16-3.5]
2. Each coin operated pay telephone shall be equipped with a coin
return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure
an immediate refund when applicable.
3. Each pay telephone shall have affixed to it, in a place visible to
everyone using the pay telephone, the name and address of the
distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone
service to report a malfunction or secure a refund.
4. Pay telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, a pay telephone
shall be served and maintained so that:
(a) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof;
(b) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon;
(c) Any clear plastic or glass parts are unbroken and reasonably
free of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes and discoloration;
(d) Any paper or cardboard parts or inserts are reasonably free of
tears, peeling or fading;
(e) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly
misshapen;
(f) The telephone receiver is attached to the telephone.
b. The pay telephone shall be maintained in working condition. Any
distributor who fails to maintain its pay telephone in working condition
may be given a ten (10) day written notice to repair the pay telephone
by the municipal official. If the pay telephone is not in working
condition at the end of the ten (10) day period, the municipal official
may revoke the permit unless the distributor provides written
assurance that the pay telephone shall be repaired or removed within
the next five (5) days.
c. Each pay telephone shall, within ten (10) days of written request of the
municipal official, be capable of being restricted to outgoing calls. If
such telephone is not restricted to outgoing calls per this section, such
permit shall be revoked.
a. No pay telephone shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any street
or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
1. Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
or
§ 16-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.5
1:579
§ 16-3.6. Removal of Pay Telephones. [2000 Code § 16-3.6]
No distributor shall remove a pay telephone without having first notified the
Municipal official.
§ 16-3.7. Revocation. [2000 Code § 16-3.7]
2. Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
3. Interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or
mailboxes permitted at or near the location;
All as set forth in paragraph c hereinafter.
b. Pay telephones shall be placed, or otherwise secured, so as to prevent
their being blown down or around the street or sidewalk, but shall not
be chained or otherwise secured, to any traffic or street signs, signals,
hydrants or mailboxes.
c. No pay telephones shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
1. Within any marked crosswalk;
2. Within three (3) feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalks;
3. Within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call
box or other emergency facility;
4. Within five (5) feet of any driveway;
5. Within three (3) feet of any public area improved with a lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping;
6. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six (6) feet;
7. Within three (3) feet of any building unless written permission
therefor is secured and filed with the application.
d. Pay telephones shall not be placed in sidewalks in front of street
addresses where there appears to be continuous criminal activity
involving the use of the pay telephone. "Continuous criminal activity,"
as used in this section, means reports to the police of more than four (4)
criminal incidents in a month prior to the date of the application or
more than twelve (12) reported criminal incidents in a year prior to the
date of the application.
e. Except for subsequent application by the same distributor for the
placement of an additional pay telephone adjacent to the distributor's
existing permitted pay telephone:
1. All pay telephones must be placed at least six hundred (600) feet
from all other pay telephones.
§ 16-3.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-3.7
1:580
§ 16-3.8. Application of Ordinance to All Legally Existing Pay
Telephones. [2000 Code § 16-3.8]
a. Upon the receipt of a written complaint by a citizen or an authorized
representative of the Police Department that the location and use of a
pay telephone constitute a threat to the health and welfare of the
community, as defined below, the municipal official shall provide to the
distributor of the pay telephone written notice of same, including a
detailed explanation of the complaint.
b. The distributor shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice
to cure the deficiencies noted therein.
c. If cure is not accomplished, the municipal official shall conduct a
hearing on fifteen (15) days written notice to all affected parties to
ascertain whether the location and use of the pay telephone constitute a
threat to the health and welfare of the community.
d. A "threat to the health and welfare of the community," as used in this
section, shall mean the existence of continuous criminal activity as set
forth in subsection 16-3.5d above.
e. Affected parties shall have the opportunity for discovery and
examination of witnesses prior to hearing, and shall have the
opportunity to present evidence and examine witnesses at the hearing.
f. If the municipal official finds evidence presented that the location and
use of the pay telephone constitute a threat to the health and welfare of
the community, the municipal official may by written notice to the
distributor, revoke any permit issued for the use of such pay telephone,
or may order such lesser relief as he/she deems fair, including requiring
the pay telephone to be restricted to outgoing calls only.
g. In the event that a permit is revoked or other lesser action is directed
pursuant to paragraph f. of this section the distributor shall have the
right to appeal to City Council within thirty (30) days of the issuance of
the revocation or directive by filing a written notice thereof with the
City Clerk with a copy to the municipal official.
a. All legally existing pay telephones located on or above sidewalks within
the municipality shall be deemed "grandfathered." "Grandfathered" pay
telephones shall mean those telephones installed prior to the 1963
Ordinance No. 788 or any telephones subsequently installed pursuant
to the above noted ordinance.
b. Any distributor desiring that its pay telephones be "grandfathered"
must notify in writing the municipal official within thirty (30) days of the
locations of all of the distributor's pay telephones existing on the date of
adoption of this ordinance. All pay telephones not so identified shall not
be entitled to "grandfathered" status. The provisions of this ordinance
shall, however, apply to all pay telephones located on or above
§ 16-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3.8
1:581
§ 16-3.9. Violation. [2000 Code § 16-3.9]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 16-3.10. Removal. [2000 Code § 16-3.10]
Pay telephones for which permits have been revoked and municipal appeals
exhausted shall be removed by the distributor within ten (10) days of the
receipt of written final determination. In the event that the distributor does
not remove a pay telephone for which a permit has been revoked or denied,
the municipality may do so. Pay telephones removed by the municipality
shall be handled so as to protect and preserve the physical integrity of the
equipment and shall be stored in a secured facility until retrieved by the
distributor. There shall be a minimum fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars
plus all costs borne by the City to remove any pay telephone and to repair
and restore the site. If any removed pay telephone or equipment is not
removed from City storage by the owner within thirty (30) days it shall
become the sole property of the City.
§ 16-4. SIDEWALK SIGNS.
§ 16-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 3006 § 16-4.1; Ord. No. 3045]
As used in this section:
SIDEWALK SIGN — shall mean a temporary free standing sign located on
the sidewalk, sidewalk area, or boardwalk in front of a storefront.
§ 16-4.2. Permit Required, Fee for a Permit, and Indemnity. [Ord.
No. 3006 § 16-4.2; Ord. No. 3045]
sidewalks within the municipality which are installed after the effective
date of this ordinance.
a. Sidewalk signs shall be exempt from obtaining a zoning permit.
However, no sidewalk sign shall be erected without a permit issued by
City Clerk or a duly authorized representative of the Clerk in
consultation with the Fire Department, Police Department, City
Engineer and such other officials, or their designees, as may be
desirable. Permits are valid for one (1) year beginning January 1, and
ending December 31.
b. There shall be an annual permit fee in the amount of twenty-five
($25.00) dollars for permission to erect sidewalk sign(s), which fee shall
commence as of January 1, 2014.
c. Before receiving a permit, an applicant shall:
1. Submit a general liability insurance certificate covering bodily
injury and property damage with a minimum of one million
($1,000,000.00) dollars per person and one million ($1,000,000.00)
§ 16-3.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 16-4.2
1:582
§ 16-4.3. Permitted Locations and Sign Restrictions. [Ord. No. 3006
§ 16-4.3; Ord. No. 3045]
dollars per accident or occurrence. The City of Asbury Park shall
be named coinsured.
2. Execute a Hold Harmless Agreement, in a form provided by the
City Clerk or a duly authorized representative of the Clerk and
which is approved by the City Attorney, between the applicant and
the City of Asbury Park.
a. Each business located within a commercial or mixed-use zoning district
or redevelopment area and having its own separate entrance onto
either the public sidewalk at street level or public boardwalk may place
upon the public sidewalk or boardwalk in front of the said place of
business and solely during the hours the said business is in operation,
one (1) sidewalk sign along each street frontage and/or boardwalk
frontage. These requirements shall not, however, apply to directional
signs posted temporarily (not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours) at or
immediately adjacent to the venue of a specific special event.
b. The sign shall have a maximum width of thirty (30) inches, maximum
height of forty-eight (48) inches and maximum depth of twenty-four (24)
inches.
c. The sign shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any side yard
property boundary, provided, however, that in the case of a property
having a frontage of less than twenty (20) feet, the sign shall be located
as near to the center of the frontage as practicable. The sign shall be
further located within four (4) feet of either the curb face or the front of
the building, provided further, however, that a sixty (60) inch wide
unobstructed path shall be maintained at all times on the sidewalk.
Signs on the boardwalk shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of
the front of the storefront.
d. No sign shall be erected and maintained in a manner that prevents free
ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape, or which
prevents free ingress or egress from any lawfully parked vehicle.
e. Attaching the sign to the sidewalk, structures, poles, objects, etc. by
bolts, chains, cords, rope, wire, cable, etc. is prohibited.
f. The sign shall be removed from public sidewalks or the boardwalk if
there is any snow accumulation (the sign may not be displayed until the
snow is removed).
g. The sign shall be constructed of weather resistant materials (no paper,
fiberboard, foam core board, corrugated paper or unfinished wood
materials shall be permitted), and shall be constructed and/or weighted
so as to be impervious to the effects of strong winds. The sign shall be
maintained at all times in good repair and shall not be permitted to
weather, fade, peel, crack or otherwise deteriorate. The sign shall not
§ 16-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4.3
1:583
§ 16-4.4. Removal or Denial. [Ord. No. 3006 § 16-4.4; Ord. No. 3045]
§ 16-4.5. Violation. [Ord. No. 3006 § 16-4.5; Ord. No. 3045]
Chapter 17
(RESERVED)
Chapter 18
SEWERS
§ 18-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF SEWER SYSTEM AS A PUBLIC
UTILITY. [2000 Code § 18-1; Ord. No. 2018-44]
The municipal sewer system consisting of main sewers, lateral sewers,
sewage treatment or disposal plants, sewage receptacles, pumping stations,
and any and all improvements, erections, works, establishments, and
fixtures to provide proper sewage and drainage for the City and controlled
and managed by the City, whether owned or controlled by it, is hereby
created and established as a municipal public utility for all the purposes of
the local bond law of New Jersey and the local budget law of the State of
New Jersey. This municipal public utility is hereby found and determined
to be a utility, enterprise or purpose authorized to be undertaken by the
City and for which it may receive rates, rentals or other charges for or in
connection with the uses and services of such municipal public utility which
shall be held, used and applied in accordance with the provisions of the
local bond law and the local budget law and any other applicable laws.
be illuminated, nor shall it contain moving parts or have balloons,
streamers, pennants, or similar adornment attached to them.
a. Notwithstanding anything contained in this section to the contrary, the
Fire Department and/or Police Department shall have the right to
prohibit or further restrict the location of any sidewalk sign which, in
their sole discretion, they deem by virtue of the sign's construction or
location, to constitute a safety hazard to the public.
b. Sidewalk signs may be moved/removed by the City for municipal
purposes such as snow removal, traffic issues, and maintenance of the
public right-of-way.
a. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be subject, upon
conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. Each day that
a violation persists shall be considered a separate violation of this
section.
b. Sidewalk signs placed in violation of this section will result in the
immediate removal of the sign and the business' sidewalk sign permit
privileges will be denied for the remainder of that year.
§ 16-4.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-2
1:584
§ 18-2. SEWER CONNECTIONS.
§ 18-2.1. Application; Connection Charges; Compliance Required.
[2000 Code § 18-2.1; Ord. No. 2961; Ord. No. 2018-44]
a. No connection with the public sewers shall be made until a written
application, filled out upon a form to be furnished by the Bureau of
Roads and Sewers and signed by the owner of the property to be
connected, or an authorized agent, is made to the City Engineer or his/
her designee and his/her permission obtained.
b. The Bureau may make all connections with the street sewers, laying the
service pipe from the street sewer to the curbline, for which work the
charge shall be the actual cost to the Bureau for the work and
supervision, and the charge shall be made against the property or its
owner and shall become due and payable immediately upon the
completion of the work.
c. The City Engineer or his/her designee may grant permission to
plumbers or others to make connections with the street sewer pipes,
but such work must be done in compliance with any reasonable
conditions that the City Engineer or his/her designee may require.
d. As per Senate Bill 1247 of 2018, if there is a material increase to the
level of demand for any new construction of additional service units
requested, an additional fee shall apply to the amount of the higher
demand/usage. As used in this section, "materially increases" means
any increase in the number of service units; or any other change which
increases the level of use or demand on the sewerage system by fifteen
(15%) percent or more over the highest actual annual use and demand
that existed during the prior 10-year period immediately preceding the
addition, alteration, or change in use; provided, however, that, if the
property has been connected to the sewerage system for less than ten
(10) years, the average level of use and demand shall be calculated
based on the actual period of connection.
e. As per Senate Bill 1247 of 2018 the following shall be in effect:
1. The City established within its rates or schedules a fifty (50%)
percent reduction in the connection fee or tapping fee assessed
pursuant to section 8 of P.L. 1946, c. 138 (C. 40:14A-8) for new
connections to the sewerage system which is to be charged to
public housing authorities, to non-profit organizations building
affordable housing projects, and to any other affordable housing,
including affordable housing units in inclusionary projects.
2. For units previously connected to the authority's system that were
demolished or refurbished to allow for new affordable housing
units and for which a connection or tapping fee was previously
paid, a county, regional or municipal sewerage authority shall
establish within its rates or schedules a credit against the
§ 18-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-2.1
1:585
§ 18-2.2. Connection Required; Permission Required to Connect.
[2000 Code § 18-2.2; Ord. No. 2961; Ord. No. 2018-44]
connection fee or tapping fee to be assessed for connection with
the sewerage system to public housing authorities, non-profit
organizations building affordable projects, and to any other
affordable housing, including affordable housing units in
inclusionary projects. The credit shall be the connection fee or
tapping fee previously assessed and paid for connection with the
sewerage system for units previously connected to the authority's
system.
3. The connection fee or tapping fee assessable against a public
housing authority, non-profit organization, or other affordable
housing owner, for units previously connected to the authority's
system that were demolished or refurbished to allow for new
affordable housing units, including affordable housing units in
inclusionary projects, shall be the lesser of the reduced rate
provided for in paragraph 1 above, or the current non-reduced rate
applicable to other types of housing developments minus the credit
provided under paragraph 2 above for units for which a connection
fee or tapping fee was previously paid, provided that said public
housing authority, non-profit organization, or other affordable
housing owner can establish the connection fee or tapping fee was
previously assessed and paid for connection with the system. If the
same cannot be established, the reduced rate provided for in
paragraph 1 above shall be assessed.
a. Connection Required.
1. Sewer Connection. The owner of every existing house, building or
structure, and the owner of every house, building or structure
hereafter to be constructed or acquired which may be occupied or
used by human beings located on their property along the line of
any public sewer created shall, at the same time the water
company taps in service and the meters installed, connect and
hookup the sewage facilities emanating from such house, building
or structure.
2. Penalty. If any person violates the provisions of this paragraph a. by
failing to comply with any order, in accordance with the provisions
hereof, within thirty (30) days after notice, the proper officials shall
file a complaint and, upon conviction, the person shall be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
b. Permission to Connect. No person shall break into the street sewer
pipes, or injure them in any manner while excavating, or make a house
connection without obtaining permission from the City Engineer or his/
her designee.
§ 18-2.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-2.3
1:586
§ 18-2.3. Prohibited Sewer Connections. [2000 Code § 18-2.3; Ord.
No. 2018-44]
No cellar drains, no area drains, no roof leaders, no sump pumps or
downspouts, and no garbage and refuse disposal units shall be connected to
the sewer system. (Garbage disposals, both residential and commercial, are
allowed to be connected provided they are used for grinding of food waste
only and are water flush operated.)
§ 18-3. BUREAU OF ROADS AND SEWERS.
§ 18-3.1. Duties of Officials. [2000 Code § 18-3.1; Ord. No. 2961;
Ord. No. 2018-44]
§ 18-3.2. Action of Agents or Employees of the Sewer Utility. [2000
Code § 18-3.2; Ord. No. 2961; Ord. No. 2018-44]
No agent or employee of the Sewer Utility shall have authority to bind the
Sewer Utility or the City by any promise, agreement or representation not
provided for by this chapter unless such authority is given in writing and
approved by a resolution of the Mayor and City Council.
§ 18-3.3. Inspections. [2000 Code § 18-3.3; Ord. No. 2961; Ord. No.
2018-44]
a. Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Bureau of Roads
and Sewers. Except for general collection duties assigned herein, the
City Engineer or such other official as authorized by the City shall
exercise general supervision and control and shall be in direct charge of
the sewer system of the City, including all physical plants and
properties connected therewith. The supervision and control is subject
to the provisions of this chapter and such other ordinances and
resolutions as may be passed from time to time by the Mayor and City
Council.
b. The Sewer Utility Collection Clerk, or such other person as may be
designated by the City Engineer or such other official as authorized by
the City, under the direction of the Tax Collector, shall:
1. Have charge of all the books and records of the Sewer Utility.
2. Bill and make all collections of fees for the use of sewer facilities
including opening of any streets or sidewalks for introduction or
change of sewer fixtures.
a. Entry. The City Engineer or any authorized employee of the Sewer
Utility or any person designated by the City Manager or City Engineer
or such other official as authorized by the City for that purpose may, at
all reasonable hours, enter the premises of any sewer service user for
the purposes of inspecting any water or sewer connection or service
equipment.
§ 18-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-3.3
1:587
§ 18-4. RESTRICTIONS ON SEWER USE.
§ 18-4.1. Prohibited Sewer Discharges. [2000 Code § 18-4.1; Ord.
No. 2961; Ord. No. 2018-44]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes in any portion of the sewer system of the City:
b. Fixtures and Meters. The City Engineer or such other designated
person is authorized to enter any premises as herein provided to
examine the meter; read the meter; make all necessary tests; examine
all pipes and fixtures for conformity with the provisions of this chapter;
and check the number of fixtures connected to the sewer or water
service.
c. The laterals connecting the waste water plumbing system of the
property to the collection mains of the sewer utility shall be the
responsibility of the property owner. Lateral shall mean: the physical
wastewater conveyance pipe, beginning at the point at which the pipe
penetrates (exits) the foundation of the principal structure of the
property (or ancillary structure, if one exists), and ending at the point at
which said pipe directly connects to the collection main (including the
connection itself) within the public right-of-way.
a. Liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
(150°F) degrees Fahrenheit;
b. Any water or waste which may contain more than one hundred (100
p.p.m.) parts per million by way of fat, oil, or grease;
c. Any gasoline, benzene, naphthol, fuel oil, paints, lacquers, or other
inflammable or explosive liquids, solids, or wastes including plating
solutions, chromium, zinc or other toxic heavy metals, cyanides
including solvents;
d. Any garbage or trash and medical wastes, including food and entrails;
e. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch, manure, cloth or paper diapers, or
any other solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or which otherwise interferes with the proper
operation of the sewer works;
f. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.3 or higher than 9.0 or
having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of sewage works. pH
shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution;
g. Any waters or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewer treatment
§ 18-3.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-4.1
1:588
§ 18-5. SEWER RATES.
§ 18-5.1. Sewer Rental Charges. [2000 Code § 18-5.1; Ord. No. 2660
§ I; Ord. No. 2018-44]
process or constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to create any
hazards in receiving waters of the Sewage Treatment Plant;
h. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character or
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the Sewage Treatment Plant;
i. Any noxious malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public
nuisance.
j. Water waste containing phenols;
k. Any water or waste containing or causing excessive discoloration;
l. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of waste constituting "slugs"
(fifteen (15) minutes or more of flow of five (5) times the average
twenty-four (24) hour flow on property under normal operating
conditions);
m. Wastewater containing unusual B.O.D. (Biochemical Oxygen Demand
under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days when incubated at
twenty (20°C) degrees Centigrade);
n. Waste or wastewater containing radioactive material.
a. The Mayor and City Council, by separate resolution, shall impose a
sewer rental charge for the use, operation, maintenance and
construction of the sewer system within the geographical limits of the
sewer area of the City upon the owners of the properties within the
limits of the sewer area and served thereby at the rates therein
established as follows. In the event that no rate resolution is passed, the
existing rates shall continue in effect.
Annual flat/demand/customer service rate shall be as calculated below
in subsection 18-6.1; plus
1. A charge for each building and/or unit in which water is consumed
which shall be based upon the rate per thousand gallons or part
thereof consumed in such building or unit.
2. Where the use of property is producing waste material, which
imposed a burden on the sewerage system or requires
pretreatment, an additional surcharge against the property
producing the waste commensurate with the added costs shall be
fixed.
3. Repealed.
§ 18-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5.1
1:589
b. The user charge, as fixed by the City, shall be reviewed and revised
periodically to reflect actual costs of treatment works operation.
c. As per Senate Bill 1247 in 2018:
1. (a) The City shall provide a credit applicable toward a connection
or tapping fee to be charged for a reconnection of a
disconnected property that was previously connected to the
sewerage system, provided that:
(1) the property has been connected to the sewerage system
for at least 20 years; and
(2) service charges have been paid for the property in at least
one of the last five years.
(b) The credit required under paragraph (a) above shall be
calculated as follows:
(1) If the reconnection does not require any new physical
connection or does not increase the nature or size of the
service or the number of services units, or does not expand
the use of the sewerage system, the credit shall be equal in
amount to the new connection or tapping fee.
(2) If the reconnection requires a new physical connection,
increases the nature or size of the service or the number of
service units, or expands the use of the sewerage system,
the credit shall be equal in amount to any connection or
tapping fee previously paid for the property, and the
sewerage authority shall charge the difference between
the credit and the connection or tapping fee for the new
use or class.
(3) If no connection or tapping fee was ever paid for the
property, but all service charges due and owing on the
property have been paid for at least twenty (20) years, the
credit shall be equal in amount to the new connection or
tapping fee; provided, however, that any charges due and
owing pursuant to paragraph (2) above shall be paid.
(c) If no connection or tapping fee was ever paid for a
disconnected property that is to be reconnected and which was
previously connected to the sewerage system for at least
twenty (20) years, the sewerage authority shall charge, in
addition to any amount due and owing after application of a
credit pursuant to this section, a connection or tapping fee
equal to the lesser of:
(1) Twenty (20%) percent of the service charges that would
have been paid based upon the usage for the last full year
that the property was connected to the sewerage system
§ 18-5.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-5.1
1:590
for the period from the date of the disconnection from the
sewerage system to the date of the new connection; or
(2) the new connection fee.
(d) A credit shall not be allowed under this section for a property
that has been disconnected from the sewerage system for more
than five (5) years.
(e) As used in this section, "disconnected property" means a
property that has been physically disconnected from the
sewerage system or a property not physically disconnected but
to which service has been discontinued without payments
being made. A "disconnected property" shall not include a
property that has been temporarily disconnected from the
sewerage system or to which service has been discontinued
without payments being made for less than twelve (12)
consecutive months and is being reconnected as it existed,
prior to the temporary disconnection or discontinuance of
service.
2. (a) For a property connected to the sewerage system for less than
20 years, the City shall charge an additional connection or
tapping fee for an addition, alteration, or change in use that
materially increases the level of use and imposes a greater
demand on the sewerage system, but does not involve a new
physical connection of the property to the sewerage system.
(b) The connection or tapping fee authorized by paragraph (a)
above shall be equal to the amount by which the increased use
and demand on the sewerage system exceeds the use and
demand that existed prior to such addition, alteration, or
change in use.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude a local
unit operating a county or municipal sewerage facility from
charging a new or additional connection or tapping fee for any
new or additional connection of a property to the sewerage
system, or for any increase in the size of an existing connection
or for any new construction of additional service units
connected to the sewerage system that materially increases
the level of use or demand on the sewerage system.
(d) As used in this section, "materially increases" means any
increase in the number of service units; or any other change
which increases the level of use or demand on the sewerage
system by fifteen (15%) percent or more over the highest
actual annual use and demand that existed during the prior
10-year period immediately preceding the addition, alteration,
or change in use; provided, however, that, if the property has
been connected to the sewerage system for less than ten (10)
§ 18-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5.1
1:591
years, the average level of use and demand shall be calculated
based on the actual period of connection.
3. (a) The City shall provide a credit applicable toward a connection
or tapping fee to be charged for a reconnection of a
disconnected property that was previously connected to the
sewerage system, provided that:
(1) the property has been connected to the sewerage system
for at least twenty (20) years; and
(2) service charges have been paid for the property in at least
one of the last five (5) years.
(b) The credit required under paragraph (a) above shall be
calculated as follows:
(1) If the reconnection does not require any new physical
connection or does not increase the nature or size of the
service or the number of services units, or does not expand
the use of the sewerage system, the credit shall be equal in
amount to the new connection or tapping fee.
(2) If the reconnection requires a new physical connection,
increases the nature or size of the service or the number of
service units, or expands the use of the sewerage system,
the credit shall be equal in amount to any connection or
tapping fee previously paid for the property, and the local
unit shall charge the difference between the credit and the
connection or tapping fee for the new use or class.
(3) If no connection or tapping fee was ever paid for the
property, but all service charges due and owing on the
property have been paid for at least twenty (20) years, the
credit shall be equal in amount to the new connection or
tapping fee; provided, however, that any charges due and
owing pursuant to paragraph (2) above shall be paid.
(c) If no connection or tapping fee was ever paid for a
disconnected property that is to be reconnected and which was
previously connected to the sewerage system for at least
twenty (20) years, the local unit shall charge, in addition to any
amount due and owing after application of a credit pursuant to
this section, a connection or tapping fee equal to the lesser of:
(1) Twenty (20%) percent of the service charges that would
have been paid based upon the usage for the last full year
that the property was connected to the sewerage system
for the period from the date of the disconnection from the
sewerage system to the date of the new connection; or
(2) The new connection fee.
§ 18-5.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-5.1
1:592
(d) A credit shall not be allowed under this section for a property
that has been disconnected from the sewerage system for more
than five (5) years.
(e) As used in this section, "disconnected property" means a
property that has been physically disconnected from the
sewerage system or a property not physically disconnected but
to which service has been discontinued without payments
being made. A "disconnected property" shall not include a
property that has been temporarily disconnected from the
sewerage system or to which service has been discontinued
without payments being made for less than twelve (12)
consecutive months and is being reconnected as it existed,
prior to the temporary disconnection or discontinuance of
service.
4. (a) A local unit operating a county or municipal sewerage facility
shall establish within its rates or schedules a fifty (50%)
percent reduction in the connection fee or tapping fee assessed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11 for new connections to the
sewerage system which is to be charged to public housing
authorities, non-profit organizations building affordable
housing projects, and any other affordable housing, including
affordable housing units in inclusionary projects.
(b) For units previously connected to the local unit's system that
were demolished or refurbished to allow for new affordable
housing units and for which a connection or tapping fee was
previously paid, a local unit operating a county or municipal
sewerage facility shall establish within its rates or schedules a
credit against the connection fee or tapping fee to be assessed
for connection with the sewerage system to public housing
authorities, non-profit organizations building affordable
projects, and to any other affordable housing, including
affordable housing units in inclusionary projects. The credit
shall be the connection fee or tapping fee previously assessed
and paid, for connection with the sewerage system for units
previously connected to the local unit's system.
(c) The connection fee or tapping fee assessable against a public
housing authority, non-profit organization, or other affordable
housing owner, for units previously connected to the local
unit's system that were demolished or refurbished to allow for
new affordable housing units, including affordable housing
units in inclusionary projects, shall be the lesser of the reduced
rate provided for in subsection a. of this section, or the current
non-reduced rate applicable to other types of housing
developments minus the credit provided under paragraph (b)
above for units for which a connection fee or tapping fee was
previously paid, provided that such public housing authority,
non-profit organization, or other affordable housing owner can
§ 18-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5.1
1:593
§ 18-5.2. Costs Not Attributable to Users to Be Distributed Among
Users. [2000 Code § 18-5.2; Ord. No. 2018-44]
The costs of operation and maintenance for flows not directly attributable
to users (i.e., infiltration and/or inflow) if any, shall be distributed among
the various classes of users and shall be included in the charges set by this
section.
establish the connection fee or tapping fee was previously
assessed and paid for connection with the system. If such
previous assessment and payment cannot be established, the
reduced rate provided for in paragraph (a) above shall be
assessed.
5. (a) For a property connected to the water supply system for less
than twenty (20) years, the City shall charge an additional
connection or tapping fee for an addition, alteration, or change
in use that materially increases the level of use and imposes a
greater demand on the water supply system, but does not
involve a new physical connection of the property to the water
supply system.
(b) The connection or tapping fee authorized by subsection a. of
this section shall be equal to the amount by which the
increased use and demand on the water supply system exceeds
the use and demand that existed prior to such addition,
alteration, or change in use.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude a local
unit operating a county or municipal water supply facility from
charging a new or additional connection or tapping fee for any
new or additional connection of a property to the water supply
system, or for any increase in the size of an existing connection
or for any new construction of additional service units
connected to the water supply system that materially increases
the level of use or demand on the water supply system.
(d) As used in this section, "materially increases" means any
increase in the number of service units; or any other change
which increases the level of use or demand on the water supply
system by fifteen (15%) percent or more over the highest
actual annual use and demand that existed during the prior
10-year period immediately preceding the addition, alteration,
or change in use; provided, however, that, if the property has
been connected to the water supply system for less than ten
(10) years, the average level of use and demand shall be
calculated based on the actual period of connection.
§ 18-5.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-5.3
1:594
§ 18-5.3. Notification of Rate and User Charge. [2000 Code § 18-5.3;
Ord. No. 2018-44]
Each rate payer shall be notified at least annually of the rate and that
portion of the user charge which are attributable to the wastewater
treatment services (cost of operation, maintenance and repair).
§ 18-5.4. Water Used in Manufacture of a Product. [2000 Code
§ 18-5.4; Ord. No. 2018-44]
Water used solely as an ingredient in the manufacture of a product such as
ice or beverage making not for on-premises consumption, if such water is
metered separately by the water company, is exempt from this section.
§ 18-5.5. Charge for Uncollected Check. [2000 Code § 18-5.5; Ord.
No. 2018-44]
A charge of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars shall be added to each and any
account(s) for which there is any uncollectible check or draft. Such draft or
check shall not be redeposited nor resubmitted for collection to the bank or
draft depository.
§ 18-5.6. Sewer Connection Fees; Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2660;
Ord. No. 2964; Ord. No. 2018-44]
a. In addition to sewer service charges imposed under subsection 18-5.1,
a connection fee in accordance with the terms of this section shall be
imposed for connection of any property to the sewerage system. The
connection fee shall be uniform within each class of users and shall be
calculated in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-11. The Mayor and
Council of the City of Asbury Park shall, by separate resolution,
determine the sewerage connection fee on an annual basis at the end of
each budget year, or as soon thereafter as an audit may be completed to
properly determine the capital base of the City of Asbury Park in its
sewerage system. The proposed revisions to the sewer connection fee
shall be the subject of a public hearing.
b. Connection fees shall be paid at the time that a sewer permit
application is made for either service to a new residential or
nonresidential unit, building, facility or structure or, as required by this
section, for additional capacity for an existing nonresidential use. The
issuance of a valid sewer permit shall be a condition precedent to the
issuance of a building permit for any new residential or nonresidential
unit, building, facility or structure or existing nonresidential building,
facility or structure for which an additional building permit is required.
c. Connection fees for nonresidential users shall be based upon the
projected usage multiplied by the rate per gallon per day of the sewer
connection fee. A minimum sewer connection charge per unit for
nonresidential users shall be imposed, in an amount equal to the
residential connection fee.
§ 18-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5.6
1:595
§ 18-6. SCHEDULE OF RATES AND SERVICE CHARGES.
d. Projected flows for nonresidential users shall be determined by the City
Engineer pursuant to the current version of N.J.S.A. 7:14A-23,
"Technical Requirements for Treatment Works Applications," whenever
practicable. In the event that a type of use is not listed in N.J.A.C.
7:14A-23, the City Engineer shall use his or her best judgment in
determining estimated sewer usage. The City may adopt additions or
exceptions to the flow projections contained in N.J.A.C. 7:14-23.3 by
resolution. For the purpose of calculations, any reference, to "seat" or
"person" in N.J.A.C. 7:14A-23 or in any projected flow criteria adopted
by the City shall be deemed to mean the maximum permitted occupancy
established pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code and/or the
Uniform Fire Code.
e. In the event that an application is made for sewer service to a
nonresidential building or unit for which the types or sizes of the uses
therein have not been determined by the applicant, or are subject to
change in the future, a connection fee shall be assessed based upon the
maximum potential estimated sewer usage in the building or unit.
f. An application for additional capacity shall be made by any existing
nonresidential user whenever there is an increase in the projected
sewer usage for any existing building or unit resulting from an increase
in size in the building or unit. A connection fee shall be charged to the
nonresidential user based upon the increase in estimated sewer usage
associated with the aforesaid increase in size.
g. In the event that an application is made to reinstate sewer service to a
residential structure that was previously abandoned or terminated
when the prior structure was demolished or substantially totally
destroyed because of catastrophe, no additional connection fee shall be
due provided that the application for service is made within two (2)
years of the date of the prior termination of service.
h. In the event that an application is made to reinstate sewer service to a
non-residential structure that was previously abandoned or terminated
when the prior structure was demolished or substantially totally
destroyed because of catastrophe, no additional connection fee shall be
due, provided that: (1) the applicant has continued to pay sewer service
charges for the property on a quarterly basis as those charges became
due, and (2) there is no change in the estimated sewer usage of the
building. In the event that condition (1) herein has been satisfied, but
there will be an increase in the estimated sewer usage of the building,
then the applicant shall pay a connection fee only on the amount of the
increase in the estimated sewer usage.
§ 18-5.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-6.1
1:596
§ 18-6.1. Flat/Demand/Customer Service Charge and Tap/
Connection Charge. [2000 Code § 18-6.1; Ord. No. 2018-44]
Any property owner connected to the sewer system or who is required to
connect to the sewer system shall pay a full annual charge in accordance
with the following schedule: (See subsection 18-6.3 for establishment of
fees.)
Meter Size Service Charge Tap Fee
5/8 inch
3/4 inch
1 inch
1 1/2 inch
2 inch
3 inch
4 inch
6 inch
8 inch
§ 18-6.2. Charge for Annual Sewer Service for Each Property. [2000
Code § 18-6.2; Ord. No. 2018-44]
The amount to be paid for annual sewer service for each property connected
or required to be connected shall be charged not less than one (1) flat/
demand/customer service charge plus a charge equal to fifty (50) times per
one thousand (1,000) gallons of water computed in the premises as reported
to the Sewer Utility by the privately-owned water company servicing the
property.
§ 18-6.3. Amounts to Be Established by Resolution. [2000 Code
§ 18-6.3; Ord. No. 2018-44]
The above amounts are to be set by resolution as indicated in this section
by the Mayor and Council on an annual basis or shall remain as set for the
previous year if no new resolution is passed.
§ 18-6.4. Meter and Services Exempt from Charges. [Ord. No. 2929;
Ord. No. 2018-44]
a. A property owner may request an exemption from the payment of
monthly sewage charges for the following water metered service lines:
1. A metered fire service line that is not connected, by-passed or
attached utilizing any other means of connection to the domestic
water side of the building.
§ 18-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-6.4
1:597
§ 18-7. TIME OF PAYMENT OF SEWER RENTAL CHARGES. [2000
Code § 18-7; Ord. No. 2018-44]
Sewer rental shall be payable to the Sewer Utility Clerk or such other
persons appointed by the City, in advance, on a quarterly basis each year
and every year thereafter, or such time as designated by the City of Asbury
Park Sewer Utility.
§ 18-8. USE OF WELLS; OTHER USES.
2. A lawn irrigation and/or lawn sprinkler system that is not
connected, by-passed or attached utilizing any other means of
connection to the domestic water side of the building.
b. Application Procedure.
1. The applicant shall file an application entitled "Request for
Metered Exemption Charges" with the Plumbing Subcode Official
for the City.
2. The applicant shall provide reasonable access, during normal
business hours, to the Plumbing Subcode Official to review and
certify that no cross connections exist and that the metering device
seeking exemption is not tied into the domestic line.
c. Certification Procedure.
1. Upon inspection and approval by the Plumbing Subcode Official, a
copy of the approved application shall be forwarded to the Tax
Collector or other City agency that has responsibility for assessing
those charges.
2. The Tax Collector or other City agency having responsibility for
assessing sewer charges, shall then exempt that metering device
for the next sewer billing cycle and each and every cycle thereafter.
d. Penalties and Enforcement.
1. Any metering device that has been granted an exemption but which
has been illegally connected on the domestic side of the water
service to the building, shall be subject to a daily fine equal to
monthly charges that would have been incurred from the date of
violation to the date of exemption granted.
2. The City reserves the right to discontinue sewer service if the
improper reconnection jeopardizes any requirements of the laws
and regulations of the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 18-6.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-8.1
1:598
§ 18-8.1. Premises Served by Wells. [2000 Code § 18-8.1; Ord. No.
2018-44]
Houses, buildings, stores, premises, and apartment units being served by
their own wells, but being connected to the sewer system, shall have their
respective wells properly metered by the Sewer Utility at the owner's
expense and shall pay the sewage rate as determined by the meter and
provided for in this section, with the exception of wells used solely for
watering lawns.
§ 18-8.2. Rate Charges and Other Cases. [2000 Code § 18-8.2; Ord.
No. 2018-44]
The sewer rental in all cases not covered by this section and where the
use of property is other than as permitted by the zoning ordinance of
the City where a special use permit is required or for any industrial use
which produces a waste material discharge in the sewer system shall be
established by the City by separate contract in such amount as would be
proportionate to its use of the waste sewer system.
§ 18-9. DELINQUENT PAYMENTS.
§ 18-9.1. Rental Charge Payable. [2000 Code § 18-9.1; Ord. No.
2018-44]
Delinquent payments, late charges, interest and costs shall become a lien
upon the property of the rate payer for which the payments are delinquent.
§ 18-9.2. Interest Charged. [2000 Code § 18-9.2; Ord. No. 2018-44]
If the sewer rental charge imposed herein is not paid on the date due, it
shall become delinquent and shall bear interest thereon at the rate of eight
(8%) percent per annum on the first one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00)
dollars of the delinquency and eighteen (18%) percent per annum on any
amount in excess of one thousand five hundred ($1,500.00) dollars to be
calculated from the date the sewer rental charge was payable until the date
of actual payment.
§ 18-9.3. Charges Not Paid and Disconnection(s). [2000 Code
§ 18-9.3; Ord. No. 2018-44]
a. If any sewer rental charge payment herein shall remain unpaid in whole
or in part for a period of six (6) consecutive months, the City shall have
the right to enter upon the property and disconnect the property sewer
system from the City sewer system in such a manner as shall be
appropriate under the circumstances. The rate payer shall be
responsible for all costs involved in the disconnecting and reconnecting
of the sewer system, which shall be paid to the City prior to
reconnection.
b.
§ 18-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-9.3
1:599
1. The City shall provide a credit applicable toward a connection or
tapping fee to be charged for a reconnection of a disconnected
property that was previously connected to the water supply system,
provided that:
(a) the property has been connected to the water supply system
for at least twenty (20) years; and
(b) service charges have been paid for the property in at least one
of the last five (5) years.
2. The credit required under subsection a. of this section shall be
calculated as follows:
(a) If the reconnection does not require any new physical
connection or does not increase the nature or size of the
service or the number of services units, or does not expand the
use of the water supply system, the credit shall be equal in
amount to the new connection or tapping fee.
(b) If the reconnection requires a new physical connection,
increases the nature or size of the service or the number of
service units, or expands the use of the water supply system,
the credit shall be equal in amount to any connection or
tapping fee previously paid for the property, and the local unit
shall charge the difference between the credit and the
connection or tapping fee for the new use or class.
(c) If no connection or tapping fee was ever paid for the property,
but all service charges due and owing on the property have
been paid for at least twenty (20) years, the credit shall be
equal in amount to the new connection or tapping fee;
provided, however, that any charges due and owing pursuant
to paragraph (b) above shall be paid.
3. If no connection or tapping fee was ever paid for a disconnected
property that is to be reconnected and which was previously
connected to the water supply system for at least twenty (20) years,
the local unit shall charge, in addition to any amount due and owing
after application of a credit pursuant to this section, a connection
or tapping fee equal to the lesser of:
(a) Twenty (20%) percent of the service charges that would have
been paid based upon the usage for the last full year that the
property was connected to the water supply system for the
period from the date of the disconnection from the water
supply system to the date of the new connection; or
(b) The new connection fee.
§ 18-9.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-9.3
1:600
§ 18-9.4. Appeals. [2000 Code § 18-9.4; Ord. No. 2590; Ord. No.
2018-44]
§ 18-10. CAPPING OF SEWER LINE REQUIRED PRIOR TO
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS. [2000 Code § 18-10; Ord. No.
2018-44]
Any sewer shall be capped before there is any demolition of a building.
§ 18-11. PENALTY. [2000 Code § 18-11; New; Ord. No. 2018-44]
The penalty for violation of any provisions of this chapter, where no other
penalty, fine, or imprisonment is provided, shall be, upon conviction, the
penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5. This penalty shall be in addition to
any different type of penalty or sanction provided for in this section.
4. A credit shall not be allowed under this section for a property that
has been disconnected from the water supply system for more than
five (5) years.
5. As used in this section, "disconnected property" means a property
that has been physically disconnected from the water supply
system or a property not physically disconnected but to which
service has been discontinued without payments being made. A
"disconnected property" shall not include a property that has been
temporarily disconnected from the water supply system or to which
service has been discontinued without payments being made for
less than twelve (12) consecutive months and is being reconnected
as it existed, prior to the temporary disconnection or
discontinuance of service.
a. In the event any person shall dispute any rental charge or late fee, he/
she shall file with the Sewer Collection Clerk, or such other designated
person, his/her reason for disputing the rental charge or tap fee on the
form provided by the Sewer Utility Clerk within fifteen (15) days of his/
her receipt of the charges.
b. Within fifteen (15) days of the filing of the dispute, the City
representative shall advise the rate payer, in writing, of the decision. In
the event the rate payer is not satisfied with the decision, they may file
an appeal on forms provided by the Sewer Utility within fifteen (15)
days of the City representative's decision to the Appeals Board.
c. The Appeals Board shall, within thirty (30) days, hold a hearing as to
only those issues set forth in the rate payer's appeal forms. After the
day of the hearing, the Appeals Board shall render its decision within
ten (10) days, which shall be final and binding upon all parties.
d. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the City Manager or his/her
designee, City Finance Officer and City Tax Assessor.
§ 18-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-12
1:601
§ 18-12. SEWER CONNECTION OR EXTENSION PERMIT.
§ 18-12.1. Purpose. [2000 Code § 18-12.1; Ord. No. 2018-44]
The purpose of this section is to institute a procedure for obtaining approval
for sewer connections or endorsements for sewer extensions, as defined
herein.
§ 18-12.2. Definitions. [2000 Code § 18-12.2; Ord. No. 2018-44]
As used in this section:
ACTUAL FLOW — shall mean the volume of sewage and other wastes which
a domestic treatment works receives; actual flow shall be determined by
the arithmetic average of the metered daily volumes of waste received at a
treatment works for the preceding period of three (3) consecutive calendar
months. Where peak flows have been determined by the City Engineer or
his/her designee to be seasonal in nature, the seasonal peak flow shall be
used in determining actual flow.
ADEQUATE CONVEYANCE CAPACITY — shall mean that in the downstream
sewers, the peak dry weather flow does not exceed eighty (80%) percent of
the depth of the pipe and the peak wet weather flow does not result in the
overflows or discharges from any manhole.
COMMITTED FLOW or PROJECTED FLOW — shall mean the sum of the
actual flow plus the sum of all flows which are anticipated from connections
which have been approved but are not yet in operation. The flow to be
anticipated from any such connection shall be that flow referred to in the
approval from the City.
CONNECTION — shall mean any physical or operational change to a
collection system or to the plumbing or piping of any building, project
facility or other structure, either proposed or existing, for which a building
permit or other municipal approval including site plan and subdivision
approval is required, which connects directly or indirectly to any portion
of a domestic treatment works and for which the projected design flow
exceeds four hundred (400) gallons per day, but is less than two thousand
(2,000) gallons per day.
CONNECTION APPROVAL — shall mean an approval permit to construct
and operate a sewer connection.
DESIGN FLOW — shall mean the average volume of wastewater, which a
domestic treatment works was designed to treat or convey, or the maximum
permissible volume of flow to a domestic treatment works as established
by a NJPDES permit, or a treatment works approval, whichever permit or
approval is most recently issued.
DOMESTIC TREATMENT WORKS — shall mean the publicly operated
treatment works located in Asbury Park which treats and processes
domestic wastes together with any groundwater, surface water, stormwater
or industrial process water that may be present.
§ 18-12 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-12.2
1:602
ENDORSEMENT — shall mean a resolution, adopted by the City Council,
endorsing the project for which an extension is required for purposes
of permitting application to be made to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection for Treatment Works Approval.
EXTENSION — shall mean a connection, as defined herein, for which the
design flow equals or exceeds two thousand (2,000) gallons per day.
MAXIMUM SEWAGE TREATMENT CAPACITY — shall mean the hydraulic,
biological or sludge handling capability necessary to meet the terms and
conditions of the NJPDES permit.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, owner or operator of a treatment works, political
subdivision of this State or any State or State agency.
SEWAGE AUTHORITY — shall mean the City of Asbury Park.
WATERS OF THE STATE — shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
streams, springs, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 18-12.3. Sewer Connection/Extension Approvals. [2000 Code
§ 18-12.3; Ord. No. 2018-44]
The City, its boards, officers and agents shall not permit a street to be
opened or a connection, as herein defined, to be made unless an approval
has been granted for such connection by resolution of the Governing Body
of the City pursuant to the procedure set forth herein.
§ 18-12.4. Conditional Approval of Building Projects. [2000 Code
§ 18-12.4; Ord. No. 2018-44]
The City, its boards, officers and agents shall condition the approval of any
building projects by way of preliminary or final subdivision or site plan
approval, building permit or other form of approval, which will require a
sewer connection, upon the terms and requirements of this section.
§ 18-12.5. Connection Application. [2000 Code § 18-12.5; Ord. No.
2018-44]
a. Procedure. The Office of Planning and Zoning shall provide the
applicant with copies of these regulations, a connection/extension
application form, a request for endorsement form (for extensions only)
and information on water conservation plumbing.
1. The applicant shall submit the application for a connection/
extension along with the appropriate documentation, including a
water conservation plan, to the Office of Planning and Zoning.
2. After review of the application, the Office of Planning and Zoning
shall notify the City Council of the results of its review. Before
making a decision, the City may request that additional
§ 18-12.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-12.5
1:603
§ 18-12.6. Violations and Penalties. [2000 Code § 18-12.7; Ord. No.
2018-44]
§ 18-12.7. Regulations. [2000 Code § 18-12.8; Ord. No. 2018-44]
The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to enact
reasonable and necessary regulations for the purpose of implementing this
section.
§ 18-13. (RESERVED)
documentation be supplied. When additional information is not
supplied as requested, the City may deny the application and
reapplication will be necessary.
3. If the Council finds that the submitted water conservation and
plumbing plan is acceptable, it shall approve the application by
resolution. The applicant shall submit a copy of the resolution to
the Department of Public Works prior to the issuance of a street
opening permit.
4. If the City Council finds that the application constitutes an
extension, as defined herein, it may endorse the extension by
resolution for purposes of obtaining the Treatment Works Approval
from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, as
required under N.J.A.C. 7:14-2.1 and 7:14A-12.1 et seq.
5. Upon receipt of a Treatment Works Approval for sewer extension,
the applicant shall submit copies of the approval, with a copy of the
resolution of the City Council endorsing the extension, to the
Department of Public Maintenance prior to the issuance of street
opening permits to the connections to the treatment works.
b. Transfer of Approval. A connection/extension approval granted for a
specific property is not transferable to any other property and is only
transferable to another person if the original circumstances which
justified granting the approval have not changed.
c. Other Obligations. The granting of a connection/extension approval by
the City does not relieve the applicant from complying with all other
State and local requirements, including 201 Facilities and 208 Water
Quality Management Plans and obtaining the requisite treatment works
approval from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
for extensions.
a. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
b. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of this section exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 18-12.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-14
1:604
§ 18-14. REGULATIONS FOR THE DISCHARGE OF WATERS AND
WASTES INTO SANITARY SEWERS AND STORM SEWERS.
(See also Chapter XX, Environmental Regulations)
§ 18-14.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 18-14.1]
As used in this section:
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — shall mean the
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter
under standard laboratory procedures in five (5) days at twenty (20°C)
degrees Centigrade expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING SEWER — shall mean the extension from the building drain to
the public sewer.
CITY — shall mean the City of Asbury Park, County of Monmouth, State of
New Jersey, or the City Council of Asbury Park, acting through the Mayor or
his/her designee.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) — shall mean the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Administrator
or other duly authorized official of the agency.
GARBAGE — shall mean solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage
and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trades or business, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch,
lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.
NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION or
(NJDEP) — shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection or, where appropriate, the Commissioner or other duly
authorized official of the agency.
PERSONS — shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group, or governmental entity, or their representatives,
agents or assignors.
pH — shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the
concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in moles per liter of solution.
PUBLIC SEWER — shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
SANITARY SEWER — shall mean a sewer which carries sewage and to
which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SANITARY WASTE — shall mean the wash water, culinary waste and liquid
waste containing human excreta and similar matter. Sanitary waste does
not include industrial waste.
§ 18-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-14.1
1:605
SEWAGE — shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present
(synonymous with "waste" and "wastewater")
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — shall mean any arrangements or devices
and structures used for treating sewage and owned by the City.
SEWAGE WORKS — shall mean all facilities owned by the City for
collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER — shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — shall mean any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste
which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow
exceeds for any period or duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more
than five (5) times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration of flows
during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN or STORM SEWER — shall mean a sewer which carries
storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial
wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — shall mean solids that either float on the surface
of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering under standard laboratory procedure.
WATERCOURSE — shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs,
either continuously or intermittently.
§ 18-14.2. Use of Sanitary and Storm Sewers. [2000 Code § 18-14.2]
a. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters
into any sanitary sewer.
b. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a
natural outlet approved by the City. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the City to
a storm sewer or natural outlet.
c. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other waste to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process, constituting a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plan.
§ 18-14.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-14.2
1:606
3. Solid or viscous substances, either whole or ground by garbage
grinders, in quantities or of such size capable of causing
obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works.
d. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in
the opinion of the City that such water can harm either the sewer,
sewerage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on
the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public
property or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the
acceptability of these wastes, the City will give consideration to such
factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature
of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment
plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plan and
other pertinent factors. The City will be guided in forming an opinion on
the availability of wastes by accepted standards of practice such as
those used by the EPA and the Water Pollution Control Federation. The
substances prohibited are:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty (150°F) degrees Fahrenheit (65°C).
2. Any water or waste containing more than two hundred (200) mg/l
of oil or grease of non-petroleum origin or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between
thirty-two (32°F) and one hundred fifty (150°F) degrees Fahrenheit
(0° and 65°C).
3. Any waters or wastes containing, on an average monthly basis,
more than one hundred (100) mg/l of oil or grease of petroleum
origin, nor shall the concentration in any single sample exceed one
hundred fifty (150) mg/l.
4. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odorproducing
substances in concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the City as necessary after treatment of the
composite sewage to meet the requirements of the State, Federal
or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
5. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the City in compliance with
applicable State or Federal regulations.
6. Any waters or wastes having a pH of less than 5.5 or greater than
9.5.
7. Any waters or wastes containing:
§ 18-14.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-14.2
1:607
(a) A BOD or Suspended Solids concentration in excess of 350 mg/
l without first obtaining specific approval from the City.
(b) Excessive discoloration.
(c) Unusual chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the
sewage treatment works.
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
8. Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processed
employed, or which are amenable to treatment only to such degree
that the sewage treatment plan effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge
to the receiving waters.
e. The disposal into the public sewer system of any pollutant by any
person shall comply with Federal standards promulgated by the EPA
pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act and those of the NJDEP.
f. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the City, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand
or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall be a
type and capacity approved by the City and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
g. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided
for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in
satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
h. When required by the City, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole located at a point on the sewer following all waste discharges,
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans
approved by the City. The installation shall be by the owner at his/her
expense and shall be maintained by him/her so as to be safe and
accessible at all times.
i. All laboratory analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to
which reference is made in this section shall be performed by NJDEP
and EPA certified laboratories in accordance with approved laboratory
procedures. All measurements, tests and analyses shall be determined
at the control manhole which shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
§ 18-14.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-14.2
1:608
§ 18-14.3. Damage to Sewer System Prohibited. [2000 Code
§ 18-14.3]
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 18-14.4. Powers and Authority of Inspectors. [2000 Code
§ 18-14.4]
§ 18-14.5. Violations and Penalties. [2000 Code § 18-14.5]
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb and property.
j. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern.
k. The owner of any property must obtain approval by the City prior to
commencement of construction of all building sewer connections to the
sewage work. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a
building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, and all connections to
the sewage works shall be designed and constructed to conform to the
requirements and procedures set forth by the City and in the Building
and Plumbing Code of the City. In the absence of City Code provisions
or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures shall be as set
forth in appropriate specifications of the American Standards for
Testing Materials (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation
(WPCF) in the most current Manual of Practice, or such other standards
as the City may designate. All connections to the sewage works shall be
subject to the inspection and approval of the City. All such connections
shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the City
before installation.
a. Duly authorized employees of the City, and NJDEP and EPA
representatives bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
b. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in paragraph a., duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all
safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company.
§ 18-14.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-14.5
1:609
§ 18-14.6. Administration. [2000 Code § 18-14.6]
The City shall promulgate such rules, regulations, guidelines and standards
as may be necessary to assure the proper administration and effectuation of
this section.
§ 18-15. GREASE, OIL AND SAND; ADDITIONAL INSPECTIONS.
§ 18-15.1. Additional Inspection; Fees; Reinspection. [Ord. No.
2971]
a. Any person found to be violating any provision of this section shall be
served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
whereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such
notice, permanently abate all violations. Violation of this section may
result in termination of the disposal authorization.
b. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in this subsection shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter
I, Section 1-5 for each violation. Each day in which any violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
c. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City
by reason of each violation.
a. For all establishments within the City of Asbury Park where grease, oil
or sand is generated which has the capacity to enter the sanitary sewer
system, an annual plumbing inspection fee of one hundred ($100.00)
dollars shall be required. The City will bill each establishment in
January, and this fee must be paid no later than March 15. A contract
and evidence that the contract is in force or invoices showing that the
facilities are being properly cleaned and maintained shall be presented
with payment. Failure to pay the annual inspection fee and provide the
required proof of maintenance will prohibit the issuance of a mercantile
license for that year.
b. The Plumbing Subcode Official shall make a yearly inspection of all
establishments wherein the potential of grease, oil or sand to enter the
sanitary sewer system is present. If a facility is a constant problem for
the City, and the owner is not cooperating with the City in finding a
solution to the grease, oil or sand problems, and making the necessary
modifications to their facilities, and the Plumbing Subcode Officials are
required to make repeated inspections, then the City will charge an
additional fee of fifty ($50.00) dollars for each inspection above the
initial one covered by the aforementioned fee until the problem is
resolved.
§ 18-14.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 18-15.2
1:610
§ 18-15.2. Responsibility to Clean Interceptors; Inspections; Proof
of Maintenance. [Ord. No. 2971]
§ 18-15.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2971]
For violation of any provision of this section, and in addition to the penalties
prescribed in Sections 1-5 and 18-11 of the City Code, the maximum penalty
upon conviction of a violation shall be by a fine not to exceed five hundred
($500.00) dollars per day for the period of noncompliance.
Chapter 19
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 19-1. DEFINITIONS. [2000 Code § 19-1; Ord. No. 2599]
As used in this section:
BULK REFUSE — also known as Type 13 bulky waste, shall mean all large
items of solid waste and because of their size or weight requires handling
other than normally used for municipal waste. Bulky waste includes, but is
not limited to, such items as furniture, carpeting, and household odds and
ends.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — shall mean and include the Health
Officer or his/her agent and/or the Chief of Police or his/her agent.
a. All grease, oil and sand interceptors require periodic maintenance and
cleaning. Experience will show the optimum cleaning cycle, but
generally each interceptor should be cleaned on a weekly or monthly
basis. Existing grease interceptors of very limited capacity may require
cleaning on a daily basis. The use of enzymes or other chemicals to
attempt to keep the grease in suspension shall not be used. Experience
has shown that these compounds only deposit the grease downstream
from the trap in the sanitary sewer system. Any blockages caused by
the illegal use of enzymes will be removed by the party responsible at
their cost. The owner of an interceptor must show evidence to the City
personnel during their periodic inspection that the interceptor has been
cleaned on a regular basis. The establishment shall provide either: a
contract for yearly cleaning and evidence that the contract is in force,
or an invoice for each cleaning event.
b. If City personnel find during their annual inspection or during
inspections of the City sewer mains that the interceptor is not being
properly maintained and grease is entering the sanitary sewer system,
the owner will be responsible to clean the system or the City of Asbury
Park will perform the work and bill the owner. IF there is continued
evidence of lack of maintenance at a facility, the City reserves the right
to disconnect the violator from the sewer system. All costs to disconnect
and reconnect will be borne by the property owner.
§ 18-15.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-1
1:611
COMBUSTIBLE RUBBISH — shall mean and include rags, old clothes,
leather, rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, sawdust, tree branches, yard
trimmings, furniture and other combustible solids not considered by the
City to be of highly volatile or explosive nature.
CONSTRUCTION-DEMOLITION MATERIALS — shall mean and include any
materials generated from the construction, alteration, construction and/or
demolition of any structure or parts thereof, including but not limited to
brick, wood, siding materials, roofing materials, concrete or cinder blocks,
sheetrock, plaster, plumbing fixtures, electrical fixtures and mechanical
fixtures.
GARBAGE — also known as type 10 municipal waste, shall mean residential,
commercial and institutional solid waste generated within a community.
It shall include all waste liquids and solids resulting from the handling,
consumption, preparation and disposal of meat, fish, fowl, birds, offal and
vegetables in any form. It shall include swill, kitchen refuse, animal or
vegetable matter and offal, all decaying and decomposing substances, all
dead dogs, cats, and other animals, and all other matter commonly known
as "garbage."
LITTER — shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein, and
all other waste material which, if thrown or deposits as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE RUBBISH — shall mean and include metals, metal
shavings, tin cans, glass, crockery and other similar materials, but not the
wastes resulting from building construction or alterations work.
OFFICIAL — shall mean the Health Officer or his/her agent.
PAPER — shall mean and include newspapers, periodicals, cardboard and
all other wastepaper.
PUBLIC PLACE — shall mean any and all streets, gutters, sidewalks,
boulevards, alleys, or other public ways; any and all public parks, squares,
spaces, grounds, and buildings; and any pond, lake or stream or other body
of water within the City or its borders.
REFUSE — shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid, residential, commercial
and/or industrial wastes.
TRASH — shall mean and include all rubbish, old or useless or worthless
furniture, household effects and appliances, twigs, branches, leaves, ashes,
cinders, junk, paper, cardboard, cartons, refuse, any useless or worthless
object, and all other matter commonly known as "trash."
VEHICLES — shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person
or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 19-1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 19-1
1:612
YARD WASTE — also known as Type 23 vegetative wastes, shall include,
but is not limited to, tree limbs and branches less than three (3) inches in
diameter, hedge clippings, shrubbery, plant and flower residue.
§ 19-2. COLLECTION OF GARBAGE, TRASH, YARD WASTE AND
BULK REFUSE.
§ 19-2.1. Regulation of Collection. [2000 Code § 19-2.1; Ord. No.
2599; Ord. No. 2610; Ord. No. 3072; Ord. No. 3082]
a. Garbage and Trash. All garbage and trash may be mixed and shall be
drained of all water, and placed in a proper receptacle as described
hereafter.
b. Paper. When not placed in proper receptacles, paper shall be secured
and properly tied into bundles or other packages in a manner to prevent
any scattering while being handled by the contractor, while such
bundles or packages are located on the curblines, berm or premises
awaiting collection.
c. Yard Waste. No leaves or yard waste (as defined in subsection 19-1,
Definitions) shall be placed loose in piles within the City Right of Way
including but not limited to on the sidewalk, gutter or street where the
same may be dispersed by wind, forces of nature, passersby or traffic,
except in the following manner during the respective times:
1. Leaves piled loosely in distinctively separate piles from other yard
waste, may be placed in the street along the gutter or grass strip
for collection annually during the following time periods:
October 15th through December 31st and April 1st through May
15th
2. Yard waste either loosely piled or bundled, and leaves contained in
paper bags made especially for the purposes of leaf disposal, may
be placed at the street along the gutter or curbside for quarterly
collection, no more than one week prior to the following dates:
March 31st, June 30th, September 30th and December 31st
(a) Loose yard waste and bagged leaves placed more than one
week prior to said dates or during non-collection periods will
not be collected and shall be subject to fine.
(b) Grass clippings (lawn clippings) shall never be placed in the
street, gutter or curbside for collection whether loose, bagged
or in containers for disposal. Grass clippings disposed of in this
manner shall be subject to fine. Grass clippings should be
mulched or composted within the site of origination. Grass
clippings may also be disposed of at the Monmouth County
Reclamation Facility, 3211 Shafto Rd, Tinton Falls, NJ 07753 —
(732) 683-8686, for a nominal fee.
§ 19-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2.1
1:613
(c) Ornamental grasses (measuring in long lengths) shall be
considered yard waste and shall be disposed of as such.
Ornamental grasses are not considered grass clippings.
3. For further information or clarification, reference can be made to
the City's Recycling Calendar or contact can be made to:
Department of Public Works
732-775-0900
4. All brush, branches or yard waste (excluding grass clippings and
leaves) shall be considered rubbish and shall be placed in suitable
receptacles and disposed of in the same manner as provided
hereafter.
d. Receptacles.
1. The owner, tenant, occupant or operator of every dwelling, multiple
dwelling, hotel, rooming house, store, motel, business building,
market, restaurant, or other premises in the City, where garbage,
waste and combustible rubbish, noncombustible rubbish,
combustible trade waste and noncombustible trade waste shall
accumulate, must provide and keep on such premises sufficient and
suitable metal or plastic receptacles, cans or barrels, with covers
for all of the same, for receiving and holding the aforesaid
materials.
2. All receptacles and containers, as well as bundles used for the
purpose described in this section shall be at all times of such size
and weight as can easily be handled by one (1) man, and in no case
shall exceed sixty (60) pounds in weight. Metal and upright plastic
containers shall be provided with tight-fitting lids and shall be
constructed in such a manner so as to be reasonably insect- and
rodent-proof. All receptacles and containers shall be kept closed
and sealed in an upright position. Plastic trash and garbage bags
shall be kept closed and sealed and placed within a suitable metal
or upright plastic container if they contain garbage or any
putrescible matter.
e. Public Litter Containers. No place of business shall deposit trash,
garbage, rubber, paper or trade waste in any litter container in the City.
No individual shall deposit household trash, garbage, rubber, paper or
trade waste in any public litter container placed upon the streets and
park areas of the City. The containers are to be used by the public in
preventing litter in the streets and parks of the City.
f. Construction/Demolition Materials. All construction and/or demolition
materials must be removed forthwith from the construction or
demolition site by the contractor performing construction and/or
demolition. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to insure
that this provision is complied with.
§ 19-2.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 19-2.1
1:614
g. Placement for Collection.
1. Location. The owner, tenant, occupant or operator of every
dwelling, multiple dwelling, hotel, rooming house, store, motel,
business, building, market, restaurant, or other premises in the
City, where garbage, combustible rubbish, noncombustible
rubbish, combustible trade waste and noncombustible trade waste
shall accumulate, shall, on the scheduled days for collection, place
or have placed in proper and suitable receptacles or containers, as
set forth in this section, all garbage, rubbish, waste, ashes, trash
and other refuse materials, as defined in this section, at or adjacent
to the curbline outside of the building proper where the same will
be easily accessible to the collector. Receptacles awaiting
collection shall be stored or kept in such places so as not to become
a nuisance to the occupants of any dwelling adjacent thereto. When
not set out for collection, as herein provided, and after collection,
all receptacles for trash or garbage, or both, whether empty or
partially-filled or fully-filled, shall be kept in the rear of the
residence or place of business, or location from which collected,
and not upon any part or portion of the front or side yards of the
premises, unless otherwise recommended by the Health Officer
and approved by the City Manager or his/her designee.
2. Time. The owner, tenant, occupant or operator of every dwelling,
multiple dwelling, hotel, rooming house, store, motel, business,
building, market, restaurant, or other premises in the City, where
garbage, combustible rubbish, noncombustible rubbish,
combustible trade waste and noncombustible trade waste shall
accumulate, or any other person, shall not place or cause to be
placed, or permit to remain on the curbline, berm, or any portion of
the street or sidewalk, or any part portion of the front yard or side
yards of the premises, any receptacle, bundle, bag, can, or
container or barrel, whether metal, plastic or otherwise, which
shall contain garbage, trash, paper, rubbish, ashes, waste or other
refuse material, prior to sunset of the day preceding the collection
pick-up date or after 6:00 a.m. of the day of collection, and shall not
allow or permit any empty receptacles, cans, containers or barrels
of any kind to remain on the curbline, berm, or any portion of the
street or sidewalk or any part or portion of the front yard or side
yards of the premises, after 6:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
h. Residential Collection.
1. Garbage and refuse generated by residential premises shall be
placed at curbside adjacent to residential premises for collection
on the pick-up dates designated by the City, and shall consist of no
more than five (5) containers consisting of upright ridged
containers with tight fitting lids or secure plastic bags, or secure
bundles, or secure nonrecyclable boxes, or any combination
thereof, which shall be placed at curb for collection per pick-up day
per dwelling unit, and in no case shall any container and its
§ 19-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2.1
1:615
contents exceed sixty (60) pounds in weight, and in no case shall
the aggregate of all containers and contents exceed three hundred
(300) pounds in weight per dwelling unit per pick-up day.
2. Bulk refuse generated per residential premises shall be placed at
curbside adjacent to residential premises on pick-up dates
designated by the City, and shall consist of no more than three (3)
large bulk items, and in no case shall any large bulk items exceeds
one hundred twenty (120) pounds in weight, nor shall the total
aggregate weight exceed three hundred sixty (360) pounds. Any
premises having more than one (1) dwelling unit shall be limited to
placing no more than six (6) large bulk items out for curbside
collection per pick-up day in the manner described herein.
3. Yard waste generated by residential premises shall be placed at
curbside fronting residential premises on pick-up dates designated
by the City, and in no case shall bundles or containers of yard waste
exceed sixty (60) pounds in weight or a total of one hundred eighty
(180) pounds in aggregate. Any premises having more than one (1)
dwelling unit shall be limited to placing no more than six (6)
bundles or containers of yard refuse out for curbside collection per
pick-up day in the manner described herein. All bundles of yard
waste must be tied securely and not exceed four (4) feet in length.
Grass clippings and tree limbs or tree parts exceeding three (3)
inches in diameter must be disposed of by the owner of the
premises at his/her expense.
4. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of any
residential premises to ensure that garbage, refuse and yard waste
is properly stored and prepared for collection at the residential
premises and in accordance with all provisions of this section, the
City's recycling regulations, and all applicable local, County and
State regulations, and in no case shall waste materials from or on
residential premises be handled or stored in such a manner as to
constitute a nuisance, or be otherwise inimical to the health and
safety of the residents of Asbury Park. All applicable local, County
and State regulations shall be complied with by owners of
residential premises and where applicable tenants of these
premises regarding the handling and placement of garbage, refuse
and yard waste for collection.
5. If the owner of any residential premises requires off-curb collection
or additional services beyond twice weekly curbside collection
provided by the City, as described herein, the owner of the
premises assumes all responsibility for arranging for the additional
services, including all costs associated with the collection and
disposal of the garbage, refuse and yard waste.
6. Auto tires, recyclables, white goods (appliances), all other scrap
metal generated from residential premises shall be removed by the
City's Public Works Department by appointment. The City Engineer
§ 19-2.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 19-2.1
1:616
or his agents or assigns shall designate the date of appointment,
the quantity to be collected on said date and the manner of
placement for collection on said date. The owner or his agent
or assigns of the residential premises requesting the service, is
responsible for scheduling said services, Pick-up dates and
procedures for recyclables will be outlined in an annual bulletin to
be distributed annually to each and every residential City address.
i. Nonresidential collection.
1. All garbage, refuse and yard waste originating from nonresidential
premises shall be placed at curbside in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
2. The owner or operator or his/her designee of any nonresidential
premises shall be liable for the cost of collection and disposal of
garbage, refuse and yard waste placed off-curb for collection, or for
amounts in excess of the curbside limitations regarding weight or
frequency of collection by the City.
3. The owner or operator or his/her designee of any nonresidential
premises shall be liable for the collection and disposal, including
the associated costs, of all recyclable materials, including auto
tires, scrap metal and appliances.
4. All bulk refuse generated from nonresidential premises shall be
governed by the same provisions as residential premises as
identified in this section, except that no nonresidential entity shall
place more than three (3) items of bulk refuse or yard waste out for
collection on any designated pick-up date.
5. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator or his/her
designee of any nonresidential premises to ensure that garbage,
refuse and yard waste are properly stored and prepared for
collection at the nonresidential premises and in accordance with all
provisions of this section, the City's recycling ordinance, and all
applicable local, County and State regulations, and in no case shall
waste materials from or on nonresidential premises be handled or
stored in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance, or be
otherwise inimical to the health and safety of the residents of
Asbury Park.
6. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of public and
private schools, or his/her designee to provide for collection and
disposal of all garbage, refuse and yard waste, including the
associated costs.
j. Interference with Placement and Collection Prohibited. No person shall
prevent or interfere with any agent or employee of the authorized
contractor or collector of garbage, trash or refuse, or his/her employees
in the discharge of his/her duties.
§ 19-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-2.1
1:617
§ 19-2.2. Responsibility of Owner, Leasee or Manager to Maintain
Property; Notice of Violation Not Required. [2000 Code § 19-2.2;
Ord. No. 2599]
§ 19-3. RECYCLING PROGRAM.
§ 19-3.1. Purpose. [2000 Code § 19-3.1]
The growing problem of solid waste disposal and the conservation of the
recyclable material is an important public concern; and the separation of
certain recyclable material will serve the public interest by reducing solid
waste and conserving our material resources.
The promotion of that public interest is best served by establishing rules
and regulations for the separation, recovery, collection, storing and
marketing of the recyclable material.
§ 19-3.2. Mandatory Program Established; Requirements. [2000
Code § 19-3.12; Ord. No. 2599]
k. Maintenance of Premises.
1. No owner, tenant, lessee or person in charge of any building, house,
store, room or place shall maintain the same or permit the same or
any portion thereof to be maintained in any state of uncleanliness
or in an unsanitary condition.
2. In multiple dwellings or guest houses having more than two (2)
units, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to comply with the
provisions of this section.
a. No owner, tenant, leasee or person in charge of any building, house,
store, room or place shall maintain the same or permit the same or any
portion thereof to be maintained in any state of uncleanliness or in an
unsanitary condition.
b. No Notice Requirement. Due to health and safety concerns for the
residents of the City, the following violation(s) under this chapter do not
require prior notice to owner or person or persons responsible before a
summons may issue:
1. Trash at curb.
Editor's Note: See also Chapter XIII, subsection 13-1.6.
a. It shall be mandatory for all persons, except those physically disabled,
who are owners, lessees and occupants of residential property, to
separate glass bottles and jars, aluminum cans, newspapers, and
leaves, as hereinafter defined, from all other solid waste produced by
such residences for collection and ultimate recycling of the matter.
§ 19-2.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 19-3.2
1:618
§ 19-3.3. Definitions. [2000 Code § 19-3.3; Ord. No. 2599]
As used in this section:
ALUMINUM — shall mean and include all disposable items made of
aluminum, including aluminum containers used for soda, beer, or other
beverages.
b. It shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees and occupants of business
and industrial property and of private, public and governmental
institutions and buildings to separate glass bottles and jars, aluminum
cans, newspapers, and leaves as hereinafter defined from all other solid
waste produced by the nonresidential establishments for collection and
the ultimate recycling of the material.
c. It shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees and occupants of business
and industrial property and of private, public and governmental
institutions and buildings to separate, in addition to glass bottles and
jars, aluminum cans, newspapers, and leaves; corrugated cardboard
and/or high grade paper from all other solid waste produced by the
nonresidential establishments for collection and the ultimate recycling
of the materials.
d. All residential and nonresidential sources of solid waste shall separate
tin and bimetal cans from all other solid waste produced by the
residential and nonresidential establishments for collection and the
ultimate recycling of the material as may be required by Monmouth
County.
e. On and after the adoption of this section, and in accordance with
existing State regulations (N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), all service stations, oil
retailers and motor vehicle reinspection stations with "used oil holding
tanks" shall accept up to five (5) gallons at a time, of used motor oil
from individuals changing oil from cars, lawn mowers or motorcycles
and shall post a sign informing the public that they are a "Used Oil
Collection Site."
f. Be it further provided that participating service stations, oil retailers
and motor vehicle reinspection stations report monthly to the City
Clerk, indicating the gallons of waste oil recycled from their premises.
g. All generators of asphalt, concrete, and wood waste (stumps, brush,
land clearing debris, pallets, and waste lumber), pursuant to
demolition, construction and/or alteration activities, will separate these
materials from all other solid waste for the purpose of recycling of the
materials.
h. Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection, the owners or
operators or his/her designees of nonresidential property shall be
responsible for the collection and/or disposal of all recyclable materials,
including all costs associated with such collection and disposal.
§ 19-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3.3
1:619
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — shall mean and include cardboard of the
type used to make cardboard boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar
corrugated and craft paper material.
GLASS — shall mean and include all products made from silica or sand, soda
ash and limestone; the product being transparent or translucent and being
used for packaging or bottling of various matters excluding, however, blue
or flat glass commonly known as window glass.
HIGH GRADE PAPER — shall mean and include white and/or off-white
stationery, photocopy and computer paper.
LEAVES — shall mean and include all foliage from trees and shrubs.
NEWSPAPER — shall mean and include paper of the type commonly
referred to as newsprint, and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily
or weekly, having printed thereon news and opinions, and containing
advertisements and other matters of public interest.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — shall mean all waste materials that have the
ability to be returned, through a processing, to their formal alternate use.
Recyclable materials shall include:
ALUMINUM CANS — - beverage or food containers constructed of
aluminum or its alloys.
a.
TIN AND BIMETAL CANS — - food and beverage containers that are
composed of an aluminum top and steel sides and bottom. Tin cans are
food and beverage containers constructed wholly of steel.
b.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLES — - refers to the mixing of glass bottles
and jars, aluminum cans, tin and bimetal cans in the same containers.
c.
GLASS — - food and beverage containers constructed from silica or
sand, soda ash and lime, and can be transparent, translucent or have
various colors.
d.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — - shall mean and include Craft
corrugated that has a brown hue made from craft paper, and regular
corrugated that is gray and tan and is made from other types of paper,
such as newspaper.
e.
NEWSPAPER — - shall mean and include papers including inserts of
the type commonly referred to as newsprint and distributed at periodic
intervals, usually daily or weekly.
f.
MIXED PAPER — - articles of paper, including but not limited to,
magazines, catalogs, envelopes, file folders, mail, office paper,
photocopy, white and off-white stationary and computer paper.
g.
WASTE OIL — - shall mean and include used oil drained from
automobiles, motorcycles, lawnmowers, etc.
h.
§ 19-3.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 19-3.3
1:620
SOLID WASTE — shall mean and include all garbage and rubbish normally
produced by the occupants of commercial, industrial, residential, and
institutional property and disposed of by private or public pickup.
§ 19-3.4. Recycling Coordinator. [2000 Code § 19-3.4]
§ 19-3.5. Collection by Authorized Persons; Sale; Monthly Report.
[2000 Code § 19-3.5]
§ 19-3.6. Collection by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited. [2000
Code § 19-3.6]
Recyclable material, as defined herein, shall be the property of the City once
placed on the curbside or brought to a drop-off center.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized by the
Mayor and City Council to pick up or cause to be picked up the recyclable
material as defined herein. Each such collection, in violation hereof, shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
a. Position Created. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby
created and established within the City.
b. Appointment; Term of Office. The Recycling Coordinator shall be
appointed by the Mayor and City Council for a term of one (1) year
expiring December 31 of each year. The term of the person first
appointed as Recycling Coordinator shall expire December 31 of the
year of that person's appointment.
c. Duties. The Recycling Coordinator, subject to the approval of the Mayor
and Council, shall establish and promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations as to the manner, days and times for the collection, sorting,
transportation, sale and/or marketing of recyclable material in order to
encourage the preservation of material resources while minimizing the
cost of the recycling program to the City.
a. The Mayor and City Council may use municipal personnel to collect
recyclable material set forth herein at curbside and/or from a drop-off
center and shall sell the recyclable material if a market exists therefor
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
b. The Mayor and Council may elect to enter into agreements with
qualified persons or corporations authorizing them to collect the
recyclable material at curbside or from a drop-off center and to sell the
recyclable material.
c. All authorized persons or corporations collecting recyclable materials
from curbside will provide the City Clerk with monthly reports
indicating the amount (in tons) of the material collected.
§ 19-3.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-3.7
1:621
§ 19-3.7. Direct Disposal of Recyclable Material; Reports. [2000
Code § 19-3.7]
§ 19-3.8. Violations and Penalties. [2000 Code § 19-3.8]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any provision of this section or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant
thereto, shall upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I,
Section 1-5.
As an alternate penalty, a convicted person may be ordered to perform
community service for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days.
Each day such violation or neglect is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
§ 19-3.9. Enforcement. [2000 Code § 19-3.9]
All provisions of this section and subsequent rules and regulations
promulgated by the Recycling Coordinator shall be enforced by the Director
of the Department of Public Works and/or his/her designated agent.
Chapter 20
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 20-1. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS TO MUNICIPAL STORM SEWER
SYSTEM.
(See also Chapter XVIII, Sewers)
§ 20-1.1. Statement of Purpose; Background. [Ord. No. 2806]
a. No person or corporation engaged in the collection of solid waste shall
violate County or State law and/or regulations by depositing solid waste
containing unacceptable quantities of recyclable materials such as
glass bottles, glass jars, newspaper, leaves and aluminum cans at the
County Reclamation Center.
b. Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any person,
partnership or corporation, who is owner, lessee or occupant of a
residential or nonresidential property, may donate or sell recyclable
material, as defined herein, to any person, partnership or corporation
whether or not operating for a profit. The person, partnership or
corporation, however, shall not pick up recyclable materials at curbside
or at a drop-off center.
c. Be it further provided that any person, partnership or corporation, who
is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a residential, or nonresidential
property, report on a monthly basis to the City Clerk indicating the
amount (in tons) of material taken to a recycling center.
§ 19-3.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 20-1.1
1:622
§ 20-1.2. Intent. [Ord. No. 2806]
Illicit connections of non-stormwater discharges have been shown to
contribute substantial levels of contaminants to surface water bodies. These
illicit connections may originate from sources such as improperly connected
sanitary sewage lines, industrial flows and from leaking or overflowing
sanitary sewer lines and pumping stations.
This section shall prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the City of Asbury Park, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 20-1.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2806]
The definitions below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions
in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2. As used in this section:
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — shall mean any physical or non-physical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Asbury
Park, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than
the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Non-physical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
a. As a result of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (USEPA)
Phase II rules published in December 1999, the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (the "Department") has developed the
Municipal Stormwater Regulation Program. This Program addresses
pollutants entering our waters from certain storm drainage systems
owned or operated by local, County, State, intestate or Federal
government agencies. USEPA regulations refer to these systems as
"municipal separate storm sewer systems" (MS4s).
b. Following the USEPA's new Phase II rules, the Department's Municipal
Stormwater Regulation Program has issued New Jersey Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) permits to municipalities.
Asbury Park NJPDES Permit #NJG0153591 and any/all subsequent
permits that require compliance with the requirements of the USEPA's
new Phase II rules which have been adopted by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) on January 5, 2004,
and which appeared in the February 2, 2004 edition of the New Jersey
Register at 36 N.J.R. 813(a).
§ 20-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-1.3
1:623
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — shall mean non-domestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Asbury
Park, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 20-1.4. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2806]
§ 20-1.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2806]
This section shall be enforced by the City of Asbury Park Public Works
Department or any other department as designated by the City Manager or
City Council.
a. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the City of Asbury Park any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater).
b. An illicit connections found and subject to this section must be
eliminated within six (6) months of discovery by the responsible party.
§ 20-1.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 20-1.6
1:624
§ 20-1.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2806; New]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be liable, upon
conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 20-2. PRIVATE CATCH BASIN RETROFITTING.
§ 20-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-39]
Regulations requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which
are in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or
resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the
discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the City of Asbury Park so as to protect public health, safety
and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 20-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-39]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Asbury
Park or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 20-2.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2016-39]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
§ 20-1.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-2.3
1:625
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 20-2.4. Design Standard. [Ord. No. 2016-39]
Storm drain inlets identified in Prohibited Conduct above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solids and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection c below.
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 20-2.4 below prior to
the completion of the project.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
(7.0) square inches, or be no greater than two (2.0) inches across the
smallest dimension.
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 20-2.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 20-2.4
1:626
§ 20-2.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2016-39]
This section shall be enforced by the following Departments within the City
of Asbury Park: Police, Fire, Public Works, and Code Enforcement.
§ 20-2.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-39]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalties provided by Chapter I, Section 1-5 for
each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
§ 20-3. PLASTIC BAGS [Added 6-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-23]
§ 20-3.1. Purpose.
It is hereby determined and declared to be the public policy of the City
of Asbury Park to address a significant global problem relating to the
production and use of single-use plastic carryout bags and the adverse
effects emanating directly therefrom. Specifically, the intent of this section
is to reduce the use of single-use plastic carryout bags, and to promote
the use of reusable carryout bags in order to reduce litter, to reduce harm
to humans, wildlife and the environment, to protect our parks and coastal
waterways, and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general
public.
§ 20-3.2. Definitions.
As used in this section:
CARRYOUT BAG — A bag that is: (1) provided by a covered store to a
customer at the point of sale to carry food items, goods or other products
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid
and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and one
and one-half inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 20-2.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.2
1:627
purchased from such store; or (2) provided by a street vendor to a customer
at the point of sale to carry food items or goods/products purchased from
such street vendor. Such term shall not include reusable carryout bags or
exempt bags.
CITY — The City of Asbury Park, in Monmouth County, New Jersey.
CITY MANAGER — The City Manager of the City of Asbury Park, or his/her
designee(s), authorized to carry out the provisions of this section.
COVERED STORE — (i) A food service establishment, and (ii) a retail,
wholesale or service establishment engaged in either the sale of personal,
consumer or household items, or the provision of services, including but
not limited to drug stores, pharmacies, grocery stores, supermarkets,
convenience food stores, food marts, hardware stores, liquor stores,
clothing stores, jewelry stores, or other retail establishments of any kind,
or service establishments of any kind, including but not limited to beauty
salons, etc., that provide carryout bags to consumers in which to place items
purchased or obtained at such establishment.
EXEMPT BAG — Any of the following:
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment located in the City
which serves made-to-order food and/or beverages for dine in, take out or
delivery, but not including food trucks and mobile food carts.
Bags without handles to carry produce, meats, dry goods, or other nonprepackaged
food items to the point of sale within a covered store to
prevent such food items from coming into direct contact with, and/or
intended to stop cross-contamination with, other purchased items;
a.
b. Bags provided by a pharmacy to carry prescription drugs;
c. Laundry or dry-cleaning bags;
d. Newspaper bags;
Bags used to contain or wrap ice, frozen foods, meat, fish, or other
items, whether prepackaged or not, to prevent or contain moisture;
e.
Bags associated with any purchase related to an individual receiving
public assistance, such as the New Jersey State Supplemental
Nutritional Assistance Program, the EBT Program, or the New Jersey
State Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for women, infants and
children (as full or partial payment, fixed income or disability);
f.
Small clear plastic bags of less than four inches in depth that are
commonly provided to customers by hardware stores to hold screws
and bolts and other small items; or
g.
Any other bag to be exempted from the provisions of this section as
determined by the City Manager or his/her designee.
h.
§ 20-3.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 20-3.2
1:628
OPERATOR — A person in control of, or having responsibility for, the daily
operation of a covered store, which may include, but need not be limited to,
the owner of the covered store.
REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG — A bag with handles that is specifically
designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and is either:
SINGLE-USE PAPER CARRYOUT BAG — A single-use carryout bag that is
made of paper.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CARRYOUT BAG — Any carryout bag that is made
of plastic and that is not: (1) a single-use paper carryout bag; (2) a reusable
carryout bag; or (3) an exempt bag.
STREET VENDOR — For purposes of this section, any person or business
peddling, vending, selling, or displaying for sale any merchandise or food
that is presented from a mobile or transient setting, including but not
limited to a vehicle, truck, food truck, or cart, or from a moveable tent,
table, or stand, or otherwise. This term shall include but not be limited to all
peddlers, transient merchants and/or other vendors who are licensed under
Chapter IV of the City Code, as well as all vendors at farmers markets,
street festivals, and other events requiring group or special event permits
(per § 4-10 of the City Code), and street performers who have obtained a
permit under § 4-15 of the City Code.
§ 20-3.3. Use of Single-Use Plastic Carryout Bags Prohibited.
Effective January 1, 2020, no operator of any covered store or street vendor
within the City shall provide any single-use plastic carryout bag to any
customer for the purpose of enabling a customer to transport food items,
goods or other products out of the covered store or from the point of
purchase, except in accordance with the provisions of this section. Nothing
in this section shall be read to preclude operators of covered stores or
street vendors from providing single-use paper carryout bags to customers
for a fee in accordance with Subsection 20-3.4 of this section or from
making reusable carryout bags available for sale to customers. No operator
or street vendor shall preclude customers from using their own reusable
carryout bags.
§ 20-3.4. Carryout Bag Fee.
a. Made of cloth or other machine washable fabric;
Made of polyester, polypropylene, cotton or other durable material or
plastic that is at least 2.25 mils in thickness; or
b.
c. Defined as a reusable bag by the City Manager or his/her designee.
a. Effective January 1, 2020, an operator of a covered store or a street
vendor may provide a customer with a single-use paper carryout bag or
reusable carryout bag, provided that the operator or street vendor shall
impose and collect a minimum fee of $0.10 for each single-use paper
carryout bag or reusable carryout bag provided to the customer. There
§ 20-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3.4
1:629
§ 20-3.5. Outreach and Education.
§ 20-3.6. Enforcement.
shall be a maximum fee of $0.25 charged by any operator or street
vendor for each single-use paper carryout bag provided to a customer,
but there shall be no maximum fee imposed on an operator or street
vendor for each reusable carryout bag provided to a customer. No
covered store or street vendor shall be required to charge such fee for
an exempt bag. All monies collected under this section shall be retained
by the covered store or street vendor. The City recommends that such
funds be utilized by covered stores and street vendors to purchase
additional single-use paper carryout bags and reusable carryout bags
for use by customers and/or to provide outreach and education efforts
aimed at educating residents and consumers about reducing the use
of single-use plastic carryout bags and increasing the use of reusable
carryout bags.
b. Each operator shall indicate on the sales or other receipt given to the
customer the total number of single-use paper carryout bags provided
to the customer, and the total fee charged to the customer pursuant to
Subsection a above. This provision shall not apply to street vendors.
c. No covered store or street vendor shall charge a carryout bag fee for
bags of any kind provided by the customer in lieu of a carryout bag
provided by any such covered store or street vendor.
d. No covered store or street vendor shall charge or prevent a person from
using a bag of any kind that they have brought to any such covered
store or street vendor for purposes of carrying food items, goods or
other products from such store or street vendor.
a. The City Manager or his/her designee shall establish an outreach and
education program aimed at educating residents, covered stores and
street vendors on reducing the use of single-use plastic carryout bags
and increasing the use of reusable carryout bags.
b. To the extent practicable, the City Manager or his/her designee shall
seek the assistance of private entities and local not-for-profit
organizations to provide and distribute reusable carryout bags to
residents, and to covered stores and street vendors.
a. Any notice of violation issued pursuant to this section shall be
returnable in the City's municipal court, which shall have the power to
impose penalties as provided herein.
b. The City Manager shall designate appropriate departments and/or staff
to enforce this Section, including but not limited to the Police
Department, Public Works Department, and/or Code Enforcement
Department.
§ 20-3.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 20-3.7
1:630
§ 20-3.7. Penalty.
Any person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the following penalties: for the first offense, there
shall be a fine of $250; for the second offense, there shall be a fine of
$500; and for the third and each subsequent offense, there shall be a fine of
$1,000.
§ 20-4. and § 20-5. (RESERVED)
§ 20-6. INVASIVE PLANTS.
§ 20-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2018-43]
It is hereby found and declared that it will be the public policy of City of
Asbury Park to take action to protect and promote the public health through
the control of the growth of invasive plant species.
§ 20-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2018-43]
As used in this section:
INVASIVE PLANTS — shall mean all native and non-native vines and
vegetation that grow out of place and are competitive, persistent, and
pernicious. These plants may damage trees, vegetation, or structures.
Examples include but are not limited to bamboo (clumping, spreading or
running type), ragweed, multi flora rose, kudzu-vine and poison ivy or oak.
§ 20-6.3. Control of Growth. [Ord. No. 2018-43]
All persons must control the growth of invasive plants. Failure to control the
spread of such vegetation beyond the boundaries of a resident's property is
a violation of this section.
All new in-ground plantings of invasive plants are strictly prohibited. All
existing plantings must be contained by appropriate physical barriers to
prevent the growth or spread of existing invasive species beyond the
boundaries of a resident's property
§ 20-6.4. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2018-43]
All places and premises in the City of Asbury Park shall be subject to
inspection by the enforcing officer. Such inspections shall be performed by
such person, persons or agency duly authorized and appointed by the City
of Asbury Park. Such inspection shall be made if that official has reason
to believe that any subsection of this section is being violated. The City
Manager shall appoint staff to carry out inspections to comply with this
Section.
§ 20-3.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-6.5
1:631
§ 20-6.5. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2018-43]
A penalty or penalties for the conviction of a violation under this Section
shall be governed by Chapter I, Section 1-5, General Penalty, of the City
Code.
Chapter 21
(RESERVED)
Reserved for numbering
Chapter 22
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE
§ 22-1. FINDINGS. [2000 Code § 22-1]
The Urban Enterprise Zone Authority of the State of New Jersey has
designated the City of Asbury Park and the City of Long Branch as a Joint
Urban Enterprise Zone pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zone Act, as amended.
Pursuant to the Act, the Governing Body of a qualifying municipality may
create a nonprofit corporation to formulate and propose a preliminary zone
development plan and to thereafter coordinate and administer the activities
of the municipality, zone businesses and community organizations within
the designated enterprise zone.
The City of Asbury Park is desirous of creating such a Zone Development
Corporation to administer its zone within the boundaries of its municipality.
§ 22-2. ENTERPRISE ZONE DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.
§ 22-2.1. Created. [2000 Code § 22-2.1]
The City of Asbury Park is hereby authorized to act as an incorporator
to create a nonprofit organization to be known as the "Enterprise Zone
Development Corporation of Asbury Park," and the City Manager is hereby
authorized to execute a Certificate of Incorporation containing provisions
authorized by and consistent with this chapter.
§ 22-2.2. Purpose. [2000 Code § 22-2.2]
That the purpose to be included in the Certificate of Incorporation pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq. shall include the following:
a. To formulate and propose a Preliminary Zone Development Plan
pursuant to the Enterprise Zone Act and prepare, monitor, administer,
and implement the Zone Development Plan;
§ 20-6.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 22-2.2
1:632
§ 22-2.3. Board of Directors. [2000 Code § 22-2.3; New]
The Board of Directors of the Zone Development Corporation shall consist
of eleven (11) members.
§ 22-2.4. Duration of Corporation. [2000 Code § 22-2.4]
That the duration of the Corporation shall be for a period of time as
permitted by N.J.S.A. 15A:1 et seq.
§ 22-2.5. Bylaws; Zone Administrator. [2000 Code § 22-2.5]
The Directors of the Corporation shall develop bylaws for the Corporation,
which shall be approved by the City Council and shall include an Executive
Officer to be known as the Enterprise Zone Administrator. The Board shall
b. To utilize the powers conferred by the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zone Act for the purpose of stimulating investment in, and economic
development of, the proposed enterprise zone;
c. To utilize State assistance through the provisions of the "New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zone Act" relating to exemptions from, and credits
against, State taxes;
d. To secure the involvement in, and commitment to, zone economic
development by private entities, including zone neighborhood
associations, voluntary community organizations supported by
residents and businesses in the enterprise zone.
e. To make recommendations for the revision of Municipal Planning and
Zoning Ordinances and other land use regulations as they pertain to the
enterprise zone for the City so that the City may use the powers
conferred by law to enhance the attractions of the enterprise zone to
prospective developers;
f. To increase the availability and efficiency of support services, public
and private, generally used by and necessary to the efficient
functioning of commercial and industrial facilities in the area, to the
extent to which the increase or improvement is to be provided and
financed by the City or by other entities;
g. To take such additional action, not inconsistent with the New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zone Act, as the Board of Directors of the Enterprise
Zone Development Corporation deemed necessary for the development,
administration and coordination of activities in the enterprise zone for
the benefit of zone businesses and community organizations within the
enterprise zone, for the ultimate purpose of the economic betterment of
the residences and the zone and the participating municipalities.
a. The Board of Directors shall be appointed by the City Council who shall
serve on a nonsalaried basis. All members must be a resident of the City
or have a bonafide business within the City.
§ 22-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-2.5
1:633
develop qualifications for the Zone Administrator, and shall thereafter
appoint an Administrator who meets the qualifications for a term not to
exceed four (4) years. The Board may thereafter reappoint the same
individual as Zone Administrator for successive terms, provided that no
term shall exceed four (4) years. The Board shall also hire such other
persons, including professional persons, as may be necessary for the
efficient operation of the Enterprise Zone Corporation.
§ 22-2.6. Voting Procedures. [2000 Code § 22-2.6]
That all ordinary business conducted by the Enterprise Zone Development
Corporation shall be approved by a simple majority of the Board members
who are present at any regular or special meeting of the Board of Directors.
However, amendments to the Zone Development Corporation's bylaws,
modification of zone boundaries, proposals for projects to receive money
from the Zone Assistance Fund, the hiring of an Enterprise Zone
Administrator and the hiring of professional, technical and consultant
personnel shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the entire
Board of Directors.
§ 22-2.7. Content of Certificate of Incorporation. [2000 Code
§ 22-12.7]
The Certificate of Incorporation shall also contain the names and addresses
of the first Board of Directors of the Corporation and such additional
information as may be required by the New Jersey Nonprofit Corporation
Act.
§ 22-3. ACCEPTANCE OF DESIGNATED AREAS.
§ 22-3.1. Findings. [2000 Code § 22-3.1]
Whereas, the State of New Jersey has adopted legislation creating certain
areas within certain cities as Urban Enterprise Zones.
Under the legislation, the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority was created for
the purposes of examining particular areas in cities and designating these
cities as Urban Enterprise Zones.
The City of Asbury Park, by resolution dated May 19, 1994, did seek to have
certain areas designated as Urban Enterprise Zones and did seek to have a
zone plan approved by the Authority.
Representatives of the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority did designate the
areas set forth in the aforementioned resolution as Urban Enterprise Zones
and did approve the application of the City of Asbury Park on August 10,
1994.
§ 22-2.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 22-3.2
1:634
§ 22-3.2. Areas Designated. [2000 Code § 22-3.2]
The Governing Body of the City of Asbury Park does hereby accept the
designation of certain areas contained in its resolution. The Mayor and City
Council accepts this designation from the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority
and accepts the designation of the Zone Development Plan as formulated
and approved in the aforesaid resolution.
Chapter 23
(RESERVED)
Chapter 24
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Editor's Note: Prior source history includes Ordinance No. 2123.
§ 24-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 24-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-1.1]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry.
§ 24-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-1.2]
§ 24-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-1.3]
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
a. The flood hazard areas of the City of Asbury Park are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. Protect human life and health;
b. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
§ 22-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-1.3
1:635
§ 24-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 2915
§ 24-1.4]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this section includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 24-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-2]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this section its most reasonable application. As used in this
section:
APPEAL — shall mean a request for a review of the City Manager's
interpretation of any provision of this section or a request for a variance.
c. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
f. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
h. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 24-1.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 24-2
1:636
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — shall mean a designated AO, AH, or VO
zone on the Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one (1%)
percent annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1)
to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the
path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.
Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — shall mean the land in the floodplain
within the City subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding
in any given year.
AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD RELATED EROSION HAZARD — shall mean
the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe
flood related erosion losses. After a detailed evaluation the special flood
related erosion hazard area will be designated a Zone E on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
BASE FLOOD — shall mean the flood having a one (1%) percent chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — shall mean an area of special flood
hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action
from storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — shall mean the official
map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
City of Asbury Park.
ELEVATED BUILDING — shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in a Coastal High Hazard Area to have the bottom
of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated
above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or
shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately anchored
so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood
up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an Area of Special Flood Hazard
"elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or
solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In Areas of Coastal High Hazard,
§ 24-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:637
"elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — shall mean the process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses.
FLOOD or FLOODING — shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — shall mean any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters, and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
d.
§ 24-2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 24-2
1:638
LOWEST FLOOR — shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — shall mean a structure, transportable in one or
more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by the City of Asbury Park and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — shall mean a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the City.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — shall mean a continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured
at the longest horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or
permanently towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily
not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SAND DUNES — shall mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in
ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — shall mean for other than new construction
or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
2.
§ 24-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-2
1:639
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and mean the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual
start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%) percent of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes
structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
ordinance that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this section.
§ 24-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to insure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
§ 24-2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 24-3.1
1:640
§ 24-3.1. Lands to Which This Ordinance Applies. [Ord. No. 2915
§ 24-3.1]
This section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards, within the
jurisdiction of the City of Asbury Park, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
§ 24-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 2915 § 24-3.2]
The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Asbury Park, Community
No. 340285, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 24-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-3.3]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this section
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this section
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute an offense. Any person who violates this section or fails to comply
with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not
more than one thousand two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars or imprisoned
for not more than ninety (90) days, or both, for each violation, and in
addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the City of Asbury Park from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 24-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2915
§ 24-3.4]
This section is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this section
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 24-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-3.5]
In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be:
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Monmouth
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated September 25, 2009.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on index and panel(s) 34025C0332F,
34025C0334F, 34025C0351F, 34025C0353F, whose effective date is
September 25, 2009.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this section. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at the
Office of the City Clerk at City Hall, One Municipal Plaza, Asbury Park,
New Jersey.
§ 24-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-3.5
1:641
§ 24-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 2915
§ 24-3.6]
The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This section does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This section shall not create liability on the part of the City of Asbury Park,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 24-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 24-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 2915
§ 24-4.1]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection
24-3.2 above. Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the City Manager or his/her designee and may include, but not
be limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State Statutes.
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 24-5.2b; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 24-3.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 24-4.2
1:642
§ 24-4.2. Designation of the City Manager (or His/Her Designee) as
the Local Administrator. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-4.2]
The City Manager or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer
and implement this section by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 24-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the City Manager (or His/
Her Designee). [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-4.3]
Duties of the City Manager or his/her designee shall include, but not be
limited to:
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this section have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway.
4. Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of
the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood
damage.
5. Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with subsection 24-5.4b4.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
24-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
City Manager or his/her designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
Federal, State or other source, in order to administer subsections
24-5.2a, Specific Standards, Residential Construction, and 24-5.2b,
Specific Standards, Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures.
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
§ 24-4.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-4.3
1:643
§ 24-4.4. Variance Procedures. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-4.4]
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certification required in subsection
24-4.1c.
3. In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
subsection 24-5.4b1 and 24-5.4b2(a) and (b).
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). the persons
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
24-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this section.
2. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the City Manager or his/her designee in the
enforcement or administration of this section.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision(s) of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
Superior Court of New Jersey, as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and the Rules of the Courts.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in this section, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
§ 24-4.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 24-4.4
1:644
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors set forth in subsection 24-4.4a4
above and the purposes of this section, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this section.
6. The City Manager or his/her designee shall maintain the records of
all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2)
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing paragraphs (a)—(k) in subsection 24-4.4a4 have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2)
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
§ 24-4.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-4.4
1:645
§ 24-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 24-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-5.1]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
24-4.4a4 or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
§ 24-4.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 24-5.1
1:646
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net
area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all
§ 24-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-5.1
1:647
§ 24-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-5.2]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 24-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 24-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings
may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to or
above base flood elevation; and
2. Within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction. In an Area of Special Flood Hazard, all
new construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either:
1. Have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated to the level of the
base flood elevation; and
2. Within any AO zone on the municipality's DFIRM to have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent
grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet (at least
two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). And, require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures; or
3. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
4. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
5. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
§ 24-5.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 24-5.2
1:648
§ 24-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-5.3]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
24-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
§ 24-5.4. Coastal High Hazard Area. [Ord. No. 2915 § 24-5.4]
Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in subsection 24-3.2. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges
and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in subsection 24- 4.3c2(b).
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 24-5.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If paragraph a. immediately above is satisfied, then all new construction
and substantial improvements must comply with Section 24-5,
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths (0.2) of a
foot at any point.
a. Location of Structures.
1. All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
2. The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision.
§ 24-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 24-5.4
1:649
b. Construction Methods.
1. Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the
piling or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level, with
all space below the lowest floor's supporting member open so as
not to impede the flow of water, except for breakaway walls as
provided or in subsection 24-5.4b4.
2. Structural Support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a one (1%) percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (100-year mean
recurrence interval).
(c) There shall be no fill used for structural support.
3. Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of subsection
24-5.4b1 and subsection 24-5.4b2(a) and (b).
4. Space Below the Lowest Floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this section shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood latticework or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more
than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway
walls which exceed a design safe loading of twenty (20) pounds
per square foot (either by design or when so required by local
or State codes) may be permitted only if a registered
professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs
proposed meet the following conditions:
§ 24-5.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 24-5.4
1:650
Chapter 25
(RESERVED)
Chapter 26
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 26-1. EMPLOYMENT QUALIFICATIONS. [2000 Code § 26-1]
All officers and employees shall be selected with reference to their
qualifications and fitness for the public service required of them and
without reference to their political faith or affiliation. The officers and
employees shall be selected to office pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:83-1 et seq.
§ 26-2. RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS. [2000 Code § 26-2; Ord. No.
2920; Ord. No. 3089]
(1) Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood, and
(2) The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and non-structural).
Water loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those
required by applicable State or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the (local administrator) for approval.
c. Sand Dunes. There shall be no man-made alteration of sand dunes
within Zones VE and V on the community's DFIRM which would
increase potential flood damage.
a. All City officers and employees employed by the City of Asbury Park on
the date of final passage of this section shall not be required as a
condition of their continued employment, to become bona fide residents
of the City, except as otherwise required by law.
b. A bona fide resident is a person having a permanent domicile within the
City.
c. Before a nonresident is employed for a non-uniformed classified civil
service position, the City Manager or his/her designee shall place an
§ 24-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-2
1:651
§ 26-3. CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM ADOPTED.
§ 26-3.1. Findings. [2000 Code § 26-3.1]
The New Jersey Civil Service Commission has completed a survey of all
positions of its jurisdiction and following such survey, the New Jersey Civil
Service Commission submitted to the Mayor and Council four (4) separate
and distinct schedules.
§ 26-3.2. Schedules. [2000 Code § 26-3.2]
The following information was contained in the schedules:
advertisement in a local newspaper at least once seeking a qualified
City resident.
d. For non-uniformed classified civil service positions, the City shall
separate all of the duly qualified applicants for the position or positions
to be filled into the following classes:
1. Residents of the City of Asbury Park.
2. Other residents of Monmouth County.
3. Residents of Counties contiguous to Monmouth County.
4. Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
5. All other qualified applicants who are residents of the United States
but who do not reside in New Jersey.
The classes of qualified applicants defined above shall be
considered as separate and successive lists of eligibles for the
position or positions to be filled, in the order referenced above.
Editor's Note: This Section 26-2 was adopted by Ordinance No.
2526 on July 7, 1999 and amended by Ordinance No. 2920,
adopted December 2, 2009.
a. Schedule I. A list of employees in the City together with their dates of
last permanent appointment, and their previous existing status, salary,
title and divisional classifications.
b. Schedule II. A list of titles of full-time positions in the classified service
in the City, in descending order, by proposed salary ranges divided into
salary increments, with a list of titles and proposed salary ranges of fulltime
positions in the classified service in the City in schematic
arrangement.
c. Schedule III. An alphabetical list of titles of full-time positions in the
classified service in the City with proposed salary ranges and divisional
classifications, an alphabetical list of titles in the unclassified service in
the City with the statutory or other provisions placing the position in
§ 26-2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 26-3.2
1:652
§ 26-3.3. Salary Plan. [2000 Code § 26-3.3]
The Mayor and Council in accordance with the request of the New Jersey
Civil Service Commission is desirous of providing an adequate salary plan
for classes of positions in the City, therefor:
§ 26-4. RETIREMENT BENEFITS. [2000 Code § 26-4; Ord. No.
2018-35]
As per State statute, union contract or individual contract, as amended from
time to time.
§ 26-5. MANDATORY DIRECT DEPOSIT.
§ 26-5.1. Introduction and Enabling Legislation. [Ord. No. 2017-3]
Pursuant to C. 52:14-15f.2b et seq. P.L. 2013 c. 28, authorizes local
governments to mandate direct deposit for governmental employees
effective after July 1, 2014.
the unclassified service, and an alphabetical list of titles of part-time
positions in the classified service in the City.
d. Schedule IV. Recommendations for rules for the installation and
administration of civil service procedures in and for the City.
a. The classes of positions, duties of which are set forth in the above
schedules prepared by the New Jersey Civil Service Commission are
hereby created.
b. The salary ranges setting forth annual increments specified in the
schedule are hereby adopted as and for each class of position
mentioned in the schedules and the increment payments contained
therein are contingent on the availability of funds.
c. The Mayor and Council reserve the right to pay a salary to any new
employee at any figure given in the schedules, and not necessarily the
first figure of the schedules.
d. The adoption of this section shall not operate so as to provide for a
payment in excess of the normal increment prescribed for the class of
position attached thereto, notwithstanding that the minimum salary
range as set forth in that class position may not be reached.
e. The adoption of this section shall operate to provide increments only to
those employees who have satisfactorily performed the duties of their
positions.
f. The salaries shall be paid semi-monthly to the officers and employees.
g. The aforesaid schedules shall be kept on file with the City Clerk.
§ 26-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-5.2
1:653
§ 26-5.2. Direct Deposit Required. [Ord. No. 2017-3]
§ 26-5.3. Role of the Chief Financial Officer. [Ord. No. 2017-3]
The Chief Financial Officer shall have the ability to grant limited, good
cause waivers to the direct deposit mandate.
Chapter 27
(RESERVED)
Chapter 28
HEALTH REGULATIONS
§ 28-1. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 28-1.1. Title. [2000 Code § 28-1.1]
This chapter shall be known and designated as the "Health Code of the City
of Asbury Park."
§ 28-1.2. Right of Entry. [2000 Code § 28-1.2]
The Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designees and
employees shall have the right to enter into and upon any premises, public
or private building, or vehicle for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
the Health Code and the health laws and regulations of the State of New
Jersey or to determine whether such provisions or rules and regulations are
being complied with or obeyed. No person shall oppose such entry or hinder
or interfere with the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their
designees or employees in the performance of their duty.
§ 28-1.3. Permits and Licenses. [2000 Code § 28-1.3]
a. All full-time or biweekly paid employees shall have their net pay
deposited via direct deposit.
b. Seasonal or part-time employees are exempt from this requirement but
can utilize direct deposit.
a. Issuance. All licenses or permits required by the Health Code, except
when otherwise specifically provided, shall be issued by the City Clerk.
Upon application to the City Clerk for the issuance of same, the
applicant shall, simultaneously therewith, apply to the Health Officer/
Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee for a Certificate of
Approval, which certificate shall be issued by the Health Officer upon
compliance by the applicant with the applicable provisions of this Code
and any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 26-5.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-1.3
1:654
§ 28-1.4. Display of Permits and Licenses. [2000 Code § 28-1.4]
§ 28-1.5. Vital Statistics. [2000 Code § 28-1.5; Ord. No. 2282 § 1;
Ord. No. 2574; Ord. No. 2671; Ord. No. 2679; Ord. No. 2834; Ord.
No. 2938; Ord. No. 2015-42; Ord. No. 2017-46]
b. Revocation. In the event of the violation of any of the provisions of this
Code or of the relevant rules and regulations provided for, a license or
permit may be revoked after a hearing before the Health Officer/Chief
Code Enforcement or their designee upon charges filed with the Health
Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee. The holder of
the license or permit shall have at least one (1) week's notice by mail of
the time for the hearing. The notice shall be addressed to the address of
the holder of the license or permit as appears upon the application. The
penalty of revocation provided in this subsection shall be in addition to
any other penalties provided for in this Code.
c. Suspension. In the event of the violation by the holder of a license or
permit of any provision of the Health Code or of the relevant rules and
regulations pertaining thereto, where the effect of such violation is such
as shall constitute a hazard or injury to public health, the Health
Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee is authorized
to suspend the license or permit pending the hearing before the Health
Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee provided in
paragraph b. In the event of such suspension, the Health Officer/Chief
Code Enforcement Officer or their designee shall, within twenty-four
(24) hours after notice of suspension, give to the holder of such license
or permit an opportunity for hearing before him/her and to present such
evidence as may be desired concerning such violation. After the
hearing, the Health Officer/Code Enforcement Officer or their designee
may continue or discharge such suspension, but if continued, an early
final hearing shall be provided by the Health Officer/Chief Code
Enforcement Officer or their designee.
a. All permits and licenses issued under the Health Code shall be
prominently displayed upon the premises for which issued; and upon
each vehicle or device used in the business for which a license or permit
is required, there shall be displayed at all times, in plain sight, on the
left side or rear of the vehicle or device, such current license or permit
sign as may be provided by the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement
Officer or their designee.
b. Every holder of a license or permit shall exhibit same, upon demand, to
the Health Officer or any other authorized representative of the Health
Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee, or any police
officer of the City.
a. Marriages, civil unions, domestic partnerships, births, deaths, and fetal
deaths (stillbirths) shall be reported to the registrar of Vital Statistics of
§ 28-1.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.5
1:655
the City upon the forms supplied and in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the New Jersey State Department of Health.
b. Fees.
1. The local registrar, shall, upon request, supply to any applicant a
certification or certified copy of the record of any birth, death,
domestic partnership, marriage or civil union registered under the
rules and regulations of the New Jersey State Department of Health
for a fee of fifteen ($15.00) dollars.
2. Performance of Marriage or Civil Union Ceremony. There shall be a
fee in the amount of seventy-five ($75.00) dollars for the Mayor or
Deputy Mayor of the City of Asbury Park to perform a marriage or
civil union ceremony. Such fee shall be deposited into the current
fund, payable to the City of Asbury Park. Said funds shall then be
disbursed by the City to the Mayor or Deputy Mayor, as
appropriate, as compensation for the performance of the ceremony.
3. Correction of a Vital Record. There shall be a fee in the amount of
fifteen ($15.00) dollars for any correction requested of a vital
record (birth, death or marriage certificates). If the correction
requested was an error made by this City's registrar's office, the
fee shall be waived.
c. The registrar shall furnish a birth, marriage, domestic partnership, civil
union or death certificate without fee in the prosecution of any claim for
public pension or military or naval enlistment purposes.
d. Domestic Partnerships.
1. Definitions. As used in this section:
(a) Affidavit of Domestic Partnership shall mean an affidavit that
sets forth each party's name and age, the parties' common
mailing address, and a statement that, at the time the affidavit
is signed, both parities meet the requirements of the New
Jersey Domestic Partnership Act, P.L. 2003, c. 246, for entering
into a domestic partnership and wish to enter into a domestic
partnership with each other.
(b) Basic living expenses shall mean the cost of basic food and
shelter, and any other cost, including but not limited to, the
cost of health care, if some or all of the cost is paid as a benefit
because a person is another person's domestic partner.
(c) Certificate of domestic partnership shall mean a certificate
that includes: the full names of the domestic partners, a
statement that the two (2) individuals are members of a
registered domestic partnership recognized by the State of
New Jersey, the date that the domestic partnership was
entered into, and a statement that the partners are entitled to
§ 28-1.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-1.5
1:656
all the rights, privileges and responsibilities accorded to
domestic partners under the law. The certificate shall bear the
seal of the State of New Jersey.
(d) Commissioner shall mean the Commissioner of Health and
Senior Services.
(e) Domestic partner or partner shall mean a person who is in a
relationship that satisfies the definition of a domestic
partnership as set forth in the New Jersey Domestic
Partnership Act, P.L. 2003, c. 246.
(f) Have a common residence shall mean that two (2) persons
share the same place to live in this State, or share the same
place to live in another jurisdiction when at least one (1) of the
persons is a member of a State-administered retirement
system, regardless of whether or not: the legal right to possess
the place is in both of their names; one (1) or both persons
have additional places to live; or one (1) person temporarily
leaves the shared place of residence to reside elsewhere, on
either a short-term or long-term basis, for reasons that include,
but are not limited to, medical care, incarceration, education, a
sabbatical or employment, but intends to return to the shared
place of residence.
(g) Jointly responsible shall mean that each domestic partner
agrees to provide for the other partner's basic living expenses
if the other partner is unable to provide for himself or herself.
(h) Notice of Rights and Obligations of Domestic Partners shall
mean a form that advises domestic partners, or persons
seeking to become domestic partners, of the procedural
requirements for establishing, maintaining, and terminating a
domestic partnership, and includes information about the
rights and responsibilities of partners.
2. In accordance with the New Jersey Domestic Partnership Act, P.L.
2003, c. 246, two (2) persons who desire to become domestic
partners and meet the requirements of this subsection may execute
and file an Affidavit of Domestic Partnership with the local registrar
upon payment of a fee, in an amount to be determined by the
Commissioner. Each person shall receive a copy of the Affidavit
marked "filed."
3. A domestic partnership shall be established when all of the
following requirements are met:
(a) Both persons have a common residence and are otherwise
jointly responsible for each other's common welfare as
evidenced by joint financial arrangements or joint ownership of
real or personal property, which shall be demonstrated by at
least one (1) of the following:
§ 28-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.5
1:657
(1) A joint deed, mortgage agreement or lease; or
(2) A joint bank account; or
(3) Designation of one (1) of the persons as a primary
beneficiary in the other person's will; or
(4) Designation of one (1) of the persons as a primary
beneficiary in the other person's life insurance policy or
retirement plan; or
(5) Joint ownership of a motor vehicle; and
(b) Both persons agree to be jointly responsible for each other's
basic living expenses during the domestic partnership; and
(c) Neither person is in a marriage recognized by New Jersey or a
member of another domestic partnership; and
(d) Neither person is related to the other by blood or affinity up to
and including the fourth degree of consanguinity; and
(e) Both persons are of the same sex and therefore unable to enter
into a marriage with each other that is recognized by New
Jersey law, except that two (2) persons that are each sixty-two
(62) years of age or older and not of the same sex may establish
a domestic partnership if they meet the requirements set forth
in this subsection; and
(f) Both persons have chosen to share each other's lives in a
committed relationship of mutual caring; and
(g) Both persons are at least eighteen (18) years of age; and
(h) Both persons file jointly an Affidavit of Domestic Partnership;
and
(i) Neither person has been a partner in a domestic partnership
that was terminated less than one hundred eighty (180) days
prior to the filing of the current Affidavit of Domestic
Partnership, except that this prohibition shall not apply if one
(1) of the partners died; and in all cases where a person
registered a prior domestic partnership, the domestic
partnership shall have been terminated in accordance with the
provisions of the New Jersey Domestic Partnership Act.
4. The local registrar shall:
(a) Stamp each completed Affidavit of Domestic Partnership
received with the date of its receipt and the name of the
registration district in which it is filed; and
(b) Immediately provide two (2) copies of the stamped Affidavit of
Domestic Partnership to the person who filed that document.
§ 28-1.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-1.5
1:658
§ 28-1.6. Burial, Disinterment and Removal Permits. [2000 Code
§ 28-1.6]
§ 28-1.7. Communicable Diseases. [2000 Code § 28-1.7]
The control of communicable diseases in the City shall be conducted as
specified in the Sanitary Code of the Department of Health of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 28-1.8. Nuisances. [2000 Code § 28-1.8]
5. Upon the filing of an Affidavit of Domestic Partnership and payment
of the appropriate filing fee, the local registrar shall immediately
complete a Certificate of Domestic Partnership with the domestic
partner's relevant information and the date that the domestic
partnership was established. The local registrar shall then issue to
the domestic partners two (2) copies of the Certificate and two (2)
copies of the Notice of the Rights and Obligations of Domestic
Partners. Copies of the Certificate of Domestic Partnership shall be
prepared and recorded in the local registrar's records and with the
State registrar.
6. The local registrar shall, on or before the tenth day of each
calendar month, or sooner if requested by the Department of
Health and Senior Services, transmit to the State registrar the
original of all of the Affidavits of Domestic Partnership and
Certificates of Domestic Partnership received or prepared by the
local registrar for the preceding month.
7. A person who executes an Affidavit of Domestic Partnership in
violation of the provisions of the New Jersey Domestic Partnership
Law, P.L. 2003, c. 246, or in violation of this subsection, shall be
liable to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed one thousand
($1,000.00) dollars. The penalty shall be used for and collected
pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L. 1999, c.
274 (C. 2A:58-10, et seq.)
a. Burial, disinterment, or removal permits shall be issued by the City
Registrar of Vital Statistics in accordance with the Revised Statutes of
the State of New Jersey upon application and payment of the prescribed
fees.
b. All cemetery regulations shall be in accordance with the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
a. Prohibited. No person shall commit, maintain, or allow any nuisance, as
declared and described in this section.
b. Nuisance Declared. The following matters, things, conditions, or acts
are hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this City:
§ 28-1.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.8
1:659
1. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become
detrimental or a menace to the health of the City inhabitants.
2. Any matter, thing, condition, or act which is or may become an
annoyance, or interfere with the comfort or general well being of
the City inhabitants.
3. Pollution, or existence of a condition which causes or threatens
pollution, of any waters in this City in such a way or manner as to
cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of the City, either
in their health, comfort, or property.
4. The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney, or any
entrance to the open air, or from any fire into the open air, of such
quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists, or gases as
to cause injury, detriment, or annoyance to the City inhabitants, or
to endanger their comfort, repose, health, or safety.
5. The growth, existence, or presence of ragweed on any plot of land,
lot, highway, right-of-way, or any other public or private place.
6. The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy.
7. The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
8. The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure, or animal or vegetable matter, which may attract flies and
to which flies may have access, or in which fly larvae or pupae
breed or exist.
9. The existence of, or presence of trash, discarded paper, cardboard,
wood, metal, glass, boxes, cans or vegetables, bottles, bones, rags,
tin or other metal, discarded furniture and household articles,
articles commonly called "junk."
10. Depositing, accumulating, or maintaining any matter or thing
which serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may
have access or which serves or constitutes a breeding place or
harborage for insects or rodents in or on any land, premises,
building, or other place.
11. Abandoned Motor Vehicles.
(a) Prohibited. To abandon a motor vehicle on any public street or
highway of the City; on any property which is owned, leased, or
maintained by the City; or on any property owned, leased, or
maintained by the Board of Education, Housing Authority or
Parking Authority of the City; or to abandon or permit the
abandonment of any motor vehicle on private property is
prohibited.
(b) Definitions. As used in this section:
§ 28-1.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-1.8
1:660
ABANDON (with respect to private property) — shall mean and
include, any motor vehicle which:
ABANDON (with respect to public streets, public highways and
public property) — shall mean and include, any motor vehicle
which:
MOTOR VEHICLE — shall mean an automobile, omnibus, road
tractor, trailer, truck, truck trailer or vehicle as defined in R.S.
39:1-1.
Is parked out of doors without the current year's
registration or identification markers, as required by law,
for a period of thirty (30) days, except where the motor
vehicle is clearly held for sale; or
(1)
Is parked out of doors and found to be mechanically
inoperative for a period of thirty (30) days; or
(2)
Is parked out of doors and found without one (1) or more
tires for a period of thirty (30) days.
(3)
Is parked without the current year's registration or
identification markers as required by law; or
(1)
Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, and
the driver or person owning or in charge thereof neglects
or refuses to move the same to a place where it will not
obstruct traffic; or
(2)
(3) Is found to be mechanically inoperative; or
(4) Is found without one (1) or more tires.
(c) Possession by Police Department. Whenever any member of
the City Police Department finds any motor vehicle abandoned,
as defined in this subsection, on any public street or public
highway or public property, he/she shall take possession
thereof by removing or securing removal to such garage or
place as may be designated by the Police Chief or his/her
designee or by securely placing a written notice on the motor
vehicle which states that the City Police Department has taken
possession thereof and that the motor vehicle shall be removed
from the public street, public highway or public property. Such
taking of possession shall be reported immediately to the
Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission on a form prescribed
by him/her for verification of ownership. When such motor
vehicle is removed to a garage or place designated by the
Police Chief or his/her designee and remains unclaimed by the
owner or other person having a legal right for a period of thirty
(30) days, the same may be sold at auction in a public place.
When possession is taken by placing a written notice on the
motor vehicle and it remains unmoved from the public street,
§ 28-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.8
1:661
public highway or public property for a period of thirty (30)
days, the same may be sold at auction in a public place. The
City Police Department shall give notice of such sale by
certified mail to the owner, if his/her name and address is
known, and to the holder of any security interest filed with the
Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission, and by publication
on a form to be prescribed by the Director of the Motor Vehicle
Commission by one (1) insertion, at least five (5) days prior to
the sale in one (1) or more newspapers published in this State
and circulating in the City in which such motor vehicle is being
held.
(d) Reclaiming Possession. At any time prior to the sale, the owner
or other person entitled thereto may reclaim possession of the
motor vehicle upon payment of the reasonable costs of removal
and storage of the vehicle and any fine or penalty and court
costs assessed against him/her for a violation which gave rise
to the seizure of taking possession of such vehicle.
(e) Junk Sale Certificate. If the City Police Department shall, in its
report thereof to the Director of the Motor Vehicle
Commission, certify on an application prescribed by him/her
that such motor vehicle is incapable of being operated safely or
of being put in safe operational condition except at a cost in
excess of the value thereof, the Division shall, without further
certification or verification, issue to the City, for a fee of one
($1.00) dollar, a Junk Title Certificate thereto, with proper
assignment thereon, which shall be assigned and delivered to
the purchaser of the vehicle at public sale.
(f) Sale of Motor Vehicles. Upon the sale of any motor vehicle for
which no Junk Title Certificate is issued, the City shall execute
and deliver to the purchaser an application for Certificate of
Ownership prescribed by the Director of the Motor Vehicle
Commission, in the same form and manner as provided in
N.J.S.A. 39:10-15, which shall also contain the name and
address, if known, of the former owner. Such application shall
be accepted by the Director of the Motor Vehicle Commission
for issuance of a Certificate of Ownership for a fee of two
($2.00) dollars.
(g) Claims of Sold Vehicles. Upon the sale of a motor vehicle,
claims of interest therein shall be forever barred and the
proceeds realized therefrom after payment of the expenses of
possession and sale shall be remitted to the City Treasury as its
sole property.
12. The keeping, harboring, feeding, nesting, or breeding of common
pigeons or stray cats.
§ 28-1.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-1.8
1:662
§ 28-1.9. Abatement of Nuisance. [2000 Code § 28-1.9]
§ 28-1.10. Noise. [1977 Code § 19-1.11; Ord. No. 2932]
No person shall make, cause or permit to be made or caused upon any
premises owned, occupied or controlled by him/her or it, or upon any public
street, alley or thoroughfare, any unnecessary noises or sounds by means
of the human voice, or by any other means or methods which are physically
annoying to persons, or which are so harsh, or so prolonged or unnatural, or
unusual in their use, time and place as to occasion physical discomfort, or
which are injurious to the lives, health, peace and comfort of the inhabitants
of the City. The provisions contained in Section 3-9 of the City Code are
hereby incorporated herein by reference, and any violation of Section 3-25
shall also represent a violation of this Chapter.
13. Wherever any apartment house or project provides for off-street
parking, it shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to park in any space provided for the parking if the rear of
the motor vehicle faces the window of any occupied apartment.
a. Whenever a nuisance is found on any plot of land, lot, right-of-way or
any other private premises or place, notice in writing shall be given to
the owner thereof to remove or abate the same within a reasonable
time. A duplicate of the notice shall be left with one (1) or more of the
tenants or occupants of the premises or place.
If the owner resides out of the State or cannot be so notified speedily,
such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant
or occupant thereof, or posted on the premises and such action shall
be considered proper notification to the owner, tenant, or occupant
thereof.
b. Whenever a nuisance is found on any public property or on any street or
any other public premises or place, notice in writing shall be given to
the person responsible therefor or in charge thereof to remove or abate
the nuisance within such time as shall be specified therein. If such
person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their
designee may remove or abate such nuisance in the manner as
hereinafter provided in the case of a like condition existing on a private
premises or place.
c. If the owner, tenant, or occupant, upon being notified as provided by
this section, shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Health Officer/
Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee shall proceed to
abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or abated in a
summary manner by such means as he/she shall deem proper.
§ 28-1.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.11
1:663
§ 28-1.11. Spitting. [2000 Code § 28-1.11]
No person shall spit upon any public sidewalk or upon any part of the
interior or exterior of any public building or public conveyance.
§ 28-1.12. Dirt and Dust. [2000 Code § 28-1.12]
No tenant or occupant of any flat or apartment in any house occupied by
two (2) or more families, and no agent, servant or employee of such tenant
or occupant, shall use any window, dumbwaiter shaft, fire escape, or porch
of such house for the purpose of discharging dust, by shaking or otherwise
from clothes, rugs, or other floor coverings, brooms, mops, rags, or other
cleaning implements or material.
§ 28-1.13. Animals Prohibited. [2000 Code § 28-1.13]
No person shall have or keep in his/her possession any goats, sheep, swine,
horses, rabbits, chickens, pigeons or other fowl.
§ 28-1.14. Communicable Diseases of Animals. [2000 Code
§ 28-1.14]
§ 28-1.15. Animal Bites. [2000 Code § 28-1.15]
a. Reporting. Every veterinarian who attends any animal in the City
affected with or suspected to be affected with anthrax, glanders, farcy,
foot and mouth disease, rabies, tuberculosis, or any other
communicable disease, shall file with the Health Officer/Chief Code
Enforcement Officer or their designee within twelve (12) hours
thereafter a written report stating the name of the disease, the kind of
animal, the precise location of such animal, the name and address of the
owner or person in charge of such animal, and any other necessary
information regarding the animal so affected. In case no veterinarian
attends such animal, it shall be the duty of the owner or person in
charge to file such report with the Health Officer/Chief Code
Enforcement Officer or their designee.
b. Isolation, Destruction. The owner or person in charge of any animal
affected with or suspected to be affected with any disease mentioned in
this section, or with any other communicable disease, shall isolate or
restrict such animal and follow such precautions in such manner and
for such length of time as the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement
Officer or their designee may direct. The Health Officer/Chief Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the power to order the destruction of
any animal with any such disease and it shall be the duty of the owner
or person in charge thereof to immediately comply with the terms of
such order. The Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their
designee or the City shall not be liable for the value of any animal so
destroyed.
§ 28-1.11 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-1.15
1:664
§ 28-1.16. Slaughtering. [2000 Code § 28-1.16]
No person shall kill or slaughter in the City any cattle, sheep, swine,
or horses or maintain any establishment or place where such practice is
followed.
§ 28-1.17. Poultry. [2000 Code § 28-1.17]
a. Whenever any animal is bitten by any animal affected or suspected of
being affected with rabies, the owner or person in charge of the animal
so bitten shall, as the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or
their designee may order, either have such animal destroyed or have it
isolated in a manner approved by the Health Officer/Chief Code
Enforcement Officer or their designee for a period of six (6) months.
b. Whenever a dog, cat, or other animal bites any person, the owner or
person in charge shall securely confine such animal for the purpose of
observation in such a manner and for such period as may be designated
by the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee.
c. No person shall destroy, sell, move, or otherwise dispose of any animal
under observation as herein provided without a permit from the Health
Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee.
a. No person shall engage in the business of preparing live fowl for sale or
selling live fowl or slaughtering poultry in the City without first
obtaining from the City Clerk a permit for that purpose. The City Clerk
shall issue such permit upon the receipt of a Certificate of Approval
signed by the City Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or
their designee.
The person shall apply to the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement
Officer or their designee for such Certificate of Approval, which shall
be issued by the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their
designee upon the compliance by the applicant with the applicable
provisions of this chapter and any rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto. The permit expires on December 31 each year, or
prior thereto if the premises licensed are converted to a use other than
that provided in this section. The building in which such business is
conducted shall only be used for the keeping, slaughtering and sale of
poultry.
b. All buildings or places in which poultry slaughtering or the sale of live
poultry is conducted as a business shall conform with the following
requirements:
1. Such business shall be conducted on the ground floor only.
2. The floors thereof shall be of material impervious to moisture and
shall be properly sloped to a well-trapped outlet having direct
connection with a sewer. The walls of the room in which
slaughtering is actually carried on shall be covered to height of six
§ 28-1.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.17
1:665
§ 28-1.18. Horse Meat. [2000 Code § 28-1.18]
(6) feet with smooth material impervious to moisture and the
remainder of the walls and ceilings shall be finished with a smooth,
hard surface.
3. Hand plucking shall be carried out in a separate and enclosed
room. Watertight receptacles shall be provided for all refuse and
shall be properly covered and removed daily.
4. All rooms or space used for the purpose of slaughtering poultry
shall be ventilated directly to the open air. No such ventilation shall
in any way enter a ventilation shaft which is used in connection
with the living apartments of any building.
5. All coops shall be made of heavy wire and shall be of uniform size.
All stands or counters shall be built substantially and shall be
covered with marble, slate, zinc, or tin. Stands, counters, and coops
shall be raised from the floor at least twelve (12) inches to permit
flushing with water underneath. A plentiful supply of running hot
and cold water shall be provided. Stands and counters for the sale
of poultry shall be arranged to allow a clear passageway to the
public.
6. All parts of such poultry slaughtering houses shall be at all times
kept in a sanitary condition.
a. No person shall sell, offer or expose for sale, or distribute any horse
flesh or horse flesh products unless every carcass, piece, parcel, or
container thereof shall have conspicuously attached thereto a label or
tag, not less than three (3) inches wide and four (4) inches long in
letters not less than one (1) inch in height the words, "Horse Flesh," or
"This Product Contains Horse Flesh."
b. No horse flesh or horse flesh product shall be offered or exposed for
sale in any store or other premises unless there is maintained, in a
conspicuous place upon the front of such store or premises as well as
upon that portion of the premises which is nearest to the place therein
at which such horse flesh or horse flesh products are kept, signs with
letters not less than four (4) inches high, containing the words, "Horse
Flesh and Horse Flesh Products Sold Here."
c. No person shall cancel, erase, obliterate, deface, cover, remove, or alter
any brand, tag, label, or other marking hereby or by any other law or
regulations required to be impressed or attached upon any horse flesh
or horse flesh product, nor any sign on any premises or portion thereof
as hereby required.
d. This section does not apply to the sale of horse flesh or horse flesh
products in sealed containers as food for animals where such
containers are labeled in accordance with the laws and regulations of
the State and Federal government.
§ 28-1.17 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-1.19
1:666
§ 28-1.19. Waste Disposal. [2000 Code § 28-1.19]
§ 28-1.20. Rubbish. [2000 Code § 28-1.20; Ord. No. 2610]
No person shall place ashes or rubbish on the sidewalk or streets of this
City for removal therefrom, except after sunset of the day preceding the
collection pickup date or before 6:00 a.m. on the day of the collection
thereof.
§ 28-1.21. Weeds and Refuse. [2000 Code § 28-1.21; Ord. No. 2610]
a. No person shall clean, pump out, or convey through the streets of the
City the contents of any cesspool or septic tank without first obtaining a
permit from the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their
designee.
b. No person shall collect, remove, or convey through the streets any
garbage, ashes, or other waste material without obtaining a Scavenger
License from the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or
their designee, the fee of which shall be five ($5.00) dollars for each
vehicle.
a. The owner, tenant, or person in possession of any lands in the City shall
not permit such lands to be covered with or contain brush, weeds, dead
and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash
and debris, or refuse where the same is inimical to the preservation of
the public health, safety, or general welfare of the people of the City, or
which may constitute a fire hazard.
b. Upon complaint of any City resident, or any officer or employee of the
City, or upon his/her own motion, the Health Officer/Chief Code
Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall make an investigation of
the condition. He/she shall notify the owner, tenant, or person in
possession of the lands complained of, in writing, either personally or
by regular mail, to remove the brush, weeds, dead or dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, or
refuse and debris.
c. If the owner, tenant, or person in possession fails to abate or remedy the
condition complained of, after one (1) day notice, the Health Officer/
Chief Code Enforcement Officer or his/her designee shall cause the
condition complained of to be abated and remediated and shall,
thereafter, certify the cost thereof to the Mayor and Council, who shall
examine the certificate, and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as
shown thereon to be charged against the lands. The amount so charged
shall become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to the taxes to
be assessed and levied upon such lands, to bear interest at the same
rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner
as taxes.
§ 28-1.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-1.21
1:667
§ 28-1.22. Toilet Facilities. [2000 Code § 28-1.22]
§ 28-1.23. Buses. [2000 Code § 28-1.23]
All buses operated in the City shall be kept in a thoroughly clean and
sanitary condition, and a sufficient number of ventilators shall be open at all
times to provide a plentiful supply of pure air. The owners and operators of
buses shall be responsible for the condition thereof.
§ 28-1.24. Swimming Pools. [2000 Code § 28-1.24]
The construction, alteration and operation of swimming pools shall comply
with the rules and regulations set forth in the "Swimming Pool Code of New
Jersey," dated 1970, of the Department of Health of the State of New Jersey,
as it may be amended and revised.
§ 28-1.25. Conflict Provisions. [2000 Code § 28-1.25]
Where a provision of this chapter or this Health Code is found to be in
conflict with a provision in any other portion of this Code, or any regulation
issued under the authority of this Code, the provision which establishes
the higher standard for the protection of health, safety, and welfare shall
prevail.
§ 28-2. COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 28-2.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 28-2.1]
As used in this section:
COIN-OPERATED OR SELF SERVICE DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT
or ESTABLISHMENT — shall mean and include those premises wherein
devices for the cleaning of textiles, fabrics, garments or other articles by
the use of any solvent, other than water, are installed for and used by the
general public.
d. Any person who violates this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to
the penalty set forth in Chapter I, Section 1-5.
a. Every building where the public is expressly or impliedly invited or any
establishment where people are employed, or any place of amusement,
shall be provided with proper toilet and lavatory facilities for the
employees and patrons.
b. Industrial establishments shall provide at least one (1) toilet for every
fifteen (15) persons.
c. All toilets and lavatories shall be kept clean at all times. An adequate
supply of toilet paper shall be provided in every water closet.
d. All water closets, traps, flush tanks and pipes shall be effectively
protected against freezing.
§ 28-1.21 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-2.1
1:668
CUSTOMER AREA — shall mean that portion of the establishment to which
the general public is permitted access.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — shall mean the Health Officer/Chief Code
Enforcement Officer or their designee or an authorized representative
thereof.
MAINTENANCE AREA — shall mean that portion of the establishment to
which the customer is not permitted access and which is used for general
maintenance and storage purposes.
SOLVENT — shall mean any cleaning fluid which is free of additives to
mask the odor, classified by the National Board of Fire Underwriters as
nonflammable at ordinary temperatures, and not more toxic than the
generally accepted threshold limit value for perchlorethylene as
promulgated by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial
Hygienists.
§ 28-2.2. Administration. [2000 Code § 28-2.2]
Any person desiring to operate a coin-operated or self-service dry cleaning
establishment shall make application therefor in writing to the Health
Authority. Such application shall include the following information:
§ 28-2.3. Construction, Operation and Maintenance Requirements.
[2000 Code § 28-2.3]
a. The applicant's full name, residence, telephone number and post office
address, and whether such applicant is an individual, firm, or
corporation. If a partnership, the names and addresses of the partners
shall be included. If a corporation, the names and addresses of the
officers of the corporation shall be included.
b. The proposed location of the establishment, a floor plan showing the
building outline and location of the equipment.
c. The manufacturer of the machine, the trade name and manufacturer's
agent.
d. The name, address and authorized officer of the person engaged to
install the equipment.
e. The name or names of maintenance personnel and their telephone
numbers.
f. The signature of the applicant or the authorized officer of the applicant.
g. Upon receipt of such application, the Health Authority shall make such
investigation as may be necessary of maintenance and storage
facilities, as well as machines and their locations in and about the
premises, to determine compliance with the provisions of this section.
Upon approval of the application, a numbered operator's permit shall
be issued.
§ 28-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.3
1:669
a. The public shall only be permitted access to that portion of coinoperated
or self-service dry cleaning machines which is necessary for
use of those machines. The remaining portion of each machine shall be
separated from the customer area by a partition in which there are
grills or similar ventilation devices. This partitioned-off area shall be
called the maintenance area. The access door to the maintenance area
shall be self-closing and locked to prevent access by the public.
b. No person, other than the permit holder or his/her representative, shall
enter the maintenance area.
c. The maintenance area shall not be interconnected with that of heating
devices requiring air for combustion, such as gas dryers, water heaters
and comfort heating devices.
d. Heating devices requiring air for combustion shall be installed in such
fashion as to obtain air for combustion from the outside temperature.
e. Ventilation of establishments shall be effected by the drawing of air
from the customer area through grills or other openings in the partition
by means of an exhaust fan or fans operating in the maintenance area.
Exhaust fans shall have a rated capacity of four hundred (400 c.f.m.)
cubic feet per minute per machine for normal use and one thousand
(1,000 c.f.m.) cubic feet per minute per machine, for use in
emergencies. The rated capacities of exhaust fans shall appear on this
equipment or its name plate.
f. If air is being constantly exhausted as a built-in feature of the
equipment, the rated capacity of the fan can be reduced by this amount.
g. Air shall be replenished at a temperature not less than sixty (60°F)
degrees Fahrenheit as quickly as it is exhausted from the customer
area.
h. Each coin-operated or self-service dry cleaning machine shall be
equipped with an exhaust system that maintains a minimum of one
hundred (100) feet per minute velocity through the loading door
whenever the door is open. The duct work connections to this system
shall be sealed (soldered or taped) and the discharge outlet extended to
a minimum height of five (5) feet above the roof line and shall be located
so that the effluent may not reenter the premises.
i. A concrete dike or metal pan or similar facility, shall be installed at the
location of each machine to collect and contain spillage. This facility
shall be constructed of a material impervious to the solvent used.
j. The floor covering in the customer area shall be made of a material
resistant to the solvents used in such machines.
k. All establishments shall meet the requirements of all established State
and local laws, codes, and regulations; including, but not limited to air
pollution, electrical wiring, plumbing, fire prevention, waste disposal,
§ 28-2.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-2.3
1:670
§ 28-2.4. Personnel and Customer Safety. [2000 Code § 28-2.4]
sanitation, solvent storage, food or beverage vending, hours of
operation and presence of an attendant.
a. A respirator, approved by the U.S. Bureau of Mines as affording
protection against organic solvent vapors, shall be provided for and
used by maintenance personnel during correction of leakages, cleaning
of the system, removal of line and muck bags, and at all times when the
odor of solvent is noticeable.
b. The customer area shall be equipped with a fire extinguisher approved
by use against electrical or oil fires by the National Board of Fire
Underwriters.
c. A step-by-step, readily legible instruction list for operation of machines
shall be posted in a conspicuous location near the machines in the
customer area. These instructions shall include a list of items not to be
dry cleaned in a coin-operated or self-service dry cleaning machines,
such as those made in part or completely of plastic, rubber, leather,
paper, fur, angora and urethane.
d. Each establishment shall post in a conspicuous location, readily visible
from the outside of these premises, the telephone number or numbers
to be called in the event of an emergency.
e. Each machine shall be provided with an interlock system to prevent the
loading door from being opened during the normal cycle or in the event
of a power failure. This system may be either electrical and/or
mechanical.
f. No machine shall be permitted to be operated in a coin-operated or selfservice
dry cleaning establishment which in normal operation fails to
eliminate all vapors from the cleaned items upon completion of the dry
cleaning cycle.
g. Immediate action shall be taken to eliminate solvent odor in the
customer area. Failure to take such action shall be just cause for closing
the establishment. Vapors or odors from such establishments shall be
exhausted in such manner as not to constitute air pollution, as defined
by Statute (Chapter 212, P.L. 1954).
h. No person shall use spotting equipment containing flammable material
in a coin-operated or self-service dry cleaning establishment.
i. Each machine shall be inspected each day that it is in operation and
shall be kept in good repair by maintenance personnel. A record shall
be kept in the maintenance area of all inspections and repairs made.
j. Solvents shall be kept in closed airtight containers and shall be handled
in such manner as to prevent the escape of odors.
§ 28-2.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-2.4
1:671
§ 28-2.5. Inspection. [2000 Code § 28-2.5]
The Health Authority shall inspect establishments as often as he/she deems
necessary. The permit holder or his/her representative shall permit access
to any portion of the establishment for the purpose of making such an
inspection.
§ 28-2.6. Nuisance. [2000 Code § 28-2.6]
Any coin-operated or self-service dry cleaning establishment constructed,
operated, or maintained in violation of the provisions of this section is
hereby declared to be nuisance and detrimental to public health.
§ 28-3. FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 28-3.1. Definitions. [2000 Code § 28-3.1]
As used in this chapter:
APPROVED — shall mean any article of food or drink, a source of food
or drink, a method, a device, or a piece of equipment which meets the
requirements of the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their
designee of the City, or the State Department of Health.
EMPLOYEE — shall mean any person who handles food or drink during
preparation or servicing, or who comes in contact with any eating or
cooking utensil, or who is employed in a room in which food or drink is
prepared or served.
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — shall mean the Health Officer/Chief Code
Enforcement Officer or their designee or other official possessing a license
issued by the State Department of Health under the provisions of N.J.S.A.
26:1a-41.
RETAIL FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENT — shall mean a restaurant,
tavern, box lunch establishment, bakery, meat market, delicatessen,
luncheonette, caterer, soda fountain, food vending vehicle, and any other
place in which food or drink is prepared or stored for public consumption,
distribution, or sale at retail, including any vehicle used in connection
therewith and all places where water for drinking or culinary purposes is
available for public use.
SANITIZE — shall mean the rendering of eating and drinking utensils free
from disease-producing bacteria so that they have been so cleansed and
disinfected as to have a total bacterial count of not more than one hundred
(100) per utensil when sampled in accordance with approved method in an
approved laboratory.
UTENSIL — shall mean any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery,
containers, or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact.
k. A maintenance person shall be on duty on the premises at all times that
the establishment is doing business.
§ 28-2.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-3.2
1:672
§ 28-3.2. Certificates of Approval. [2000 Code § 28-3.2]
§ 28-3.3. Certificates, Revocation and Transfer. [2000 Code § 28-3.3]
§ 28-3.4. Mercantile License. [2000 Code § 28-3.4]
The City Clerk shall not issue a Mercantile License to any applicant for any
retail food handling establishment unless and until the applicant produces a
Certificate issued by the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or
their designee in accordance with this section.
§ 28-3.5. Inspection of Retail Food Handling Establishments. [2000
Code § 28-3.5]
The Enforcing Official shall inspect, as often as he/she deems necessary,
every retail food handling establishment. The person operating a retail food
handling establishment shall permit access to all parts of the establishment
and shall make available all records of food purchased upon request of the
Enforcing Official.
a. No person shall operate a retail food handling establishment unless a
Certificate or approval of an existing Certificate to operate same shall
have been issued by the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer
or their designee. The certificate shall not be issued except after
inspection of the premises proposed to be operated are found to be in
full compliance with this chapter. Such Certificate or approval of an
existing Certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such
establishment.
b. There shall be charge of five ($5.00) dollars for such Certificate or
approval of an existing Certificate.
c. Certificates issued or approved under the provision of this chapter
expire annually on December 31. Application for renewal shall be
submitted with the required fee prior to January 1.
d. A person conducting an itinerant retail food handling establishment
shall secure a Certificate; or if such person is the holder of a Certificate
issued by the Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee of another jurisdiction, the Certificate may be approved by the
Health Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee and
there shall be a fee of five ($5.00) dollars charged for such approval.
a. A Certificate or approval of Certificate may be suspended or revoked for
a violation by the holder of any provisions of this chapter, after an
opportunity for a hearing by the Mayor and Council.
b. A Certificate or approval of a Certificate issued by another Board of
Health is not transferable.
§ 28-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-3.6
1:673
§ 28-3.6. Closure for Infection. [2000 Code § 28-3.6]
If the Enforcing Official has reason to believe that any retail food handling
establishment is or may be a source of food-borne infection, he/she shall
advise the owner, manager, or employees thereof accordingly and order
appropriate action to be taken, which will eliminate the source of infection.
In the event such action is not taken immediately, he/she may order such
establishment to be closed and post a statement in a conspicuous place at
the entrance thereof, stating "The sale of food or drink in this establishment
is forbidden — Health Officer of the City of Asbury Park," which order shall
be effective and statement shall remain posted until the action ordered
to eliminate the source of food-borne infection has been completed. The
Enforcing Official, who believes an employee of any retail food handling
establishment is ill or infected with a disease, or may be a carrier of a
disease, which may be transmitted through food, may order him/her to
leave the establishment and order the employer to prohibit such employee
from returning to work until permission is granted to return by the Health
Officer/Chief Code Enforcement Officer or their designee.
§ 28-3.7. Penalty. [2000 Code § 28-3.7]
Any person who violates any provision of or order promulgated under this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I,
Section 1-5.
§ 28-4. STERILE SYRINGE ACCESS PROGRAM. [Ord. No. 2016-48]
The City of Asbury Park authorizes the Visiting Nurse Association Health
Group to establish a sterile syringe access program in Asbury Park to be
operated in accordance with the guidelines and procedures established by
the New Jersey Department of Health.
§ 28-5. INTENTIONAL RELEASE OF BALLOONS.
§ 28-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2018-34 § 28-4.1]
It is hereby found and declared that it will be the public policy of City of
Asbury Park to take action when feasible to reduce the effects of certain
products utilized, placed, or released with the environment in order to
protect the health and safety of the general public.
§ 28-5.2. Release of balloons. [Ord. No. 2018-34 § 28-4.2]
This section is adopted in order to protect the environment, particularly the
wildlife, and the health, safety and well-being of persons and property by
prohibiting the release of helium balloons into the atmosphere, including
latex and mylar, as it has been determined that the release of balloons
inflated with lighter-than-air gases pose a danger and nuisance to the
environment, particularly to wildlife and marine animals so as to constitute
a public nuisance and may pose a threat to the safety of its inhabitants and
their property.
§ 28-3.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 28-5.3
1:674
§ 28-5.3. Prohibited releases. [Ord. No. 2018-34 § 28-4.3]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to intentionally
release, organize the release, or intentionally cause to be released balloons
inflated with a gas that is lighter than air within the City of Asbury Park
limits, except for:
§ 28-5.4. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 2018-34 § 28-4.4]
Any person found in violation is guilty of a non-criminal infraction
punishable by a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
Chapter 30
LAND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
1. Balloon released by a person on behalf of a governmental agency or
pursuant to a governmental contract for scientific or meteorological
purposes.
2. Hot air balloons that are recovered after launching.
3. Balloons released indoors.
§ 28-5.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5.4
1:675

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 30-1. SHORT TITLE. [2000 Code § 30-1]
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Land Development
Regulations of the City of Asbury Park."
§ 30-2. AUTHORITY. [2000 Code § 30-2]
This chapter is enacted by the authority vested in the City Council of the
City of Asbury Park pursuant to the enabling law of the State of New Jersey
and after proper notice and public hearing pertaining thereto.
§ 30-3. PURPOSE. [2000 Code § 30-3]
The purpose of this chapter is as follows:
a. To plan and guide the appropriate use or development of all land in a
manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals, and
general welfare.
b. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
c. To provide adequate light, air and open space.
d. To ensure that land development does not conflict with the development
and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the County and the
State as a whole.
e. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the wellbeing of persons,
maintenance of the character of neighborhoods, preservation of the
environment and quality of life.
f. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditures of public funds
by the coordination of public development with land use policies.
g. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
residential, recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open
space, both public and private, according to their respective
environmental requirements.
h. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of
such facilities and routes which will result in congestion or blight.
i. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
§ 30-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-3
1:677
§ 30-4. (RESERVED)
§ 30-5. RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS. [2000 Code
§ 30-5]
The provisions of this chapter set forth minimum requirements for
promotion of the health, safety and public welfare; and whenever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most
restrictive, or that imposing the higher standards, shall govern. All
j. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land.
k. To encourage planned developments which incorporate the best
features of design and relate the type, design and layout of residential,
commercial, industrial and recreational development to the particular
site.
l. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction consistent
with provisions permitting other residential uses of a similar density in
the same zoning district.
m. To encourage coordination of various public and private procedures and
activities shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of
such development and to the more efficient use of land.
n. To regulate the location of buildings and establish standards of
development; to establish building lines and the location of buildings
designed for residential, commercial, industrial, office or other uses
within such lines and to fix reasonable standards to which buildings or
structures shall conform.
o. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures which are incompatible with
the character of development of the permitted uses within specified
zoning districts and surrounding areas.
p. To regulate alterations of existing buildings; to prevent such additions
to, and alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures
which would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder.
q. To conserve the value of land and buildings throughout the City.
r. Within the community's resources, to meet the future housing needs of
the citizens of the City and the region and to assure a full range of
housing types to meet all income levels.
s. To promote controlled redevelopment within the community in order to
provide a sound economic base.
§ 30-3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-5
1:678
ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter
are hereby repealed as to such inconsistency.
§ 30-6. RELATIONSHIP TO LAND USE PLAN. [2000 Code § 30-6;
New]
This chapter is intended to effect the standards for land uses and densities
set forth in the redevelopment plans and other elements or sub-elements of
the Asbury Park Master Plan as amended. Upon adoption of or amendment
of a Land Use Plan Element or Housing Plan Element of the Master Plan,
this chapter shall be amended, if necessary, so as to conform to such Master
Plan Elements. This chapter may be revised or modified by the City Council
in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Statutes.
§ 30-7. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. [2000 Code §§ 30-7.1
through 7.4; amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
§ 30-7.1. Requirement; Zoning Officer to Issue.
No building or structure may be erected or altered nor may any building
or structure or parcel of land become occupied, or the use therein changed
until a zoning permit or certificate of resolution compliance is obtained from
the Zoning Officer.
§ 30-7.2. Necessary for Construction Permit.
Application for a zoning permit or certificate of resolution compliance must
be made at the time of application for a construction permit or a mercantile
license.
§ 30-7.3. Necessary Prior to New Occupancy or New Use.
Should a construction permit or mercantile license not be required, the
zoning permit or certificate of resolution compliance must be obtained prior
to the new occupancy or new use of a building or property.
§ 30-7.4. Fee for Certificate of Resolution Compliance, Time of
Payment; Compliance Required Before Issuance.
A fee of $20 will be charged for each certificate of resolution compliance.
Such fee will be payable at the time of application. The certificate will be
issued only after an inspection is made by the Director of Planning and
Redevelopment or their designee to confirm compliance with this chapter.
This certificate shall not be provided until all known outstanding municipal
or Board invoices related to the project are paid.
§ 30-8. SEVERABILITY. [2000 Code § 30-8]
Should any portion of this chapter be held invalid, the holding shall not
affect the validity of remaining portions of this chapter. If a section of this
chapter is held invalid in one (1) or more of its applications, this section
§ 30-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-8
1:679
shall remain in effect in all valid applications that are severable from the
invalid application.
§ 30-9. TIME LIMITATIONS ON VARIANCES. [Ord. No. 2639]
a. Any variance or exception granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
of the City of Asbury Park shall be deemed expired if no construction,
alteration, or conversion has been commenced within one (1) year from
the date of granting of the variance, subject to the limitations set forth
herein.
b. The time limitation on the exercise of the variance or the exception
shall be tolled if the developer or property owner is barred or prevented
directly or indirectly from proceeding with the development otherwise
permitted, if the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with said development, for the following reasons, (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-21):
1. By a legal action instituted by any State, agency, political
subdivision or other party to protect the public health and welfare;
or
2. By a directive or order issued by any State agency, political
subdivision or Court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare.
In the event that either of the conditions set forth above are met,
the running of the period of approval of the variance or exception
shall be suspended for the period of time said legal action is
pending or such directive or order is in effect.
In that instance, it shall be the obligation of the developer or
property owner to notify the Zoning Officer and the City of Asbury
Park Zoning Board of Adjustment that the developer or property
owner has encountered a condition herein described.
c. The one (1) year time period shall be tolled only for as long as the
aforementioned conditions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-21 are in effect and then
only as to the remaining portion of said one (1) year time period.
Nothing herein shall preclude an extension of said time period in the
discretion of the Zoning Board upon application to said Board and upon
notice to adjacent property owners as requested by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
d. If a variance is granted in conjunction with minor or major site plan
approval, those time periods relating to work to be performed pursuant
to site plan approval, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., shall apply
to the variance or variances granted in connection therewith.
e. If a variance is granted in conjunction with preliminary approval of a
major site plan, the applicant may, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49c.,
apply for extensions on said variance for additional periods of at least
§ 30-8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-9
1:680
§ 30-10. through § 30-14. (RESERVED)
one (1) year, but not to exceed a total extension of two (2) years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by ordinance,
such revised standards may govern.
f. If a variance is granted in conjunction with a site plan approval, and
final approval is obtained, the developer may obtain an extension with
regard to that variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52d., if the
developer can prove to the reasonable satisfaction of the Planning
Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities
and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
these approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before (1)
what would otherwise be the expiration date of said variance or (2) the
91st day after the developer receives the last legally required approval
from other governmental entitles, whichever occurs later.
§ 30-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-10
1:681

ARTICLE II
Basic Definitions and Interpretations
§ 30-15. DEFINITIONS. [2000 Code § 30-15; Ord. No. 2735 § 1; Ord.
No. 2777 § 1; Ord. No. 2831 § 1; Ord. No. 2851]
For the purpose of this chapter, "lot" shall include "plot," and "building"
shall include "structure," and "fence" shall include "wall." Unless the
context of use clearly indicates otherwise, the term "shall," "will," and
"must" indicate a mandatory requirement, and the term "may" indicates a
permissive action. The singular may also mean the plural and person shall
also mean other legal entities, in proper context.
ABUTTING COUNTY ROAD OR DRAINAGE FACILITIES — shall mean any
existing or proposed County road or drainage facility shown on the adopted
County Master Plan, Highway Plan, or Official Map, which adjoins or ties
within a lot or parcel of land submitted for subdivision or site plan approval.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — shall mean a building or use
subordinate to and customarily associated with or incidental to the principal
building or use on the same lot. When an accessory building is attached in
a substantial manner by a wall or roof to a principal building, it shall be
considered a part thereof.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — shall mean the Director of Planning and
Redevelopment as defined in this Chapter 2.[Amended 12-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-39]
ADULT ARCADE — shall mean an establishment where, for any form of
consideration, one (1) or more motion picture projectors, slide projectors,
video tape players, or similar machines for viewing by five (5) or fewer
persons each are used to show films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by an
emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — shall mean an establishment that has as a
substantial portion of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale for any form of
consideration, any one (1) or more of the following: (1) books, magazines,
periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations that are
characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas; or, (2) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are
designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.
ADULT CABARET — shall mean a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar
establishment that regularly features live performances characterized by
the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities,
or films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic
reproductions, in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time
is devoted to the showing of materials characterized by an emphasis upon
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:683
anatomical areas. For the purposes of this chapter, "go-go bars" shall be
considered to be adult cabarets.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER — shall mean an establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in
which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to
the showing of material characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT THEATER — shall mean a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar establishment characterized by activities featuring the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities featuring the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
ALLEY — shall mean a minor way which is used primarily for vehicular
service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street. An alley, as defined herein, shall not be considered a street for the
purposes of compliance with Subsection e. of § 30-68.2.
ALTERATION — shall mean a change to the exterior or interior elements
of a building or structure so as to affect the amount or arrangement of
rooms, corridors and other spaces or to change the nature of their use and/
or a change to parking and loading areas and access thereto which affects
existing parking layout, circulation, drainage, building arrangements,
landscaping, buffering and/or lighting.
AMUSEMENTS, COMMERCIAL — shall mean an establishment which
includes a combination of rides, games of chance, coin-operated
amusements and similar devices arranged and intended to provide
amusement.
ANTIQUES — shall mean objects having special value because of their age
and craftsmanship.
APPLICANT — shall mean a developer submitting an application for
development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — shall mean the application form
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance a permit pursuant to subsections
30-21.6 and 30-22.3.
ARCADE — shall mean an establishment containing four (4) or more coin
operated amusements; including video games, pinball machines, juke boxes,
pool tables or games of chance.
AUTOMOBILE JUNK YARD — shall mean and describe any business and any
place of storage or deposit which displays, or in or upon which there are
displayed, two (2) or more unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for
reconditioning for use for highway transportation, or used parts of motor
vehicles or material which has been a part of a motor vehicle, the sum of
which parts or material are equal in bulk to two (2) or more motor vehicles.
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:684
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR — shall mean a business or person who for
compensation engages in repairing, restoring, removing, or installing
integral component parts of an engine, power train, chassis, or body of any
vehicle.
AUTOMOBILE STORAGE YARD, PRIVATE — shall mean one (1) or more
unregistered or disabled vehicles which are stored in the open on private
property and not being restored to operating condition.
AVERAGE ELEVATION — shall mean the elevation of the finished grade at
the center of each facade of a building or structure divided by the total
number of facades.
BANNER — shall mean any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material
that is mounted on a pole, a building, or any other mounting. National flags,
State or municipal flags, the official flag of any institution or business, or
other officially recognized flags shall not be considered banners.
BAR — shall mean any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold
at retail for consumption on the premises, exclusive of establishments
otherwise defined herein.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION — shall mean the highest elevation, expressed
in feet above sea level, of the level of flood waters resulting from a one
hundred (100) year storm.
BASEMENT — shall mean a space having one-half (1/2) or more of its floorto-
ceiling height above the average elevation of the adjoining ground and
with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half (6 1/2) feet. A
basement shall be counted as a story if used for business, industrial, office
or residential proposes.
BEACON — shall mean any light with one (1) or more beams directed into
the atmosphere or directed at one (1) or more points not on the same
property as the light source; also, any light with one (1) or more beams that
rotate or move.
BED AND BREAKFAST — shall mean an owner occupied facility that
provides overnight accommodations and a morning meal to transients for
compensation. Bed and breakfasts shall only be permitted as a renovation of
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:685
an existing building; no new construction shall be permitted (although some
"minor" additions may be appropriate). The limit of time a guest may stay
shall be limited to a maximum of two weeks. Minor additions shall mean no
more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of new floor area and which
does not trigger any setback or height variances.
BERM — shall mean an earthen mound planted with grass or other plant
material and used for screening one area from another.
BOARD ENGINEER — shall be the engineer duly appointed and of record
by the respective Board.[Added 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
BOARDING HOUSE — shall mean any building, together with any related
structure, accessory building, any land appurtenant thereto, and any part
thereof, which contains two (2) or more units of dwelling space arranged
or intended for single room occupancy, exclusive of any such unit occupied
by an owner or operator, and wherein personal or financial services are
provided to the residents, including any residential hotel or congregate
living arrangement, but excluding any hotel, motel, or established guest
house wherein a minimum of eighty-five (85%) percent of the units of
dwelling space are offered for limited tenure only.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — shall mean the Asbury Park Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
BREW PUB — shall mean an establishment licensed to brew any malt
alcoholic beverages in an amount not to exceed three thousand (3,000)
barrels of thirty-one (31) fluid gallons capacity per year, operated in
conjunction with a restaurant regularly and principally used for the purpose
of providing meals to its customers and having adequate kitchen and dining
room facilities, located immediately adjoining the premises licensed to brew
malt alcoholic beverages as a restricted brewery.
BUFFER — shall mean a portion of a lot or parcel which is devoted to the
visual separation of land uses on the same lot or on an adjacent lot. In most
instances the buffer will be a strip of plant material, at least five (5) feet
wide, massed so as to block or screen views through it.
BUILDING — shall mean a combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having a
roof. This definition shall not be construed to apply to trailers, wagons or
any other enclosure supported by a chassis, axles and/or wheels.
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:686
BUILDING COVERAGE — shall mean the area of a lot or parcel covered
by buildings or structures, exclusive of parking areas or other impervious
ground covers.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — shall mean a governmental construction
project or acquisition of equipment or real property.
CELLAR — shall mean a space with less than one-half (1/2) of its floor-toceiling
height above the average elevation of the adjoining ground or with a
floor-to-ceiling height of less than six and one-half (6 1/2) feet.
CHANGE OF USE — shall mean the use of a building or premises for
a purpose different than previously authorized and where one (1) use
classification is being changed to another (e.g., one (1) family residential
to two (2) family residential, retail sales to retail service, multifamily
residential to general office, hotel/motel to multifamily dwelling or rooming/
boarding house).
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER — shall mean a place of business established for
the purpose of providing supervision and care for five (5) or more children
five (5) years of age or younger and operated on a regular basis, but not as
a residence or domicile.
CHURCH/HOUSE OF WORSHIP — shall mean a building or premises,
together with any related structure, accessory building, or land appurtenant
thereto, and any part thereof in which persons assemble for the purpose of
conducting religious worship services and related activities.
CIRCULATION — shall mean systems, structures and physical
improvements for the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or
power by such means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers,
airways, pipes and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such
means as terminals, stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings or
transshipment points.
CLUBS, SOCIAL/FRATERNAL ORGANIZATIONS — shall mean a building or
premises together with any related structure, accessory building, or land
appurtenant thereto, and any part thereof, in which persons congregate for
social or civic purposes and where membership might be required.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — shall mean an area to be developed as a
single entity wherein buildings and structures are arranged in groups,
either on separate lots or on a single parcel, so as to provide open space
and efficient distribution of roads and utilities according to a preconceived
plan.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:687
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE — shall mean any sign wording, logo, or other
representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — shall mean an open space area within or related
to a site designated as a development, and dedicated, set aside, reserved
or intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the
development. Common open space may contain such complimentary
structures, facilities and improvements as are necessary and appropriate
for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development, and
the general public if so dedicated.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED —
shall mean any community residential facility licensed by the State of New
Jersey pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448 (C. 30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food,
shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision as required, to not
more than fifteen (15) developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons,
not including any person who has been committed after having been found
not guilty of a criminal offense by reason of insanity or having been found
unfit to be tried on a criminal charge. For the purposes of this chapter,
"group homes," "intermediate care facilities," "supervised apartment living
arrangements," and "hostels" are considered "community residences for the
developmentally disabled."
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — shall
mean any shelter approved for a purpose of service, contracted and
certified by the State of New Jersey pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 337 (C.
30:40-1-14) providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal
guidance and other services on a temporary basis to not more than fifteen
(15) persons who have been victims of domestic violence, including any
children of such victims.
CONDITIONAL USE — shall mean a use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as contained in this chapter and upon the issuance of authorization therefor
by the Planning Board.
CONGREGATE SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — shall mean a facility
providing independent dwelling units supplemented by congregate meals,
housekeeping and support services to persons sixty (60) years of age or
older.
CONTAINERS, REFUSE — shall mean a large box or container made of
metal or similar material and designed to be carried on a flat bed truck or
other conveyance and used for the disposal of debris or other materials.
For the purposes of this chapter, a "dumpster," including those which are
designed to be mechanically emptied by specialized disposal vehicles, are
to be considered refuse containers.
CONVENIENCE STORE — shall mean any retail establishment offering
for sale prepackaged food products, household items, and other goods
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:688
commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area less than
three thousand (3,000) square feet.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — shall mean a composite of the plan elements
for the physical development of Monmouth County, with the accompanying
maps, plots, charts, and descriptive and explanatory matter adopted by the
County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and N.J.S.A. 40:27-4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — shall mean the Monmouth County Planning
Board.
COURT — shall mean any open, unoccupied area which is bounded by three
(3) or more building walls.
COURT, INNER — shall mean an open area, unobstructed from the ground
to the sky, which is bounded on more than three (3) sides by the exterior
walls of one (1) or more buildings.
COURT, OUTER — shall mean an open space, unobstructed from the ground
to the sky, which is bounded on not more than three (3) sides by the exterior
walls of one (1) or more buildings.
CURB CUT — shall mean a separation or break in the curbline or edge of
the cartway to allow access to a driveway or other vehicular passageway.
CUT — shall mean a portion of land surface or area from which earth has
been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original
ground surface or excavated surface.
DAYS — shall mean calendar days.
DEDICATION — shall mean a dedication of land for construction,
reconstruction, widening, repairing, maintaining or improving a street,
public or private, and for the construction, reconstruction or alteration
of facilities related to the safety, convenience or carrying capacity of the
street; including, but not limited to curbing, pedestrian walkways, drainage
facilities, traffic control devices and utilities in or along road rights-of-way.
DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL — shall mean the number of dwelling units per
gross acre of residential land area including streets, easements and open
space within a development. The residential density of mixed use
development proposed for oceanfront parcels, located east of Kingsley
Street in RC and R5 Zones, may be calculated using the entire tract,
including portions of the tract containing only commercial uses, provided
the proposed development is consistent with all aspects of the Waterfront
Redevelopment Plan and this chapter. In all other developments, including
planned developments, the residential density shall be calculated after the
tract area occupied exclusively by commercial uses is subtracted from the
gross tract area.
DEVELOPMENT — shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two (2)
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure,
or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use
of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land,
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:689
for which permission may be required pursuant to this chapter. For the
purposes of this chapter, "Special Questions," as defined in this chapter, are
not considered "development."
DEVELOPMENT, CONVENTIONAL — shall mean development other than
planned development or cluster development.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — shall mean a major subdivision or any
development not defined as a minor development.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — shall mean:
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — shall mean a zoning, subdivision, site
plan, Official Map, or other municipal ordinance or regulation containing
the use and development of land, or amendment thereto adopted and filed
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE — shall mean three (3) or more
persons, who may be residents or nonresidents of the City, appointed by the
Planning Board upon recommendation of the City Manager or City Planner
for the purpose of providing technical advice and comments on development
applications.
DRAINAGE — shall mean the removal of surface water or groundwater
from land by drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff
during and after construction or development to minimize erosion and
sedimentation, to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts
and bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to
lessen nonpoint pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for
their biological functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary
for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
a. A minor subdivision;
The construction of any building or structure or addition to any building
or structure of five hundred (500) or more square feet but less than one
thousand (1,000) square feet of building area or structural area;
b.
The construction of more than four (4) but less than ten (10) parking
spaces;
c.
Improvements to existing parking areas containing more than four (4)
but less than ten (10) parking spaces where the area of existing paving
and location and size of existing driveways are affected;
d.
The alteration of an existing building resulting in a change in the
number of dwelling units on the site;
e.
A change in use where additional nonconformities are created and/or
pre-existing nonconformities are exacerbated; and/or
f.
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension of
any off-tract improvement.
g.
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:690
DRIVEWAY — shall mean a vehicular accessway provided for the purpose of
allowing passage over private or public property. All driveways shall be an
appropriate hard-surface pavement that is durable and maintained in good
condition.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — shall mean a one-family dwelling attached to two
(2) or more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED — shall mean a one-family dwelling which is not
attached to any other dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY — shall mean a building containing more than
two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — shall mean a building containing one (1)
dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED — shall mean a one-family dwelling attached
to one (1) other one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall or other
structural element. (Also known as a "twin house" when located on one (1)
lot.)
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — shall mean a building containing two (2)
dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT — shall mean one (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied,
or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters with cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the
exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — shall mean those services provided by a
municipality which are necessary to support and satisfy the needs of the
community. Such services may include police and fire protection, solid
waste and wastewater collection and removal, education, snow removal,
recreation, etc.
ESTABLISHMENT OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — shall mean an
establishment which provides any form of entertainment which is of a
nature that would require the exclusion of minors by virtue of age under
existing State statute. For the purpose of this chapter, adult motion picture
or "X-rated theaters," regardless of seating capacity; "peep shows," whether
or not they are coin operated; adult cabarets or "go-go bars" and massage
parlors are considered to be "establishments of adult entertainment" if they
are required by law to exclude access to minors by virtue of age.
EXCAVATION — shall mean removal or recovery by any means whatsoever
of minerals, mineral substances or organic substances, other than
vegetation, from the water, land surface, or beneath the land surface,
whether exposed or submerged.
EXHIBITION PAVILION — shall mean a building of no more than fifty
thousand (50,000) square feet and two (2) stories in size, arranged and
intended to present the products and/or philosophy of a single sponsor
to the public, in an educational and entertaining manner, for an extended
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:691
period of time. For the purposes of this definition, an extended period of
time shall mean a period of not less than six (6) months.
FAMILY — shall mean one (1) or more persons maintaining a household,
provided that, unless specified otherwise in this chapter, no family shall
contain more than five (5) unrelated adults. A "family" shall include foster
children placed with a family by the State Division of Youth and Family
Services, a community residence for the developmentally disabled or
community shelter for victims of domestic violence containing six (6)
persons or less, excluding resident staff, but shall not include roomers,
boarders, or members of a fraternity or sorority. For the purpose of this
chapter, "unrelated adults" shall mean that no person is either mother,
father, son, daughter, sister or brother, husband or wife of any other person
in the family. (See "household.")
FENCE — shall mean a structure rising above the finished grade intended to
provide physical separation between spaces or properties. For the purposes
of this section, a structure constructed on a continuous footing or
foundation and greater than four (4) inches thick, excluding support posts,
shall be considered a wall rather than a fence and shall meet the setback
requirements for buildings specified in § 30-67, herein.
FILL — shall mean sand, gravel, earth or other materials of any composition
whatsoever placed or deposited by any person or persons.
FINAL APPROVAL — shall mean the official action of the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment taken on a development plan which has
been given preliminary approval after all conditions, engineering plans
and other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their
completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees.
FLAG — shall mean any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors,
patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision, or other entity.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — shall mean the area delineated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map as being subject to flood waters resulting from a one
hundred (100) year storm.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — shall mean the official map on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community, adopted September 15, 1983, as Map No. 340285-0001C or as
revised by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas
of the floors or stories of a building measured from the exterior face of
the exterior walls but not including areas devoted exclusively to off-street
parking and loading space for motor vehicles or any space where the floorto-
ceiling height is less than seven (7) feet.
FLOOR AREA, NET — shall mean that portion of the gross floor area to be
used or occupied or intended for use or occupancy. In the absence of floor
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:692
plans identifying and quantifying usable or habitable floor space, net floor
area will be measured as gross floor area minus twenty (20%) percent.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — shall mean the ratio of the gross floor areas
of all buildings on a lot to the lot area.
GARAGE — shall mean a building or structure used for the storage of
one (1) or more vehicles. If it is maintained for the resident occupant of
the premises and no service is rendered to the public, or any business
conducted therein, it is a private garage. Any garage other than a private
garage is a public garage.
GARAGE, REPAIR — See "Automobile repair."
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — shall mean a place where gasoline or
other motor fuel is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made
directly into motor vehicles, and which may provide for the maintenance,
service or washing of motor vehicles, or the sale of equipment and
accessories.
GOVERNING BODY — shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City of
Asbury Park.
GRADE, FINISHED — shall mean the final grade or elevation of the ground
surface conforming to the proposed design.
GRADING — shall mean any stripping, culling, filling, stockpiling or any
combination thereof, including the land in its cut or filled condition.
GUEST HOUSES — shall mean a hotel wherein no more than nine (9) units
of dwelling space, each containing private bathing facilities, are arranged
or intended for single room occupancy, exclusive of any such unit occupied
by any owner or operator, and where eighty-five (85%) percent or more of
the units are occupied by persons for ninety (90) days or less. (See "hotel.")
HABITABLE ROOM — shall mean any room in a dwelling unit other than a
kitchen or bathroom.
HALFWAY HOUSE — shall mean a building or structure or dwelling unit
wherein two (2) or more inmates of the State Department of Corrections;
or two (2) or more persons paroled from a correctional institution reside
under on-site or off-site supervision. Halfway houses, as herein defined, are
prohibited in the City as they represent a threat to the public safety and
welfare.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — shall mean the vertical distance
measured from the average finished ground elevation around the
foundation to the top of a structure; the highest point of the surface of a flat
roof; or the midpoint between the ridge and the eave of a pitched roof.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:693
HELIPORT — shall mean an identifiable area on land, water or structure,
including any building or facilities thereon, used or intended to be used
for the landing and takeoff of helicopters. The term heliport as used herein
applies to all sites, including helistops, used or intended to be used for the
landing and takeoff of helicopters.
HELISTOP — shall mean an area used or intended to be used for the landing
and takeoff of helicopters engaged in dropping-off or picking-up passengers.
HISTORIC BUILDING OR SITE — shall mean any building, structure, area
or property that has been designated on the State or National Register of
Historic Places or in the Asbury Park Master Plan to be significant in the
history, architecture, archaeology or culture of the State of New Jersey, its
communities or the nation.
HOME OCCUPATION (MINOR) — shall mean an occupation, profession,
activity, or use that is clearly a customary, incidental and secondary use
of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the
property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — shall mean the office of a physician,
dentist, chiropractor, architect, attorney, accountant or like professional
person, which is conducted within the residence of that person in a
residential zone.
HOTEL — shall mean a building or group of buildings containing ten (10) or
more units of dwelling space designed and used primarily for single room
occupancy of limited tenure in which no more than five (5%) percent of the
sleeping units may have cooking facilities of any kind, and all sleeping units
contain private bathrooms with bathing facilities. For the purposes of this
chapter, "limited tenure" shall mean occupancy in any particular facility of
not more than ninety (90) days. A maximum of fifteen (15%) percent of the
sleeping units may be occupied more than ninety (90) days. Motels, motor
inns, and motor lodges shall be considered "hotels" for the purpose of this
chapter. Buildings which contain sleeping rooms without private baths and
which do not provide heat in winter months shall be considered "seasonal
hotels" and shall not be permitted.
HOUSEHOLD — shall mean a family living together in a single dwelling unit
with common access to, and common use of all living and eating areas and
all areas and facilities for the preparation and storage of food within the
dwelling unit.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — shall mean any material which generally
reduces or prevents absorption of storm water into previously undeveloped
land. Retention and detention basins and dry wells allowing water to
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:694
percolate directly into the ground shall not be considered as impervious
surfaces.
INTERESTED PARTY — shall mean: (a) In a criminal or quasi-criminal
proceeding, any citizen of the State of New Jersey; (b) In the case of a
civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative proceeding before a
municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or outside the City,
whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy property is or may be affected by any
action taken under this chapter, or under any other law of this State or of
the United States has been denied, violated or infringed by an action or a
failure to act under this chapter.
INSTITUTIONAL AND PUBLIC USES — shall mean nonprofit public or
quasi-public institutions and uses such as public and private colleges and
universities, libraries, museums and correspondence and vocational
schools.
JUNK — shall mean any scrap, waste, reclaimable material and debris,
whether or not stored or used in conjunction with the dismantling,
processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition.
Junk may include, for purposes of illustration, vehicles, tires, vehicle parts,
equipment, paper, rags, metal, glass, plaster, household appliances, wood,
lumber, brush and building materials.
JUNKYARD — shall mean any area, lot, parcel, building or structure used
for the storage, sale, processing or abandonment of junk.
LAND — shall mean ground, soil or earth including improvements and
fixtures on, above or below the surface thereof.
LAND DISTURBANCE — shall mean any activity involving the clearing,
cutting, excavating, filling, grading, and any other activity which causes
land to be altered, eroded or subject to erosion.
LANDSCAPE PLAN — shall mean a drawing or set of drawings, submitted
in conjunction with an application for development, which indicates all the
elements of the proposed landscape treatment of a site, including plant
materials, structures, paving materials, landforms, grading and drainage.
LICENSED HEALTH CARE FACILITY — shall mean any health care facility
defined in N.J.S.A. 26:2H-2 that requires a license from the State of New
Jersey Department of Health to operate.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — shall mean an establishment that engages in
fabrication, assembly, or processing of goods or materials, or the storage
of bulk goods and materials where such activities or materials create no
hazard from fire or explosion, or produce no toxic or corrosive fumes, gas,
smoke, obnoxious dust or vapor, offensive noise or vibration, glare, flashes,
or objectionable effluent.
LOT — shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by
a plot plan or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:695
LOT AREA — shall mean the computed area contained within the lot lines,
but not including any street rights-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — shall mean a parcel of land either at the junction of or
abutting on two (2) or more intersecting streets, or abutting a single street
at the point where the road tangents deflect by more than forty-five (45°)
degrees.
LOT COVERAGE — shall mean that portion of one (1) lot or more than one
(1) lot which is improved or is proposed to be improved with buildings and
structures, including but not limited to driveways, parking lots, pedestrian
walkways, signs and other man-made improvements on the ground surface
which are more impervious than the natural surface. (See also "building
coverage" and "open space.")
LOT DEPTH — shall mean the average distance between the front lot line
and rear lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR — shall mean a parcel of land other than a corner lot and
having frontage on a street, road or other designated right-of-way.
LOT LINE — shall mean a line of record bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — shall mean the lot line separating a lot from a street
right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR — shall mean the lot line opposite and most distant from
the front lot line, or the point at which the side lot lines meet. On corner
lots, there shall be only one (1) rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — shall mean any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT, THROUGH — shall mean an interior lot which extends from one (1)
street to another.
LOT WIDTH — shall mean the distance between the side lot lines measured
at the street line. Where the side lot lines converge towards the street, the
lot width may be measured at the front yard setback line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — shall mean any security other than cash,
which may be accepted by the City for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter or as a condition of Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment approval.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — shall mean a subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MARQUEE — shall mean any permanent roof-like structure located at an
entry to an entertainment establishment that projects beyond the building
or extends along and projects beyond the wall of a building, generally
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:696
designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather, and any
sign attached to or made part of such structure.
MASSAGE PARLOR — shall mean an establishment where, for any form
of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic
treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is
administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by
a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or
similar professional licensed by the State of New Jersey. This definition
does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing
salon, spa, or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation
of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.
MASTER PLAN — shall mean the Asbury Park Master Plan and any
revisions, amendments, or additions thereto.
MICROBREWERY — shall mean an establishment engaged in brewing any
malt alcoholic beverages for sale and distribution to wholesalers and
retailers licensed in accordance with the State Alcoholic Beverage Law, that
is licensed to operate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-10.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — shall mean any subdivision containing not more
than three (3) lots, including the remaining lot or parcel, which is not
a planned development, or does not contain any new street, or does not
involve the extension of any off-tract improvement.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — shall mean Revised New Jersey Statutes
40:55D-1 et seq.
NATURAL GROUND SURFACE — shall mean the ground surface in its
original state before any grading, excavation or filling.
NIGHTCLUB — shall mean an establishment where alcoholic beverages are
served that may also serve food as an adjunct to its bar business, and where
music (live or recorded) is provided to patrons for their listening or dancing
entertainment.
NONCONFORMING LOT — shall mean a lot, the area, dimension or location
of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
chapter or previous ordinances, but fails to conform to the requirements of
the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision
or amendment of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — shall mean a structure which was of
legal height and/or legally situated on a lot or parcel prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of this chapter or previous ordinances, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — shall mean a use or activity which was lawful
prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this chapter or previous
ordinances, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment of this chapter.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:697
For the purposes of this section, a use shall be considered nonconforming
if the residential density or floor area ratio applied thereto exceeds the
maximum permitted in the zoning district in which such use is located by
reason of the adoption, revision or amendment of the Land Development
Regulations.
OFFICE, BUSINESS — shall mean a room or group of rooms used for
conducting the affairs of a business or industry.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — shall mean any office used by one (1) or
more persons licensed or certified by the State of New Jersey, or any
professional society or association with recognized status and national
affiliations, to provide a professional service to the public. Such professions
shall specifically include licensed medical practitioners, chiropractors,
psychologists, real estate practitioners, accountants, financial or insurance
practitioners, legal practitioners, planning, design, and engineering
professionals, and ravel consultants.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — shall mean the map, with changes and additions
thereto, adopted and established from time to time, by resolution of the
Board of Chosen Freeholders of the County of Monmouth pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — shall mean a map adopted in accordance with the
Municipal Land Use Law, or any prior act authorizing such adoption, which
map shall be deemed conclusive with respect to the location and width of
the streets, public parks and playgrounds, and drainage right-of-way shown
thereon.
OFF-SITE — shall mean located outside the lot lines of the lot or lots in
question but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the
subject of a development or contiguous portion of a street right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — shall mean not located on the property which is the subject
of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street rightof-
way.
ON-SITE — shall mean located on the lot or lots in question.
ON-TRACT — shall mean located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — shall mean any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that
such area may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street-parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the recreational use and enjoyment of the open space.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — See "common open space."
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — shall mean any open space area conveyed or
otherwise dedicated to the City or a City agency, Board of Education, State
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:698
or County agency, or other public body for recreational and conservational
uses.
OWNER/APPLICANT — shall mean an individual, firm, association,
syndicate, copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary
interest to seek or authorize development of land under this chapter and
State Statute.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — shall mean any open area, including parking
spaces, driveways and access aisles or other public way, used for the
temporary storage of automobiles and other permitted vehicles for the
private use of the owners or occupants of the lot on which the area is
located.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — shall mean any open area, including parking
spaces, driveways and access aisles, other than a street or other public
way, used for the temporary storage of automobiles and other permitted
vehicles and available to the public, with or without compensation or as an
accommodation for clients, customers and employees.
PARKING FACILITY — shall mean any public or private parking area or
garage.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — shall mean for purposes of notice,
any applicant for development, the owners of the subject property, and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under this
chapter.
PENNANT — shall mean any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material,
whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope,
wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PENTHOUSE — shall mean a roofed enclosure up to twelve (12) feet in
height on top of a building and occupying not more than twenty (20%)
percent of the main roof area.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — shall mean any security, which may be
accepted by the City to ensure the installation of public improvements or
compliance with conditions imposed by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
PERMIT — shall mean a certificate issued to perform work under this
chapter.
PERMITTED USE — shall mean any use which shall be allowed, subject to
the provisions of this chapter.
PERMITTEE — shall mean any person to whom a permit is issued in
accordance with this chapter.
PERSON — shall mean corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership or joint-stock company, as well as individual, the State and all
political subdivisions of the State or any agency or instrumentality thereof.
PERSONAL SERVICES — shall mean establishments engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or their apparel, including beauty
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:699
shops, barber shops, shoe repair, tailors, nail salons, and photographic
studios.
PHILANTHROPIC OR ELEEMOSYNARY USE — shall mean a use
established by a nonprofit organization and funded through a foundation
or other charitable means for the purpose of promoting human welfare.
Such uses include "shelter for the homeless" and "soup kitchens," when
operated by an organization as defined herein. Such a use does not include
"community residences for the developmentally disabled," "residential
health care facilities" or "community shelters for victims of domestic
violence" as defined in this section.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — shall mean an application for
development involving two (2) acres or more to be developed according
to a plan as a single entity containing one (1) or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses or
both and any residential and other uses incidental to the predominant use
as may be permitted by this chapter.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — shall mean planned unit development,
planned unit residential development, residential cluster, planned
commercial development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — shall mean an application for
development involving three (3) acres or more to be developed according
to a plan as a single entity containing one (1) or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any
commercial uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by
this chapter.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — shall mean an area with
a specified minimum contiguous acreage of two (2) acres or more to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan containing one (1) or
more residential clusters, which may include appropriate commercial, and/
or public or quasi-public uses all primarily for the benefit of the residential
development.
PLANNING BOARD — shall mean the Asbury Park Planning Board.
PLAT — shall mean a map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PLAT, FINAL — shall mean the final map of all or a portion of a subdivision
or site plan which is presented to the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment for final approval in accordance with this chapter.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — shall mean the preliminary map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment for consideration and preliminary
approval.
PLAT, SKETCH — shall mean the sketch map of a subdivision or site plan
of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and
classification.
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:700
PORCH — shall mean a roofed entrance or porte cochere not more than
one (1) story in height which projects beyond the main building into the
required front yard area; the porch shall not be enclosed permanently or
temporarily, with any type of material, nor shall there be any construction
between the roof and floor of the porch except for columns or posts
necessary to support the roof or an open safety railing, which shall present
no more than minimal obstruction to view; provided, however, that a
portable storm vestibule not more than five (5) feet in any horizontal
dimension is permissible during the fall and winter months and open wire
mesh removable screening in the area aforesaid is permissible during the
spring and summer months. However, open balconies may be permitted
above the first floor on buildings or structures that are built and utilized
as motels, high-rise apartments or multifamily dwelling units, provided the
balconies shall not extend more than six (6) feet beyond the building line.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — shall mean the conferral of certain rights
pursuant to this chapter prior to the final approval after specific elements
of the development plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLAN AND ELEVATIONS — shall mean
architectural drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the
design of a project illustrating in a schematic form, its scope, scale and
relationship to its site and immediate environs.
PROHIBITED USE — shall mean a use or use classification which is not
expressly permitted in a zone district.
PUBLIC AREAS — shall mean existing or proposed: (1) public parks,
playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas; (2) other public
open spaces; (3) scenic and historic sites; and (4) schools and other public
buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — shall mean a master plan, capital
improvement program or other proposal for land development adopted by
the appropriate public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGE WAY — shall mean the land reserved or dedicated for
the installation of surface or subsurface storm water drainage systems.
QUORUM — shall mean a majority of the full authorized membership of
either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
RECREATION AREA — shall mean that portion of the designated open
space of a development proposal which is specifically designed for the
active or passive recreation of the residents of the development or general
public, if so designated.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — shall mean recreation facilities operated
as a business and open to the public for a fee.
RECREATION FACILITY — shall mean a place where sports, leisure time
activities and customary and usual recreational activities such as set forth
in major group #79 of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual are
carried out.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:701
REGION or REGIONAL — shall mean Monmouth County.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — shall mean two (2) or more residential
dwellings of one (1) or more housing types grouped together on a site so
as to provide open space for the common use of the residents. The overall
permitted residential density of a site with residential clusters shall be
equal to that which is specified for the zone district.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY — shall mean any establishment
which furnishes food and provides any personal care or service beyond food,
shelter, laundry and guidance, to any one (1) or more persons eighteen (18)
years of age or older. For the purposes of this chapter, "homes for sheltered
care," "rest homes" and "convalescent homes" are considered "residential
health care facilities."
RESTAURANT — shall mean an establishment where beverages and
prepared food are served on the premises and where not less than seventyfive
(75%) percent of the gross floor area is devoted to table or booth dining
space for patrons.
RESUBDIVISION — shall mean: (1) the further division or relocation of lot
lines of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law or (2) the alteration of any streets or the
establishment of any new streets within any subdivision previously made
and approved or recorded according to law, but does not include
conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETAIL SERVICE — shall mean any establishment providing a service to
the public at large for a fee, limited to the following, except as otherwise
provided in § 30-71 of this chapter: eating and drinking places; offices
for finance, insurance, real estate or travel services; personal grooming,
garment and footwear services; business services; repair services except
for automobiles and large items such as furniture and major household
appliances such as refrigerators unless part of a retail sales business on
the premises; recreation services except amusement arcades and billiard
parlors; health services except licensed health care facilities and partial
care programs; educational services restricted to accredited colleges or
universities, licensed professional or trade schools and specialized skills
training, such as dance, martial arts, fitness training or bartending schools;
cultural services such as museums and art galleries.
RETAIL TRADE — shall mean any establishment which engages in the sale
of new merchandise to the public at large, limited to the following except
as otherwise provided in § 30-71 of this chapter: hardware and garden
supply; general merchandise and department stores; food stores; apparel
and accessory stores; home furnishing and equipment stores; appliance and
electronic equipment stores; miscellaneous retail except nonstore retailers,
fuel and ice dealers.
RETAIL USED CAR DEALERSHIP — shall mean a business where used
passenger motor vehicles are displayed and sold by a dealer licensed by
the State of New Jersey. A retail used car dealership shall not include a
motor vehicle repair facility as defined in this section, but may include such
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:702
maintenance activities for the purpose of servicing motor vehicles so as to
make them comply with the laws of the State of New Jersey.
ROOMER/BOARDER — shall mean a person other than a member of a
family or household occupying part of any dwelling unit, who, for a
consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations in such dwelling unit
and may be furnished with meals or kitchen privileges, financial assistance,
supervision or personal service as part of this consideration.
ROOMING HOUSE — shall mean a boarding house wherein no personal or
financial services are provided to residents.
ROOMING UNIT — shall mean one (1) or more rooms arranged and
intended for residential occupancy but lacking either private cooking or
bathroom facilities. Bedrooms to which direct access is gained by individual
key operated locks shall be considered "rooming units."
SECONDHAND STORE — shall mean any commercial establishment
devoted exclusively to the sale of used merchandise. For the purposes of
this chapter, "pawn shops," "used furniture stores" and "thrift shops" shall
be considered "secondhand stores;" while dealers of authentic antiques,
"nonprofit or goodwill thrift stores" and "retail used car dealers" are not
considered secondhand stores. The sale of used clothing other than in
conjunction with a "nonprofit" thrift shop is prohibited.
SEDIMENT — shall mean any solid material that is in suspension and is
being or has been moved by water, ice, wind, gravity or other means.
SEDIMENTATION — shall mean the transport and depositing of sediment.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — shall mean a building or group of buildings
containing three (3) or more dwelling units designed for and exclusively
occupied by senior citizens.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT — shall mean an establishment
other than a hotel, motel, or similar establishment offering public
accommodations, which, for any form of consideration, provides a place
where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort in
connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified
anatomical area. This definition does not include an establishment where
a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional
person licensed by the State engages in sexual therapy.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — As defined by N.J.S.A. 2C-34-7 et
seq. and the requirements established there within.[Added 12-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-39]
SIGHT TRIANGLE — shall mean a triangular shaped portion of land
established at intersections in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to
grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct sight distance.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:703
SIGN — shall mean a name, identification, description, display or
illustration which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon
a building, structure or piece of land, directing attention to a product,
business, service or individual. However, a sign shall not include a display
of official, court or public notices, any official traffic control device and
shall not include the flag, emblem or insignia of a nation, State, County,
municipality or religious group. A sign shall not include a sign located
completely within an enclosed building, except if it is visible and directed to
be seen from outside the building. Each display surface of the sign shall be
considered to be a single sign; except that where two (2) such surfaces of a
sign are physically attached, parallel and separated by less than twelve (12)
inches, the two (2) surfaces shall be considered a single sign. The sign area
shall be measured according to the dimensions of the frame. Where there is
no frame, the area shall be defined by a projected, enclosed, four (4) sided
(straight sides) geometric shape which most closely outlines the sign.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — shall mean a sign, structure, symbol or billboard
erected and maintained by an individual or corporation engaged in the sale
or rental of space thereon to a clientele upon which space there is displayed
advertising copy describing in a wide variety of products or services, which
are not produced, assembled, stored or sold from the lot or premises upon
which the advertisement is displayed.
SIGN, ANIMATED — shall mean any sign that uses movement or change of
lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene.
SIGN, BUILDING — shall mean any sign attached to any part of a building,
as contrasted with a freestanding sign.
SIGN, BUILDING WRAP — shall mean a fabric banner covering the exterior
of a building or exterior building wall which and is used to obscure buildings
undergoing construction. Building wrap signs shall display a graphic
reproduction of the completed building fa?ade located behind the sign.
Building wrap signs may contain text including the name and contact
information of the developer and any associated symbols or logos, and/or
text pertaining to the lease, rental or sale of the premises, or a portion of
the premises.
SIGN, CANOPY — shall mean any sign that is a part of or attached to an
awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a
door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — shall mean a sign or portion thereof with
characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face of the surface of the sign. A sign on which the
message changes more than eight (8) times per day shall be considered an
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:704
animated sign and not a changeable sign for purposes of this chapter. A
sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical
indication of time and/or temperature shall be considered a "time and
temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes
of this chapter.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — shall mean a sign erected on the premises
where construction is taking place or approved to take place, indicating
the name and contact information of the developer and also may indicate
the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or
similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar
individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or
project.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — shall mean any sign supported by structures
or supports that are placed on, anchored in, the ground and that are
independent from any building or other structure.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — shall mean any sign, symbol, trademark,
structure or similar device used to identify the occupant of any structure,
the product made or the activity being pursued by an individual, business,
service, commercial or industrial activity which is displayed upon the lot or
premises occupied by a person or entity for the purpose of apprising the
public of the location of such enterprise and the type of activity in which it
is engaged.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL — shall mean a sign, generally informational, that has
a purpose secondary to the use of the property on which it is located, such
as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," and other similar directives. No
sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the zone lot on
which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING — shall mean any sign that does not conform to
the requirements of this chapter.
SIGN, PORTABLE — shall mean any sign not permanently attached to the
ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported,
including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of
wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or
painted on vehicles parked or visible from the public right-of-way, unless
such vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
SIGN, PROJECTING — shall mean any sign affixed to a building or wall in
such manner that its leading edge extends more than six (6) inches beyond
the surface of such building or wall.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — shall mean a sign pertaining to the lease, rental
or sale of the premises, or a portion of the premises on which the sign is
located.
SIGN, RESIDENTIAL — shall mean any sign located in a district zoned for
residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising
for goods and services legally offered on the premises where the sign is
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:705
located, if offering such goods or services at such location conforms with all
requirements of the Land Development Regulations.
SIGN, ROOF — shall mean any sign erected and constructed wholly on and
over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure.
SIGN, ROOF, INTEGRAL — shall mean any sign erected or constructed as
an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any
design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest
portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the
rest of the roof by a space of more than six (6) inches.
SIGN, SUSPENDED — shall mean a sign that is suspended from the
underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — shall mean any sign that is used only temporarily and
is not mounted permanently.
SIGN, WALL — shall mean any sign attached parallel to, but within six (6)
inches of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined
within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is
supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one (1) sign
surface.
SIGN, WINDOW — shall mean any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination
thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business,
commodity, event, sale, or service, that is placed inside a window or upon
the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
SITE — shall mean any plot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous
lots or parcels of land.
SITE PLAN — shall mean a development plan of one (1) or more lots
on which is shown: (1) the existing and proposed conditions of the lot,
including but not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage,
flood plains, marshes and waterways; (2) the location of all existing and
proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress
and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and
signs, lighting, screening devices; and (3) any other information that may be
reasonably required in order that an informed determination may be made
by the Boards pursuant to this chapter.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — shall mean the governmental
subdivision of this State which encompasses this City, organized in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 23, Title 4 (N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et
seq.).
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — shall mean
a plan which indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a
schedule for installation, which will effectively minimize soil erosion and
sedimentation. Such measures shall be at least equivalent to the standards
and specifications as adopted by the Monmouth County Soil Conservation
District.
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:706
SOUP KITCHEN/FOOD PANTRY — shall mean an establishment engaged
primarily in distributing food directly to the needy, for free or at very low
cost.
SPECIAL ANATOMICAL AREAS — shall mean and include any of the
following: (1) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately
above the areola; or, (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIAL QUESTION — shall mean a matter which is brought before the
Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to § 30-22.3b. Special questions shall
be exempt from the notice requirements of § 30-29.2.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — shall mean and include the following:
(1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts; (2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual
or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; (3)
masturbation, actual or simulated; (4) excretory functions as part of or in
connection with any of the activities set forth in subparagraphs (1) through
(3) of this definition.
STEP-DOWN FACILITIES — shall mean a residential facility consisting
of living accommodations for former patients diagnosed and treated in a
medical institution for a high risk transmittable disease such as Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) and where specialized medical care
continues to be provided to such residents. Step-down facilities, as herein
defined, shall be regulated as a "community residence" in accordance with
the provisions of § 30-76.3c, except that such provisions shall apply to
former patients diagnosed and treated in a medical institution for a high
risk transmittable disease rather than to "developmentally disabled" or
"mentally ill" persons.
STORMWATER DETENTION — shall mean any storm drainage technique
which retards or detains runoff, such as a detention or retention basin,
parking lot storage, rooftop storage, porous pavement, dry wells or any
combination thereof.
STORY — shall mean that portion of a building included between the surface
of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or in its absence,
the ceiling or roof above. A basement, as defined in this section, shall
be considered that portion of a "story" when its ceiling height above the
average finished grade bears to the height of the "story."
STORY, HALF — shall mean a space under a sloping roof which has the line
of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three (3) feet
above the top floor level, and in which space, the possible floor area with
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:707
head room of five (5) feet or less occupies at least forty (40%) percent of the
total area of the story directly beneath.
STREET — shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive or other way: (1) which is an existing State, County, or
municipal roadway; or (2) which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law; or (3) which is approved by official action as provided
by this act; or (4) which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in
the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of
a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review
plats; and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. An alley,
as defined in § 30-15, does not constitute a "street" as is defined herein and
lots having frontage on an alley shall not be construed as having frontage
on a street for the purposes of compliance with Subsection e of § 30-68.2.
STREET, ARTERIAL — shall mean: (1) a street so designated in the duly
adopted or revised Asbury Park Master Plan; or (2) a street used and
intended as a thoroughfare between neighborhoods and as a connector to
major highways.
STREET LINE — shall mean the dividing line between a street and an
abutting lot.
STREET, LOCAL — shall mean a street which is used and intended primarily
for access to abutting properties.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — shall mean any change and/or modification
to a structure as herein defined.
STRUCTURE — shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on,
above or below the surface of land or water.
STRUCTURE, ADVERTISING — shall mean any rigid or semi-rigid material
with or without a sign displayed thereon, situated upon or attached to
real property outdoors for the purpose of furnishing a background, base or
support on which a sign may be posted or displayed.
SUBDIVISION — shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale
or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within
the meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created: (1) divisions of
land found by the Planning Board to be for agricultural purposes where
all resulting parcels are five (5) acres or larger in size; (2) divisions of
property by testamentary or intestate provisions; (3) divisions of property
upon court order; and (4) conveyances so as to combine existing lots by
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:708
deed or other instrument. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term
"resubdivision."
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — shall mean any repair, reconstruction
or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty
(50%) percent of the market value of the structure either: (1) before the
improvement or repair is started; or (2) if the structure has been damaged
and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any project
for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications, which are solely necessary to assure
safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE — shall mean a tent or similar structure made
of solid or flexible materials. No tent or other temporary structure shall be
erected for a period exceeding fourteen (14) days in any twelve (12) month
period.
THEME ENTERTAINMENT CENTER — shall mean one (1) or more
buildings arranged and intended to provide various forms of entertainment
based upon a central theme and designed to educate participants and
spectators on subject matter related to that theme.
TOWNHOUSE — shall mean an attached or semi-detached dwelling with
two (2) direct means of access from the outside, and having separate
cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities, and separate facilities for
sewerage, heating, water, electric and gas.
TRACT — shall mean property which is the subject of a development
application.
TRAILER — shall mean a vehicle used for carrying people, carrying or
storing material or objects, or for temporary working, living or sleeping
purposes, and standing on wheels or on rigid supports.
TWIN HOUSE — See "dwelling, semi-detached."
VARIANCE, BULK — shall mean a waiver from the literal application of any
of the standards or requirements of Article VI of this chapter other than
permitted uses and as specified in the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c).
VARIANCE, USE — shall mean a waiver from the literal application of any
of the standards of Article VI of this chapter, governing permitted land uses
and as specified in the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d).
VEHICLE, MOTOR — shall mean any device in, upon or by which a person
or property is or may be transported upon a highway, excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
or motorized bicycles.
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-15
1:709
VEHICLE, RECREATIONAL — shall mean vehicular type, portable
structures which can be towed, hauled or driven, primarily designed as
temporary living accommodations for recreational, camping and travel use
and including travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and selfpowered
motor homes.
VEHICULAR SALE AREA — shall mean an open area, other than a right-ofway
or public parking area, used for display, sale or rental of new or used
vehicles in operable condition and where no repair work is done.
WAREHOUSE — shall mean an establishment in which the principal use is
long or short term storage and which is inaccessible to the public during
normal business hours for the purpose of purchasing merchandise.
YARD — shall mean the exterior open area between the wall of a building or
structure and a lot line.
YARD, AGGREGATE SIDE — shall mean the sum of the two (2) side yards of
a building or structure.
YARD, FRONT — shall mean the exterior open area extending the full width
of the lot between the street line and the nearest front wall of a building or
structure.
YARD, REAR — shall mean the exterior open area extending the full width
of the lot area between the nearest rear wall of a principal building or
structure and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — shall mean the exterior open area between the side lot line
and the side wall of a building or structure and extending from the front
yard to the rear yard.
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — shall mean the Asbury Park Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
ZONING BOUNDARY — shall mean the dividing line between one (1) zoning
district and another.
ZONING DISTRICT — shall mean a contiguous area delineated on the duly
adopted and revised Zoning Plan Map which is attached to and made a part
hereof, where land uses and development are regulated as specified in this
chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — shall mean a document signed by the Zoning Officer or
Zoning Inspector which is required by this chapter, as a condition precedent
to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, or installation of a structure or building; and which
§ 30-15 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-15
1:710
acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the
provisions of this chapter or variance therefrom.
§ 30-16. DETERMINATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
[2000 Code § 30-16]
Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street centerlines,
railroad rights-of-way, and lot or property lines as they exist on lots of
record at the time of enactment of this chapter unless otherwise indicated
by dimensions on the Zoning Map. Any dimensions shown shall be in feet
and measured from the street right-of-way line even if the center line of that
street is used for the location of a zoning district line. The exact location
of any disputed zoning district boundary line shall be determined by the
Board of Adjustment. The zoning standards, controls and designations apply
to every structure, lot and use within each district, and the district lines
extended vertically in both directions from ground level.
§ 30-17. through § 30-20. (RESERVED)
§ 30-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-17
1:711

ARTICLE III
Development Administration and Enforcement
§ 30-21. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 30-21.1. Establishment and Membership. [2000 Code § 30-21.1;
Ord. No. 2572; Ord. No. 2016-54]
The Planning Board previously established is hereby continued pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), and shall consist of
nine (9) members of the following four (4) classes:
Class I-The Mayor.
Class II-One (1) of the officials of the City other than a member of the
Governing Body to be appointed by the Mayor; provided that the member
of the Environmental Commission, who is also a member of the Planning
Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class II
Planning Board member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV
members.
Class III-A member of the Governing Body to be appointed by it.
Class IV-Six (6) citizens of the City to be appointed by the Council. The
members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board, as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be a Class IV Planning Board member.
§ 30-21.2. Terms. [2000 Code § 30-21.2]
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his or her
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III
shall be for one (1) year or terminate at the completion of their respective
terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member, who is
also a member of the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or
Class IV member, who is also a member of the Environmental Commission,
shall be for three (3) years or terminate at the completion of his or her term
of office as a member of the Environmental Commission, whichever occurs
first.
The term of all other Class IV members shall be four (4) years.
§ 30-21.3. Alternates. [2000 Code § 30-21.3]
The Planning Board may, upon appointment by the Council, include two
(2) alternate members. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of
Class IV membership as provided in § 30-21 of this chapter, except that
an alternate member may also be a member of either the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education. If both of the alternate members
of the Planning Board are also members of either the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education, a regular member of the Planning
§ 30-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-21.3
1:713
Board, who is also a member of the Environmental Commission, shall be
deemed a Class II member of the Planning Board. Alternate members shall
be designated at the time of appointment by the Council as "Alternate No.
1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the alternate members shall be for
two (2) years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall be such
that the term of not more than one (1) alternate member shall expire in any
one (1) year; provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the
alternate members first appointed exceed two (2) years.
No alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he/
she has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. An
alternate member may, after public hearing if he or she requests one, be
removed by the Governing Body for cause.
Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but
shall not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member
of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 30-21.4. Vacancies. [2000 Code § 30-21.4]
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term.
§ 30-21.5. Organization. [2000 Code § 30-21.5]
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from the
members of Class IV, select a Secretary, who may or may not be a member of
the Planning Board or a City employee, and create and fill such other offices
as established by ordinance.
§ 30-21.6. Powers and Duties. [2000 Code § 30-21.6]
a. To make, adopt and amend a Master Plan for the physical development
of the City in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
b. Approve or deny applications for development in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
c. Approve or deny conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
d. Prepare and recommend for adoption an Official Map pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
e. Prepare, when authorized by the Governing Body, a capital
improvement program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29.
f. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required
by State or Federal law or regulation.
§ 30-21.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-21.6
1:714
§ 30-22. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 30-22.1. Establishment. [2000 Code § 30-22.1]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment previously established is hereby continued
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., and
shall consist of seven (7) residents of the City appointed by the Governing
Body to serve for terms of four (4) years from January 1 of the year of
their appointment. The Governing Body shall also appoint two (2) alternate
members. Alternate members shall be designated by the Chairman as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" and shall serve in rotation during
the absence or disqualification of any regular member or members. The
term of each alternate member shall be two (2) years.
g. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
h. Consider and make a report to the Governing Body within thirty-five
(35) days after referral, as to any proposed development regulation
submitted to the Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26(a), and also to pass upon other matters specifically referred
to the Planning Board by the Governing Body, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26(b).
i. When reviewing applications for development, to grant to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c).
j. Review and approve or deny site plans or conditional uses
simultaneously with the review for subdivision approval without the
applicant being required to make further application to the Planning
Board, or the Planning Board being required to hold further hearings.
The longest time period for action by the Planning Board, whether it be
for subdivision, site plan or conditional use approval shall apply.
k. Grant exceptions from all standards and procedures set forth in this
chapter for good and sufficient reason, except as follows: (1) any
standards or procedures set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law; (2)
any standards and procedures set forth in Article VI of this chapter,
except as provided in Subsection i. above; (3) exceptions to signs,
fences and parking requirements not part of any application for site
plan or subdivision approval.
l. Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance or
resolution of the Governing Body for the aid and assistance of the
Governing Body or other agencies or officers.
m. When reviewing applications for development, to direct the issuance of
a permit for a building or structure as provided in paragraphs e and f of
§ 30-22.3 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60.
§ 30-21.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-22.1
1:715
No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective office
or position under the City. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration
of term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 30-22.2. Officers. [2000 Code § 30-22.2]
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from its
members and shall select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of
the Board or a municipal employee.
§ 30-22.3. Powers and Duties. [2000 Code § 30-22.3]
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
official based on, or made in the enforcement of Article VI of this
chapter.
b. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Article VI of this chapter, or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which the Board is authorized to pass upon by this chapter.
c. To grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a
variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or
hardship where:
1. By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property, or by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any regulation in
this chapter would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of
such property.
2. In an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of property
the purposes of this act would be advanced by a deviation from the
Zoning Ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation
would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to
allow departure from this chapter; provided, however, that no
variance enumerated in Subsection d below be granted under this
§; and, provided further that the proposed development does not
require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan
or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board
shall review a request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60(a).
d. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to: (1)
allow a structure or use in a district restricted against such structure or
use; (2) an expansion of a nonconforming use; (3) deviation from a
§ 30-22.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-22.3
1:716
§ 30-22.4. Temporary Use Approvals. [2000 Code § 30-22.4]
Temporary Use Approvals may be authorized by the Board of Adjustment
after a hearing for a period not to exceed one (1) year for structures
and uses in contravention of this chapter. The Board shall insure that the
proposed temporary use or structure will not adversely affect adjacent
properties or the character of the neighborhood in which it is located and
shall use the criteria for evaluation set forth in Subsection d of § 30-22.3.
specification or standard pursuant to a conditional use; (4) an increase
over the maximum permitted floor area ratio; (5) an increase over the
maximum permitted density except as applied to the required lot area
for a lot or lots for detached one- or two-family dwellings which lot or
lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor
subdivision; or (6) a height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10
feet or 10% the maximum height permitted in the district for a principal
structure. A variance under this § shall be granted only by affirmative
vote of at least five (5) members of the Board.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of
Subsection d above unless such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not
substantially impair the intent and purposes of the zone plan and
Article VI of this chapter. Any application under this section may be
referred to any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning
Board, for its report, provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall also have the power to:
e. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood
control basin or public area reserved on the Official Map.
f. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building
or structure not related to a street.
g. Grant to the same extent, and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-37 et seq. or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67 whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval
of a variance pursuant to Subsection d above. In exercising its power,
the Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the
officer from whom the appeal was taken.
h. Grant variances for Article V, Development Requirements and
Standards, relating to signs, fences and parking requirements when
such variances are not part of any application for subdivision or site
plan approval.
§ 30-22.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-23
1:717
§ 30-23. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH THE PLANNING
BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 30-23.1. Conflicts of Interest. [2000 Code § 30-23.1]
No member of the Boards shall act on any matter in which he/she has, either
directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify himself/herself from acting on a particular matter,
he/she shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter
and not participate in any discussion or decisions relating thereto.
§ 30-23.2. Compensation. [2000 Code § 30-23.2]
All members of the Boards shall serve without compensation.
§ 30-23.3. Attorneys. [2000 Code § 30-23.3]
Each Board shall appoint an attorney who shall advise the Board or Boards
during meetings and public hearings regarding this chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Law. The same attorney may be appointed by both
Boards.
§ 30-23.4. Experts and Staff. [2000 Code § 30-23.4]
Each Board may employ or contract for and fix the compensation of such
experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board
shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts and grants,
the amount appropriated by the Governing Body for its use.
§ 30-23.5. Bylaws. [2000 Code § 30-23.5]
The Boards shall adopt such rules, regulations and bylaws as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In
the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony,
the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A.
2A:67-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 30-23.6. Meetings. [2000 Code § 30-23.6]
a. Meetings of each Board shall be scheduled at least once a month,
unless canceled for lack of applications.
b. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two (2) Board members, which shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all applicable
legal requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
§ 30-23 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-23.6
1:718
§ 30-23.7. Minutes. [2000 Code § 30-23.7]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons represented by counsel; the action taken by the Board; the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Board Secretary.
§ 30-23.8. Meeting Attendance of Applicants. [Added 12-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-39]
If an application is scheduled to be heard, the applicant shall notify the
Board Secretary a minimum of two business days before the scheduled
hearing date if said applicant desires to postpone the hearing, in writing. In
additional, the applicant, at the discretion of the Chair, is required to have a
representative appear before the Board to state, for the official record, why
the postponement is requested. The Board may, at its discretion, grant the
postponement or deny the application without prejudice. The Board may, at
its discretion, require renotification of the application if a postponement is
granted.
§ 30-24. FEES.
§ 30-24.1. Fees for Applications or Services. [2000 Code § 30-24.1]
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any services by the Planning
Board, Zoning Board and Technical Review Committee, or any member of
their administrative staff shall be stated in this section.
§ 30-24.2. Fee Schedule. [2000 Code § 30-24.2; Ord. No. 2015-52,
Ex. A]
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
Appeals and
Interpretation
$200. for all
Applicants
$300. for all Applicants
Conceptual/ Informal
Reviews
$150. for all
Applicants
$500. for all Applicants
Variances (Bulk)
d. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
e. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meeting Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
§ 30-23.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-24.2
1:719
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
A) Single and Two
Family Uses
$300. $800. plus $100. per each
Variance requested when
part of a major subdivision
B) Multifamily $300. $800. plus $100. per each
Variance requested
C) Nonresidential $300. $800. plus $100. per each
Variance required
Variances (Use)
A) Single and Two
Family Uses
$500. $1,200.
B) Multifamily $500. $1,200. plus $50. per unit
C) Nonresidential $500. $1,200. plus $100. per
1,000 sq. ft. or fraction
thereof over 2,000 sq. ft.
gross impervious surface
to be developed
Conditional Use Permit $450. $250. plus $100. per
1,000 sq. ft. or fraction
thereof over 2,000 sq. ft.
gross impervious surface
to be developed
Subdivision
A) Minor/Sketch Plat $200. plus $50. per
lot
$750.
B) Major Subdivision
Preliminary Review $300. plus $50. per
lot
$1,500. plus $200. per lot
Final Review $200. plus $25. per
lot
$500. plus $100. per lot
Site Plan Review
A) Minor Development
Residential $200 $1,000
Nonresidential $200 $1,000
B) Major Development
§ 30-24.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-24.2
1:720
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
(1) Residential
Preliminary Review
$200. plus $50. per
unit
$2,000. plus $100. per
1,000 sq. ft. developed
gross impervious surface
or fraction thereof over
2,000 sq. ft., plus $200.
per dwelling unit
Final Review $100. plus $25. per
unit
$1,000. plus $50. per
1,000 sq. ft. developed
gross impervious surface,
or fraction thereof, over
2,000 sq. ft., plus $200.
per dwelling unit
(2) Nonresidential
Preliminary Review
$250. plus $50. per
1,000 sq. ft.
developed gross
impervious surface,
or fraction thereof,
over 2,000 sq. ft.
$2,000. plus $100. per
1,000 sq. ft. developed
gross impervious surface
or fraction thereof over
2,000 sq. ft., plus $200.
per 1,000 sq. ft., or
fraction thereof, of gross
floor area
Final Review $125. plus $25. per
1,000 sq. ft.
developed gross
impervious surface,
or fraction thereof,
over 2,000 sq. ft.
$1,000. plus $50. per
1,000 sq. ft. developed
gross impervious surface,
or fraction thereof, over
2,000 sq. ft., plus $100.
per 1,000 sq. ft., or
fraction thereof, of gross
floor area
C) Conceptual Site Plan
Review
$100. Cost of professional
services to be paid by
applicant
Special Meeting Fee $1,800. $500.
Plan Amendment $500. $3,000.
§ 30-24.3. Fees; Payment Due. [2000 Code § 30-24.3; Ord. No.
2015-52, Ex. A]
Fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and no application shall
be deemed complete until the administrative officer certifies in writing that
all required fees have been paid. In the event the application is for more
than one (1) category of relief or action, the application and escrow fees
shall consist of the sum of the fees for each category.
§ 30-24.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-24.4
1:721
§ 30-24.4. Miscellaneous Charges. [2000 Code § 30-24.4; Ord. No.
2647; Ord. No. 2654; Ord. No. 2015-52, Ex. A]
Any miscellaneous charges or expenses incurred by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment or Technical Review Committee and not
covered by application or professional escrow fees shall be paid by the
applicant.
§ 30-24.5. Escrow Deposits: When Required. [2000 Code § 30-24.5;
Ord. No. 2589; Ord. No. 2015-52, Ex. A]
Escrow fees shall be deposited at the time an application is filed for one
(1) or more categories listed in this section. The maximum initial deposit
shall consist of an amount not exceeding five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars,
except for applications in a redevelopment zone within the City of Asbury
Park (redevelopment application). The initial escrow amount for such a
redevelopment application shall be governed by the redevelopment
agreement in place. Absent such an agreement, this section shall continue
to govern. Applicants shall supplement the escrow deposit, as required,
to cover the costs of professional services provided in the review of an
application.
§ 30-24.6. Professional Services Covered by Escrow Deposits. [2000
Code § 30-24.6; Ord. No. 2647; Ord. No. 2654; Ord. No. 2015-52, Ex.
A]
Professional services contemplated hereunder shall include, but not be
limited to the following:
a. Director of Planning and Redevelopment.
b. Zoning Officer.
c. Assistant City Planner.
d. City Engineer.
e. City Attorney.
f. Construction Official.
g. Attorneys engaged by the Planning and Zoning Boards and Technical
Review Committee.
h. Professional planners, consultants, and advisors to the Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment or Technical Review Committee.
i. Any other professional or consultant hired or engaged by the Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or Technical Review Committee to
aid and assist them in reviewing, evaluating and acting upon
development applications, including the hiring of experts for reports
and testimony, if deemed appropriate and necessary.
§ 30-24.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-24.6
1:722
§ 30-24.7. Disbursement of Escrow Funds. [2000 Code § 30-24.7;
Ord. No. 2015-52, Ex. A]
§ 30-24.8. Exemptions. [2000 Code § 30-24.8; Ord. No. 2647; Ord.
No. 2015-52, Ex. A]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to development applications
involving the construction, alteration or expansion of single and two-family
dwellings when such development does not require relief from the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, the Technical Review Committee or when such
development is not part of a planned development.
§ 30-25. through § 30-28. (RESERVED)
§ 30-29. HEARINGS.
§ 30-29.1. Rules; Testimony and Records. [2000 Code § 30-29.1]
j. Professional Court Reporter/Stenographer.
a. After final disposition of an application by a Board or the Technical
Review Committee and pursuant to follow-up inspections for
construction of required improvements, the professionals involved shall
submit to the administrative officer a detailed statement of services
rendered and the charge thereof. The administrative officer shall
review and verify each statement and send a copy of the requisition for
the approved amount to the applicant by certified mail for review. The
applicant shall file any objection to the charges, and request a hearing
in writing before the Board with which the application was originally
filed, within ten (10) days of receipt of the copy of the requisition. If no
written objection is received within ten (10) days, the requisition shall
be transmitted to the Finance Department for payment out of the
escrow account.
b. All deposits of escrow funds shall be governed in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1.
c. Any funds not needed for the above purposes shall be returned to the
applicant after final disposition of the approving authority.
d. In the event that the funds deposited by the applicant are found to be
insufficient to cover the approved professional costs and expenses, the
applicant, upon notice, shall be required to deposit additional funds in
the escrow account so that all such expenses are paid.
a. Rules. The Boards shall make rules governing the conduct of hearings,
which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) or of this chapter.
b. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing, or such person as he/she
may designate, shall have power to administer oaths and issue
§ 30-24.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-29.1
1:723
§ 30-29.2. Notice Requirements for Hearings. [2000 Code § 30-29.2]
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and documents
presented by the parties, and the provisions of the County and
Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
c. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
d. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Boards may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
e. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceeding by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof, on request to any interested party at his/her expense.
f. Maps and Documents. Any maps and documents for which approval is
sought at a hearing shall be on file and available for public inspection at
least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing during normal
business hours in the offices of the Board Secretary. The applicant may
produce other documents, records, or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and
documents.
a. Public Notice. Public notice of a hearing shall be given in the following
cases:
1. Application for preliminary approval of a major subdivision.
2. Application which requires a variance, whether before the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment.
3. Application for major development approval.
4. At any other time the Board shall require notice as part of an
application, hearing or other act the Board deems fit for the
application to re-notice in the interest of the public. [Added
12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
b. Public Notice Procedures.
1. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper
of the City at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
Such notice shall be arranged by the applicant.
2. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property located
within two hundred (200) feet in all directions of the perimeter of
§ 30-29.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-29.2
1:724
the subject property, as shown on the current tax duplicate,
whether such real property is located within or without the City.
Such notice shall be given by: (a) serving a copy thereof on the
owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or his/her agent in
charge of the property; or (b) mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail to the property owner at his/her address as shown on the
current tax duplicate. Notice to a corporate owner may be served
upon its president, a vice-president, secretary or other person
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of
the corporation.
c. Other Notices Required.
1. Notices of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within two hundred (200) feet of an adjoining
municipality shall be given by personal service or certified mail to
the Clerk of such municipality, which notice shall be in addition to
the notice required to be given pursuant to Subsection b of §
30-29.2 to the owners of lands in such adjoining municipality which
are located within two hundred (200) feet of the subject premises.
2. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
County Planning Board of hearings on applications for development
of property (a) adjacent to an existing or proposed County road
shown on the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan; (b)
adjoining other County land; or (c) situated within two hundred
(200) feet of a municipal boundary.
3. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a State highway.
4. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the State and Regional Planning in the Department of
Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for development
of property which exceeds one hundred fifty (150) acres or five
hundred (500) dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of
any maps or documents required to be on file with the City Clerk
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10(b).
5. Notice of hearings on the Master Plan, capital improvements
program or Official Map shall be given in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-13 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-15, respectively.
d. Time for Service. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall
be given at least ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for hearing.
e. Method of Service. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove
required shall be deemed as complete upon mailing in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
§ 30-29.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-29.2
1:725
§ 30-30. DECISIONS. [2000 Code § 30-30]
f. Form of Notice. All required notices shall state the date, time and place
of the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered and
identification of the property proposed for development by street
address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on
the current tax duplicate in the Tax Assessor's office. The notice shall
indicate the location and times at which any maps and documents for
which approval is sought may be reviewed by the public. If the
application for development includes consideration of a conditional use,
the hearing notice shall include reference to the conditional use.
g. List of Property Owners Furnished. Pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12(c), the Tax Assessor, within seven (7) days after receipt of a
request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of ten ($10.00)
dollars shall make and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of
names and addresses of owners in the City to whom the applicant is
required to give notice pursuant to Subsection b2 of § 30-29.2. The
applicant shall also supply to the Tax Assessor at the time of request a
map showing all properties and current Tax Map information for the
subject property and all properties within two hundred (200) feet of the
perimeter of the subject property. The applicant shall be entitled to rely
upon the information contained in such list and failure to give notice to
any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
h. Material to be Filed with Board. The applicant shall file an affidavit of
proof of service, form of notice, list of property owners served, and map
specified in Subsection g above with the Board prior to the hearing.
a. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing within forty-five (45) days of a decision as a resolution of the
Board which shall include findings of fact and legal conclusions based
thereon.
b. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed by the Secretary of the Board
within ten (10) days of its adoption to the applicant or, if represented,
then to his/her attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the
resolution shall also be mailed to all persons who have requested it and
who have paid the fee prescribed for such service. A copy of the
resolution shall also be filed in the Office of the City Clerk, who shall
make a copy of such filed resolution available to any interested party
upon payment of a fee calculated in the same manner as those
established for copies of other public documents in the City.
c. A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City. Such publication shall be arranged by the
applicant unless otherwise advised by the Board Secretary. If the Board
Secretary arranges for the publication of the notice of decision, it shall
be done without further charge to the applicant. Notice of decision shall
be sent to the official newspaper for publication within ten (10) days of
the date of any such decision.
§ 30-29.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-31
1:726
§ 30-31. PAYMENT OF TAXES. [2000 Code § 30-31]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65,
every application submitted to the Planning Board or to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent on the property. Any approvals
or other relief granted by either Board may be conditioned upon either the
prompt payment of such taxes or assessments, or the making of adequate
provision for the payment thereof in such a manner that the City will be
adequately protected.
§ 30-32. CONDITIONAL APPROVAL. [2000 Code § 30-32]
§ 30-33. CALCULATION OF TIME AND TIME EXTENSIONS. [2000
Code § 30-33]
In every case where relief or action is requested from either the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the time period specified by statute
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) shall not commence until the application is
deemed complete by the Administrative Officer. The Board and an applicant
may mutually agree to extend the time limit specified for action. Such
extension shall be made for a specific period of time and be indicated in the
minutes of the meeting.
a. In the event that a developer submits an application proposing a
development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by a
legal action instituted by any State agency, political subdivision or other
party to protect the public health and welfare, the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall approve such application conditioned
on removal of such legal barrier to development.
b. In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application, the developer is barred or prevented, directly
or indirectly, from proceeding with the development otherwise
permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by any State
agency, political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to
protect the public health or welfare and the developer is otherwise
ready, willing and able to proceed with the development, the running of
the period of approval under this article shall be suspended for the
period of time the legal action is pending or such directive or order is in
effect.
c. In the event that the development proposed by an application requires
an approval by a governmental agency other than the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Board shall, in appropriate instances,
condition its approval upon the subsequent approval of such
governmental agency. The Board shall make a decision on any
application within the time period provided in this chapter or within an
extension of such period as has been agreed to by the applicant unless
the Planning Board is prevented or relieved from so acting by the
operation of law.
§ 30-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-34
1:727
§ 30-34. through § 30-37. (RESERVED)
§ 30-38. RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
§ 30-38.1. Responsibilities. [2000 Code § 30-38]
The Mayor and City Council may adopt or amend any or all of the provisions
of this chapter and shall be responsible for the following additional
elements:
§ 30-39. STAFF.
§ 30-39.1. Development Coordinator. [2000 Code § 30-39.1;
amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
The Development Coordinator shall be the City Planner. The Development
Coordinator shall officially receive all applications for development,
determine if they are complete, and, if not, notify the applicant of
deficiencies. The Development Coordinator, in consultation with the Zoning
Officer, shall determine which local board, official or agency has jurisdiction
over the application and the Development Coordinator shall forward copies
to federal, state and local agencies required or requested to review the
application.
§ 30-39.2. Development Review Committee. [2000 Code § 30-39.2]
a. Adopt a capital improvements program in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-29.
b. Refer to the Planning Board, prior to adoption, any proposed
development regulation, revision, or amendment thereto in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26.
c. In accordance with the procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17, the
City Council may hear and decide any appeal of a final decision of the
Board of Adjustment approving an application for development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
d. Refer to the Planning Board, prior to the expenditure of public funds,
any capital project for review and recommendation in conjunction with
the Master Plan or any of its supplements pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-31.
e. Appoint such Class III members, Class IV members and alternates to
the Planning Board as are required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 and members
and alternates to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69.
a. A Development Review Committee may be established by appointment
of the Chairman of the Planning Board. The Development Review
Committee shall be chaired by the Development Coordinator and shall
include at least one (1) Class IV member of the Planning Board and may
§ 30-34 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-39.2
1:728
§ 30-39.3. Zoning Enforcement Officer. [2000 Code § 30-39.3]
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review all Applications for
Development to ensure they meet the requirements of this chapter except
for those sections where another official is specifically given enforcement
or administrative responsibilities. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
in no case, except upon a written order of the Boards or the Governing
Body, approve the issuance by the Construction Official of any permit or
certificate for the erection, structural alteration or occupancy of any
building or land where the proposed erection, structural alteration or use
thereof would be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. If a
violation of this chapter is found to exist, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall serve notice upon the owner, and if the violation is not corrected
within a reasonable period, shall issue a complaint to terminate the violation
before the Municipal Judge.
include a Class I, II, or III member, a member of the public or any other
Municipal, County or State Official whose particular expertise may be
required on a specific application.
b. A quorum of three (3) members of the Development Review Committee
shall be required to take action or make a recommendation on an
Application for Development.
c. The Development Review Committee shall have the following
responsibilities:
1. Determine whether the application is a minor or major
development application.
2. Determine compliance with the technical standards set forth in
Article V, and other provisions of this chapter.
3. Make recommendations on the design and technical elements of
any application.
4. Recommend to the Planning Board, in the case of site plans, waiver
of these requirements if the proposed development had secured
previous site plan approval, involves normal maintenance or
replacement such as painting or siding, or does not affect existing
drainage, circulation, landscaping, lighting, signs and other
considerations of site plan review.
5. Upon waiver of public hearing and referral to the Committee for
recommendation by the Planning Board, the Development Review
Committee may recommend approval with conditions, or denial of
any application which it deems to be a minor development. Such
action by the Committee shall not be final until it is ratified by the
affirmative vote and resolution of memorialization of the full Board.
§ 30-39.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-39.4
1:729
§ 30-39.4. Planning and Zoning Board Engineer(s) (Board
Engineer). [2000 Code § 30-39.4; amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-39]
The Board Engineer, as defined in this chapter, shall be responsible for the
following provisions of this chapter:
§ 30-40. ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES.
§ 30-40.1. Zoning Complaints. [2000 Code § 30-40.1]
All complaints regarding alleged violations of this chapter must be
addressed in writing to the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Each complaint
shall include the name and address of the plaintiff. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer will investigate the nature of the complaint and, if an inspection
is deemed necessary, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall contact the
property owner in writing, stating the nature of the complaint, an inspection
of the property in question is warranted, including the date and time of the
inspection.
The property owner and/or tenant shall honor requests for access for the
purpose of investigating potential zoning violations, and shall provide
access within seventy-two (72) hours of being contacted by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer. Where a property owner refuses to grant access for
the purposes of investigating potential zoning violations, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer may seek the issuance of a warrant from the Superior
Court of New Jersey.
Any reported violation of this chapter which is deemed an immediate threat
to the life or safety of individuals shall be reported directly to the Police
Department.
Where a violation is openly visible, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
contact the property owner and proceed with the appropriate measures to
insure that the violation is corrected.
§ 30-40.2. Violation Abatement. [2000 Code § 30-40.2]
a. Review all engineering plans accompanying Applications for
Development referred by the Boards, Development Review Committee
or Development Coordinator.
b. Inspection, when requested by either Board, of improvements
constructed or installed as part of any Application for Development
other than those which are the responsibility of the Construction
Official.
c. Certification, when necessary, before acceptance, that all such
improvements meet applicable City Codes and ordinances.
a. If it is determined that there has been a violation of this chapter, the
Zoning Officer shall serve written notice of violation upon the owner
§ 30-39.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-40.2
1:730
§ 30-40.3. Penalties. [2000 Code § 1-5.1; Ord. No. 2597; Ord. No.
2767]
For violation of any provision of this Code or other ordinance of the City of
Asbury Park, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in connection
with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon conviction of the
violation shall be by one (1) or more of the following: imprisonment in the
County Jail or in any place provided by the municipality for the detention
of prisoners, for any term not exceeding ninety (90) days; or by a fine not
exceeding two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars; or by a period of community
service not exceeding ninety (90) days.
Whenever a fine is to be imposed in an amount greater than one thousand
two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars for violations of housing or zoning
codes the owner shall be provided a thirty (30) day period during which
the owner shall be afforded the opportunity to cure or abate the condition
and shall be afforded the opportunity for a hearing before the Court for
an independent determination concerning the violation. Subsequent to the
expiration of the thirty (30) day period, a fine greater than one thousand
two hundred fifty ($1,250.00) dollars may be imposed if the Court has
determined that the abatement has not been substantially completed.
(N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 30-40.4. Subdivision Violations. [2000 Code § 30-40.4]
and/or tenant of the property where such violation is alleged to have
occurred. If the violation is not abated within a reasonable period, as
stipulated in the notice of violation, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
summons to appear before the Municipal Court Judge. Only one (1)
notice of violation shall be required to cover a violation of any single
section of this chapter by any single individual and summonses may be
issued without notice for repeat offenses.
b. At the option of the Zoning Officer, after authorization by the City
Manager, an injunction, issued by the Superior Court of Monmouth
County, may be sought to enforce the closure or cessation of a use,
activity or operation found to be in violation of this chapter, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-18.
c. In the case of a violation involving a dwelling unit created without
authorization under this chapter, the abatement required by the Zoning
Officer shall include, but may not be limited to, the removal of the
kitchen, inclusive of cooking facilities and facilities for the washing and
storage of food and utensils.
a. General. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any
person transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to
an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
City approval is required, such person shall be subject to a penalty not
§ 30-40.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-40.4
1:731
§ 30-40.5. Conditions of Approval. [2000 Code § 30-40.5]
It shall be the responsibility of an applicant to maintain and enforce all
conditions required by the Boards in granting approval of an Application for
Development as set forth in the resolution of approval, or on the site plan or
subdivision plat submitted as part of the application. Failure to do so shall
be considered a violation of this chapter.
§ 30-40.6. Permit Revocation. [2000 Code § 30-40.6]
A Zoning Permit may be revoked by the Zoning Enforcement Officer for the
following reasons:
§ 30-40.7. Appeals. [2000 Code § 30-40.7]
Any person aggrieved by any decision or action of the Zoning Enforcement
Officer may appeal such decision or action to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, within twenty (20) days of the decision or action. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment, after public hearing, may uphold, modify, or reverse
the decision or action thus appealed.
§ 30-41. through § 30-44. (RESERVED)
to exceed one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars and each lot disposition so
made may be deemed a separate violation.
b. Specific Relief. In addition to the foregoing, the City may institute and
maintain a civil action:
1. For injunctive relief; and
2. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a Certificate of Compliance has not been issued
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56 of the Municipal Land Use
Law.
In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall
be entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land, from which
the subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the
developer or his/her assigns or successors, to secure the return of
any deposits made or purchase price paid, and also, a reasonable
search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any
such action must be brought within two (2) years after the date of
the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of
the land or within six (6) years, if unrecorded as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-55.
a. Misrepresentation by the permittee of the specifics of the application.
b. Subsequent determination by the Zoning Enforcement Officer that a
violation of this chapter exists on the property or that a violation would
occur if the Zoning Permit were not revoked.
§ 30-40.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-41
1:732
ARTICLE IV
Application for Development
§ 30-45. SUBMISSION OF APPLICATIONS FOR DEVELOPMENT.
§ 30-45.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-45.1; Ord. No. 2777 § 2]
a. Informal Review with Technical Personnel. Before filing a formal
application in accordance with the procedure set forth in this article,
applicants are encouraged to meet with the City's technical personnel
including the City Planner, Zoning Enforcement Officer, Construction
Official, Fire, Police, and Public Works Departments.
b. Informal Review with Planning Board. At the request of a developer, the
Planning Board may grant an informal review of a concept plan for
development for which a developer intends to prepare an application
for development. The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan
for which review is requested, and the Planning Board shall not be
bound by any such review.
c. Complete Application. An application for development together with the
required fees and exhibits required in Article V, shall be submitted to
the Development Coordinator. The Development Coordinator shall: (1)
review the application to determine its completeness; (2) determine the
type of development action required; and (3) forward the application to
the proper board or agency for subsequent action. An application shall
be certified as complete when all requirements of the Boards have been
met. It shall be deemed complete as of the day it is so certified by the
Development Coordinator for the purposes of the commencement of the
time period for action by the Boards. If found to be incomplete, the
applicant shall be notified, in writing, within forty-five (45) days of the
submission of an application with information as to what is lacking.
Editor's Note: See also § 30-45.4, Completeness Checklists.
d. Subdivision and Site Plan Approval Required; Exemptions; Waivers.
1. Subdivision and Site Plan review and approval shall be required as
described below:
(a) Site Plan Subdivision review shall be required for:
(i) Minor Development as defined in § 30-15.
(ii) Major Development as defined in § 30-15.
(b) The following development shall be exempt from Site Plan
review:
(i) Single family or two family detached dwellings and
structures and uses accessory thereto.
§ 30-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-45.1
1:733
§ 30-45.2. Zoning Permits. [2000 Code § 30-45.2]
(ii) Repairs to the interior of a building which do not result in a
change in the number of dwelling units on site.
(iii) The construction of any building or other structure of less
than five hundred (500) square feet which does not create
or exacerbate a nonconformity.
(iv) Construction or alterations of parking areas containing
less than five (5) parking spaces which must be approved
by the City Planner and City Engineer pursuant to §
30-59.2
(v) Improvements to existing parking areas where the area of
existing paving and location and size of existing driveways
are not affected.
(vi) Changes of use where no additional nonconformities are
created and/or existing nonconformities are exacerbated.
e. Waiver of submission requirements. An applicant may request that one
or more of the submission requirements which would otherwise be
required for the application to be considered complete be waived. Such
a request shall be granted or denied within forty-five (45) days by the
Development Review Committee, or in its absence, the Board of
Jurisdiction. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing an
applicant's obligation to prove during the application process that he or
she is entitled to approval of the application.
a. No construction, enlargement, alteration or demolition requiring a
permit under the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23 et seq.)
shall take place; nor shall any permanent structure, inclusive of fencing
or signage, be erected; or a public sidewalk or curb constructed or
reconstructed; except by issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and payment of a permit fee of ten ($10.00)
dollars. No such construction, enlargement, alteration, demolition or
erection based on the issuance of a construction permit shall be
deemed to be in compliance with this chapter unless a Zoning Permit
authorizing such work has also been issued by the Zoning Officer.
b. Any Zoning Permit issued by the Zoning Officer for any proposed
construction, enlargement, alteration, demolition or erection shall only
become valid upon the issuance of the required construction permit by
the Building Subcode Official. Any such work that is undertaken based
solely upon a Zoning Permit and without the required construction
permit shall be considered a violation of this section and will result in
the automatic issuance of a summons without further notice of violation
beyond the information on the Zoning Permit Application.
§ 30-45.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-45.2
1:734
§ 30-45.3. Certificate of Resolution Compliance. [2000 Code
§ 30-45.3; amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
§ 30-45.4. Completeness Checklists and Applications. [2000 Code
§ 30-45.4; Ord. No. 2684; Ord. No. 2015-52]
c. A Zoning Permit shall expire after a period of three (3) months unless a
construction permit authorizing the same work has also been issued
within the same three (3) month period.
a. When application is made for resolution compliance that requires the
issuance of permits under the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23
et seq.) for the construction of a new building or an addition to the
ground level footprint of an existing building, an application for
resolution compliance shall also be made upon payment of a fee of $20,
which shall cover the cost of a final inspection by the Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer shall inspect for the satisfactory completion of
landscaping, driveway pavement, sidewalk and curb repair/
replacement and street tree plantings, as well as for compliance with
the resolution of the Planning or Zoning Board. A copy of the approved
compliance shall be transmitted to the Construction Official by the
Director of Planning and Redevelopment or their designee.
b. No land or new construction shall be occupied or used in whole or in
part for any purpose whatsoever until a resolution compliance and/or
zoning permit shall have been issued by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer stating that the use of the land or building complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
c. No certificate of resolution compliance for any land or structure shall
be granted until all required improvements or conditions of approval
have been met, installed or completed. A temporary certificate of
resolution compliance may be issued but only for a specific period, upon
such conditions as the Development Coordinator may impose, such as
bonding, to ensure the completion or installation of any such
improvements unfinished because of weather or unforeseen delay. The
installation of any required public or private improvements may also be
delayed if the Board Engineer warrants in writing to the Development
Coordinator that the delay is in the best interest of the City.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A., 40:55D-10.3, the City of Asbury Park hereby
adopts the Completeness Checklists and application forms for use by
the City's Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Technical
Review Committee (TRC) and Redevelopment Agency. (The
Completeness Checklists and applications may be found at the end of
this chapter.)
b. Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Technical Review Committee (TRC)
and Redevelopment Agency shall not be acted upon unless and until the
application is determined to be complete in every respect, pursuant to
§ 30-45.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-45.4
1:735
§ 30-46. PLANNING BOARD ACTION.
§ 30-46.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-46.1]
The applicant or his/her agent shall appear at all regular meetings of the
Planning Board whenever the application is being considered. Failure to
appear shall give the Planning Board the right to postpone action on the
application if the applicant or the agent's absence deprives the Planning
Board of the information necessary to make a decision.
§ 30-46.2. Application for a Major Development. [2000 Code
§ 30-46.2]
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3, including but not limited to the provision of all
necessary information, supporting data, papers, certificates, plans and
fees and all other items set forth on the Asbury Park Development
Application Completeness Checklists as adopted by this section.
c. Any applicant for development shall be given a copy of the aforesaid
Completeness Checklists upon request for a development application,
and that any applicant may seek waiver of any of the aforesaid
provisions in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
a. Preliminary Approval. If the application is found to be a major
development, the Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing and
the applicant shall be responsible for providing notice as set forth in §
30-29.2.
At the public hearing, the applicant shall submit to the Board a copy
of the published notice and affidavit of publication as required under
Subsection a of § 30-29.2, affidavit of notice of public hearing to persons
served; affidavit of ownership or authorization of owner to submit
application; map showing all properties within two hundred (200) feet
as required in Subsection g of § 30-29.2; a letter from the Tax Collector
that all taxes and easements for local improvements have been paid to
date on the property.
At a public hearing, the Planning Board shall consider the application
as submitted, the recommendations and comments of all agencies to
which the application was referred and those of the public, and shall
take action within forty-five (45) days of the submission of a complete
application or within such further extension agreed to by the applicant.
If the application involves more than ten (10) acres or more than ten
(10) dwelling units, the Planning Board shall take action within ninetyfive
(95) days of the submission of a complete application or within such
further extension agreed to by the applicant. The Planning Board shall
reject the Application for Development or grant preliminary approval.
Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant those rights set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49.
§ 30-45.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-46.2
1:736
b. Final Approval. Within three (3) years from the date of preliminary
approval or within such extension as allowed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49, the
applicant may apply for final approval in the manner set forth in §
30-45.1.
The final plan shall incorporate all changes or modifications required by
the Planning Board. The applicant shall submit an affidavit indicating
no changes were required or specify the changes that have been made
and the reasons for the changes.
In addition to the exhibits required in Article V and any other exhibits
which may have been required as a condition of preliminary approval,
the following materials shall accompany the application for final
approval:
1. A letter from the City Engineer indicating:
(a) That the engineer is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in
exact location and elevation identifying those portions already
installed and those to be installed.
(b) That the applicant has either completed the installation of all
improvements in accordance with the requirements of this
article or posted with the City Clerk a performance guarantee
in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of all improvements or
uncompleted portions thereof, as estimated by the City
Engineer, and assuring the installation of such improvements
on or before an agreed date.
(c) All items and amounts required for the corporate surety
maintenance guarantee.
2. A letter from the Development Coordinator indicating that the plan
conforms to the preliminary plan as submitted and approved.
3. A letter from the Tax Collector that all taxes and assessments for
local improvements have been paid to date on the property.
4. A letter from the City Clerk indicating:
(a) That the amount, form and content of the performance and
maintenance guarantees have been accepted by the Governing
Body.
(b) Where appropriate, that monies as required by this chapter
have been paid the City as reimbursal for construction
inspection costs incurred since preliminary approval.
The Planning Board shall act within forty-five (45) days of
submission of a completed application or within such further
time as may be mutually agreed upon. Failure of the Planning
Board to act within the allocated time or a mutually agreed
upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable approval and
§ 30-46.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-46.2
1:737
§ 30-46.3. Application for Preliminary and Final Approval. [2000
Code § 30-46.3]
Combined preliminary and final approval may be granted providing all
submission requirements for both approvals are met. The time limit within
which the Board shall act shall be the longest permitted for either of the
two (2) approvals.
§ 30-46.4. Application for a Minor Development. [2000 Code
§ 30-46.4]
If the application is found to be a minor development, the Planning Board
shall reject, approve, or conditionally approve the application within fortyfive
(45) days of the submission of a complete application. The approval
of the Planning Board on a minor subdivision shall be considered a final
approval.
All submission requirements and procedures required for a major
development shall be required for a minor development except that public
notice of the hearing need not be issued.
§ 30-46.5. Conditional Use Permits. [2000 Code § 30-46.5]
All uses designated in Article VI of this chapter as conditional uses will be
permitted only after review and approval by the Planning Board. Application
must be made in accordance with the provisions of this article. The Planning
Board will consider all specifications for the conditional use as set forth in
Subsection 30-76.3 of this Code.
The Planning Board must grant or deny an Application for Conditional Use
Permit within ninety-five (95) days of submission of a complete application
by a developer to the Development Coordinator, or within such further time
as may be consented to by the applicant.
The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use application shall
include any required site plan review pursuant to § 30-46 and shall be filed
the Development Coordinator shall issue a certificate to that
effect.
If the Application for Development is a subdivision, the plan
granted final approval shall be filed by the applicant with the
County Recording Officer within ninety-five (95) days from the
date of such approval. If any final plan is not filed within that
period, the approval shall expire. For good cause, the Planning
Board may extend the time of the filing of the plan for an
additional period not to exceed ninety-five (95) days.
The granting of final approval shall confer upon the applicant
those rights set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50 and shall terminate
the time period of preliminary approval for that part of the
development for which final approval has been granted.
§ 30-46.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-46.5
1:738
as a joint application with fees as specified in § 30-24. The time period for
action by the Planning Board on conditional uses pursuant to this section
shall apply to such site plan review. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application and
a Zoning Permit shall issue on request of the applicant.
§ 30-47. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT ACTION.
§ 30-47.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-47.1; amended 12-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-39]
a. If the Development Coordinator determines that the application
requires action by the Board of Adjustment, it shall be forwarded to the
Board of Adjustment Secretary and the applicant shall be responsible
for providing notice as set forth in § 30-29.2. The Development
Coordinator shall refer the application to those agencies required to
review the application and any other agency which may assist them in
its deliberations. [Amended 12-27-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-39]
b. The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent
approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial
impairment of the intent and purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning
Regulations. The number of votes of Board members required to grant
any such subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in §
30-22.3 for the approval in question, and the special vote pursuant to
Subsection d of § 30-22.3 shall not be required.
c. Whenever an Application for Development requests relief pursuant to
Subsection b of this section, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or
deny approval of the application within one hundred twenty (120) days
after submission by a developer of a complete application to the
Administrative Officer or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant. In the event that the developer elects to submit
separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to
the application for approval of the variance. The period of granting or
denying any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this
chapter. Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the application and a certificate
of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Board of Adjustment
to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 30-46.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-47.1
1:739
§ 30-47.2. Interpretations; Appeals; Variances. [2000 Code
§ 30-47.2]
When an Application for Zoning Permit is submitted to the Development
Coordinator which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter and
which does not require a site plan approval, the applicant must be informed
in writing of the denial of the permit prior to any application to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment involving an interpretation or appeal of that denial, or
a variance from the sections of this chapter with which the Application for
Zoning Permit does not conform.
Applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment will be submitted to the
Development Coordinator as provided in § 30-45.1. Whenever an
Application for Development includes a variance, the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall take action within one hundred twenty
(120) days from the submission of a complete application.
§ 30-47.3. Temporary Use Approvals. [2000 Code § 30-47.3]
Applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment for Temporary Use
Approvals shall be submitted to the Development Coordinator with any
necessary supporting information required by the Development
Coordinator. The application will be administered by the Development
Coordinator as provided in § 30-45.1.
§ 30-48. EXCEPTIONS.
§ 30-48.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-48.1]
Applicants for development may request an exception from the provisions
of this chapter from the Planning Board except for those procedures or
requirements set forth in Article VI, Zoning, any procedures or
requirements set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law, and exceptions to
the requirements for signs, fences or parking not part of any application for
site plan or subdivision approval.
The applicant shall indicate on the formal application the nature and
reasons for the exception. The request for the exception shall also be
Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning
Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of a subdivision, or
N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, in the case of a site plan, the Board of Adjustment
shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or
approval by the County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon
within the required time.
An application under this section may be referred to any appropriate
person or agency, for its report; provided that such reference shall not
extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall act.
§ 30-47.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-48.1
1:740
indicated on any public notice required under this chapter. Applications for
exceptions for parking, signs or fences for one- or two-family residential
uses shall be considered special questions and may be considered by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment without the requirements for public notice.
Applications for exceptions for parking, signs or fences for nonresidential
uses which do not involve a "development," as defined in § 30-15, shall also
be considered special questions and may be considered by the Zoning Board
of Adjustment without the requirement for public notice.
§ 30-49. PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
§ 30-49.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-49.1; amended 12-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-39]
As per P.L. 2017 Chapter 312, Senate, Number 3233 which amends Section
41 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (C. 40:55D-53) the City hereby adopts the following
regulations.
a. Guarantees required; surety; release. Before filing of final subdivision
plats or recording of minor subdivision deeds or as a condition of final
site plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a zoning permit
pursuant to subsection d. of section 52 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-65), the municipality may require and shall accept in
accordance with the standards adopted by ordinance and regulations
adopted pursuant to Section 1 of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D- 53a)
for the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of certain
on-tract improvements, the furnishing of a performance guarantee, and
provision for a maintenance guarantee in accordance with Subsection
a1 and 2 of this section. If a municipality has adopted an ordinance
requiring a successor developer to furnish a replacement performance
guarantee, as a condition to the approval of a permit update under the
State Uniform Construction Code, for the purpose of updating the name
and address of the owner of property on a construction permit, the
governing body may require and shall accept in accordance with the
standards adopted by ordinance and regulations adopted pursuant to
Section 1 of P.L. 1999, c. 68 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53a) for the purpose of
assuring the installation and maintenance of certain on-tract
improvements, the furnishing of a performance guarantee, and
provision for a maintenance guarantee, in accordance with Subsection
a1 and 2 of this section.
1. Performance guarantee.
(a) As required this section, the developer shall furnish a
performance guarantee in favor of the municipality in an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation of only
those improvements required by an approval or developer's
agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be dedicated to a public
entity, and that have not yet been installed, which cost shall be
determined by the Board Engineer, as defined by this chapter,
§ 30-48.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-49.1
1:741
according to the method of calculation set forth in Section 15
of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4), for the following
improvements as shown on the approved plans or plat: streets,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, street
trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and
required by "the map filing law," P.L. 1960, c.141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.; repealed by Section 2 of P.L. 2011, c. 217)
or N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 through 8, water mains, sanitary sewers,
community septic systems, drainage structures, public
improvements of open space, and any grading necessitated by
the preceding improvements. The Board Engineer, as defined
by this chapter, shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the
improvements covered by the performance guarantee, which
itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each performance
guarantee posted by the obligor.
(b) A municipality may also require a performance guarantee to
include, within an approved phase or section of a development
privately-owned perimeter buffer landscaping, as required by
local ordinance or imposed as a condition of approval. At the
developer's option, a separate performance guarantee may be
posted for the privately-owned perimeter buffer landscaping.
(c) In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary
certificate of occupancy for a development, unit, lot, building,
or phase of development, as a condition of the issuance
thereof, the developer shall, if required by an ordinance
adopted by the municipality, furnish a separate guarantee,
referred to herein as a "temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee," in favor of the municipality in an amount equal to
120% of the cost of installation of only those improvements or
items which remain to be completed or installed under the
terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and which are
required to be installed or completed as a condition precedent
to the issuance of the permanent certificate of occupancy for
the development, unit, lot, building or phase of development
and which are not covered by an existing performance
guarantee. Upon posting of a "temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee," all sums remaining under a
performance guarantee, required pursuant to Subsection a1(a)
of this section, which relate to the development, unit, lot,
building, or phase of development for which the temporary
certificate of occupancy is sought, shall be released. The scope
and amount of the temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee shall be determined by the Zoning Officer, City
Engineer, as defined by this chapter, or other municipal official
designated by ordinance. At no time may a municipality hold
more than one guarantee or bond of any type with respect to
the same line item. The temporary certificate of occupancy
guarantee shall be released by the zoning officer, Board
§ 30-49.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-49.1
1:742
Engineer, as defined by this chapter, or other municipal official
designated by ordinance upon the issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy with regard to the development, unit,
lot, building, or phase as to which the temporary certificate of
occupancy relates.
(d) A developer shall furnish to the municipality a "safety and
stabilization guarantee," in favor of the municipality. At the
developer's option, a safety and stabilization guarantee may be
furnished either as a separate guarantee or as a line item of the
performance guarantee. A safety and stabilization guarantee
shall be available to the municipality solely for the purpose of
returning property that has been disturbed to a safe and stable
condition or otherwise implementing measures to protect the
public from access to an unsafe or unstable condition, only in
the circumstance that:
(1) Site disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work
on the development has ceased for a period of at least 60
consecutive days following such commencement for
reasons other than force majeure; and
(2) Work has not recommenced within 30 days following the
provision of written notice by the municipality to the
developer of the municipality's intent to claim payment
under the guarantee. A municipality shall not provide
notice of its intent to claim payment under a safety and
stabilization guarantee until a period of at least 60 days
has elapsed during which all work on the development has
ceased for reasons other than force majeure. A
municipality shall provide written notice to a developer by
certified mail or other form of delivery providing evidence
of receipt.
(e) The amount of a safety and stabilization guarantee for a
development with bonded improvements in an amount not
exceeding $100,000 shall be $5,000. The amount of a safety
and stabilization guarantee for a development with bonded
improvements exceeding $100,000 shall be calculated as a
percentage of the bonded improvement costs of the
development or phase of development as follows:
(1) $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement
costs; plus
(2) 2 1/2% of bonded improvement costs in excess of $100,000
up to $1,000,000; plus
(3) 1% of bonded improvement costs in excess of $1,000,000.
(f) A municipality shall release a separate safety and stabilization
guarantee to a developer upon the developer's furnishing of a
§ 30-49.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-49.1
1:743
performance guarantee which includes a line item for safety
and stabilization in the amount required under this subsection.
(g) A municipality shall release a safety and stabilization
guarantee upon the Board Engineer's, as defined by this
chapter, determination that the development of the project site
has reached a point that the improvements installed are
adequate to avoid any potential threat to public safety.
2. Maintenance guarantee.
(a) As required by this section, the developer shall post with the
municipality, prior to the release of a performance guarantee
required pursuant to Subsection a1(a) or (b), or Subsection
a1(a) and (b), of this section, a maintenance guarantee in an
amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the
improvements which are being released.
(b) If required, the developer shall post with the municipality,
upon the inspection and issuance of final approval of the
following private site improvements by the municipal engineer,
a maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15% of
the cost of the installation of the following private site
improvements: stormwater management basins, in-flow and
water quality structures within the basins, and the outflow
pipes and structures of the stormwater management system, if
any, which cost shall be determined according to the method of
calculation set forth in Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4).
(c) The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period
not to exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the
end of the established term.
3. In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance
guarantee to another governmental agency, no performance or
maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by
the municipality for such utilities or improvements.
b. The time allowed for installation of the bonded improvements for which
the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation, which cost shall be determined by the municipal
engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in Section 15
of P.L. 1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4) as of the time of the passage
of the resolution.
§ 30-49.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-49.1
1:744
c. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the municipality for the reasonable cost of
the improvements not completed or corrected and the municipality may
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete
such improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements
shall be subject to the public bidding requirements of the "Local Public
Contracts Law," P.L. 1971, c. 198 (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
d. List of improvements.
1. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
(except for the top course) and appurtenant utility improvements,
and the connection of same to the public system, the obligor may
request of the governing body in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the municipal clerk, that the municipal
engineer prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the municipal engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection a of this section, a
list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed bonded
improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall send a
copy of the request to the municipal engineer. The request shall
indicate which bonded improvements have been completed and
which bonded improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment
of the obligor. Thereupon the municipal engineer shall inspect all
bonded improvements covered by obligor's request and shall file a
detailed list and report, in writing, with the governing body, and
shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not later
than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
2. The list prepared by the municipal engineer shall state, in detail,
with respect to each bonded improvement determined to be
incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the nature and
extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each
completed bonded improvement determined to be unsatisfactory.
The report prepared by the municipal engineer shall identify each
bonded improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to
be made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed
and satisfactory bonded improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the municipal engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to subsection a.
of this section.
e. Approval.
1. The governing body, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
municipal engineer, or reject any or all of these bonded
improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for
§ 30-49.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-49.1
1:745
rejection, and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction
to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the
improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the municipal engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection a of this section.
This resolution shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt
of the list and report prepared by the municipal engineer. Upon
adoption of the resolution by the governing body, the obligor shall
be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee
with respect to those approved bonded improvements, except for
that portion adequately sufficient to secure completion or
correction of the improvements not yet approved; provided that
30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee and "safety
and stabilization guarantee posted may be retained to ensure
completion and acceptability of all improvements. The safety and
stabilization guarantee shall be reduced by the same percentage
as the performance guarantee is being reduced at the time of each
performance guarantee reduction. For the purpose of releasing
the obligor from liability pursuant to its performance guarantee
the amount of the performance guarantee attributable to each
approved bonded improvement shall be reduced by the total
amount for each such improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the municipal engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection a
of this section, including any contingency factor applied to the cost
of installation. If the sum of the approved bonded improvements
would exceed 70% of the total amount of the performance
guarantee, then the municipality may retain 30% of the amount
of the total performance guarantee and safety and stabilization
guarantee to ensure completion and acceptability of bonded
improvements, as provided above, except that any amount of the
performance guarantee attributable to bonded improvements for
which a temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee has been
posted shall be released from the performance guarantee even if
such release would reduce the amount held by the municipality
below 30%.
2. If the municipal engineer fails to send or provide the list and report
as requested by the obligor pursuant to Subsection d of this section
within 45 days from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to
the court in a summary manner for an order compelling the
municipal engineer to provide the list and report within a stated
time and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party. If the
governing body fails to approve or reject the bonded improvements
determined by the municipal engineer to be complete and
satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for the complete
and satisfactory improvements within 45 days from the receipt of
the municipal engineer's list and report, the obligor may apply to
the court in a summary manner for an order compelling, within a
§ 30-49.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-49.1
1:746
stated time, approval of the complete and satisfactory
improvements and approval of a reduction in the performance
guarantee for the approvable complete and satisfactory
improvements in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the municipal engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to Subsection a of this section;
and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorneys fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
3. In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the
municipality or approving authority as part of the performance
guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the performance
guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash
deposit in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to
the full amount of the performance guarantee, provided that if the
developer has furnished a safety and stabilization guarantee, the
municipality may retain cash equal to the amount of the remaining
safety and stabilization guarantee.
f. If any portion of the required bonded improvements is rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete or correct
such improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same
procedure of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
g. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the
governing body or the municipal engineer.
h. Reimbursement for fees.
1. The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for reasonable
inspection fees paid to the municipal engineer for the foregoing
inspection of improvements; which fees shall not exceed the sum of
the amounts set forth in Subsection h1(a) and (b) of this section.
The municipality may require the developer to post the inspection
fees in escrow in an amount:
(a) Not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the
greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that
are subject to a performance guarantee under Subsection
a1(a) or (b), or Subsection a1(a) and (b), of this section; and
(b) Not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements that
are not subject to a performance guarantee under Subsection
a1(a) of this section, which cost shall be determined pursuant
to Section 15 of P.L. 1991, c.256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
2. For those developments for which the inspection fees total less
than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in
two installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a
developer shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance on
deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount
§ 30-49.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-49.1
1:747
§ 30-49.2. Type of Guarantee. [2000 Code § 30-49.2]
At least ten (10%) percent of the performance guarantee shall be in cash
deposited with the City. Such cash shall be deposited to the credit of the
City and may be usable at any time in the event of the nonperformance of
the applicant. Any interest earned by the City on the cash deposit shall inure
to the benefit of the applicant. The remaining portion of the performance
guarantee shall be issued by a bonding or surety company authorized to do
business in the State of New Jersey.
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to
the municipal engineer for inspections, the developer shall deposit
the remaining 50% of the inspection fees.
3. For those developments for which the inspection fees total $10,000
or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit
drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited
by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the
municipal engineer for inspection, the developer shall make
additional deposits of 25% of the inspection fees.
4. If the municipality determines that the amount in escrow for the
payment of inspection fees, as calculated pursuant to Subsection
h1(a) and (b) of this section, is insufficient to cover the cost of
additional required inspections, the municipality may require the
developer to deposit additional funds in escrow provided that the
municipality delivers to the developer a written inspection escrow
deposit request, signed by the municipal engineer, which: informs
the developer of the need for additional inspections, details the
items or undertakings that require inspection, estimates the time
required for those inspections, and estimates the cost of
performing those inspections.
i. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to Subsection a of Section 29 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38), the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
j. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
municipality on the subdivision plat or site plan, the municipal
governing body shall be deemed, upon the release of any performance
guarantee required pursuant to Subsection a of this section, to accept
dedication for public use of streets or roads and any other
improvements made thereon according to site plans and subdivision
plats approved by the approving authority, provided that such
improvements have been inspected and have received final approval by
the municipal engineer.
§ 30-49.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-49.3
1:748
§ 30-49.3. Time of Guarantee. [2000 Code § 30-49.3]
Performance guarantees shall run for a term not to exceed thirty-six (36)
months. Performance guarantees with the consent of the principal and
surety, if there be a surety, may be extended by the City Council by
resolution for additional periods, provided that no one (1) extension period
shall exceed eighteen (18) months.
§ 30-49.4. City Completion. [2000 Code § 30-49.4]
If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in accordance
with the standards and specifications of the City within the time limit or
extension thereof as described in § 30-49.3 above and in the requirements
of the performance guarantees, the obligor and surety shall then be liable
to the City for all reasonable costs of the improvements completed or
corrected. Prior or after receipt of the proceeds, the City shall install such
improvements and/or may use such portions of the performance guarantees
as have been deposited in cash with the City Clerk to assure the completion
of the improvements in accordance with the terms of this article and any
applicable agreement.
§ 30-49.5. Acceptance of Performance Bond by the City Council.
[2000 Code § 30-49.5]
§ 30-49.6. Release of Performance Guarantee. [2000 Code
§ 30-49.6]
The procedures established in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall govern release of
performance bonds. Before the City Council releases any guarantees, or
portions thereof, the following items shall be submitted to the City Council.
a. Before accepting a performance bond, the City Council shall have the
following:
1. A letter from the City Engineer stating that the proposed bond
covers all items required by the Planning Board with a list of the
items and costs. The letter should also state that the plans and
specifications meet all applicable City ordinances.
2. A letter from the City Attorney approving the performance
guarantee as to form and amount.
b. After approval and acceptance of the performance guarantee by the
City Council, a letter stating that fact shall be sent to the Planning
Board before the Planning Board shall sign the final plats for filing with
the County or before a Zoning Permit may be issued for a development.
a. As-built plans and profiles of all utilities and roads with a certification
by the applicant's engineer as to the actual location and construction.
§ 30-49.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-49.6
1:749
§ 30-50. MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE.
§ 30-50.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-50.1; amended 12-27-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-39]
b. A statement or affidavit from the developer that there are no liens or
other legal encumbrances on any of the improvements or utilities
proposed to be deeded to the City.
c. A statement from the City Engineer that all utilities and improvements
required by the Planning Board have been installed and completed in
accordance with applicable City ordinances.
d. A maintenance bond as provided in Subsection g below
e. Deeds, free and clear of all encumbrances, for all streets, public
easements, drainage and conservation easements, other lands
dedicated to public use, and any improvements to be dedicated or
deeded to the City or other public agency.
f. The obligor shall reimburse the Municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the City Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements; provided that the Municipality may require of the
developer a deposit for all or a portion of the reasonably anticipated
fees to be paid to the City Engineer for such inspection.
g. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development,
the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or section.
a. As required by this Ordinance amending the City Code, the developer
shall post with the municipality, prior to the release of a performance
guarantee required pursuant to subparagraph (a), subparagraph (b), or
both subparagraph (a) and subparagraph (b) of paragraph (1) of this
subsection,7 a maintenance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 15%
of the cost of the installation of the improvements which are being
released.
b. As required, the developer shall post with the municipality, upon the
inspection and issuance of final approval of the following private site
improvements by the municipal engineer, a maintenance guarantee in
an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the installation of the
following private site improvements: stormwater management basins,
in-flow and water quality structures within the basins, and the out-flow
pipes and structures of the stormwater management system, if any,
which cost shall be determined according to the method of calculation
set forth in section 15 of P.L.1991, c.256 (C.40:55D-53.4).
c. The term of the maintenance guarantee shall be for a period not to
exceed two years and shall automatically expire at the end of the
established term.
7. Editor’s Note: So in original.
§ 30-49.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-51
1:750
§ 30-51. ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 30-51.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-51.1]
The City Council shall not accept any road or other improvements into the
municipal road system or for municipal ownership until the maintenance
bond has been posted and all deficiencies are corrected or repaired. The
City may, however, undertake to remove snow and perform other municipal
services as may be required on the roads prior to final acceptance, if the
applicant presents a written request to the City Council and agrees in the
request to hold the City harmless for any damages to the roads or public
improvements caused by snow removal or other Municipal activities.
The City Council need not accept any roads or other improvements if the
road or other improvements will be used by the developer to complete other
portions of the development.
§ 30-52. through § 30-54. (RESERVED)
§ 30-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-52
1:751

ARTICLE V
Development Standards
§ 30-55. PLAN DETAILS.
§ 30-55.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-55.1]
All maps, plats and plans required to be submitted by this chapter shall
conform to one of the following sizes: eight and one-half by thirteen (8 1/2 x
13) inches; fifteen by twenty-one (15 x 21) inches; twenty-four by thirty-six
(24 x 36) inches; or thirty by forty-two (30 x 42) inches.
§ 30-55.2. Sketch Plan. [2000 Code § 30-55.2]
All plans shall be based on accurate information at a scale of not less than
one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, unless otherwise noted, and shall show
the entire tract to be developed giving the accurate location of all existing
and proposed property and street lines, and shall also show or indicate the
following information, unless waived by the Board:
a. Key Map. A map at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two
hundred (200) feet showing the entire development, zone districts, and
its relation to all features shown on the Official Map and Master Plan
located within five hundred (500) feet of the extreme limits of the
development.
b. Structures, Wooded Areas and Topography. The location and
dimensions of existing and proposed buildings and structures, including
dimensions from all existing and proposed lot lines; existing vegetation;
all isolated trees more than eight (8) inches in diameter (measured four
(4) feet above ground); and the topography within the portion to be
developed and within one hundred (100) feet thereof at two (2) foot
contours.
c. Owners. The name of the owner of the subject property and all owners
of property contiguous to and across existing or proposed streets from
the subject property as disclosed by the most recent Municipal tax
records.
d. Identity. The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers and Zone District.
e. Easements, Watercourses and Rights-of-Way. The location of existing or
proposed streets, roads, easements, public rights-of-way, streams,
bridges, culverts, drainage ditches, natural watercourses, flood control
basins, floodways and floodplains, in and within two hundred (200) feet
of the development.
f. Public Areas. Any existing or proposed parks, Municipal lands, school
sites, historic sites or other public areas shown on the duly adopted
Master Plan and/or Official Map.
§ 30-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-55.2
1:753
§ 30-55.3. Information Required for Minor Subdivision Plats. [2000
Code § 30-55.3]
If the sketch plan is being submitted for minor subdivision approval, it shall
contain the information required under § 30-55.5 and shall be a certified
survey map drawn by a licensed New Jersey land surveyor. The plat shall
provide for endorsement by the Chairman and Planning Board Secretary.
If the plat is to be filed with the County Filing Officer, it shall meet the
requirements of the Map Filing Act.
§ 30-55.4. Plan Submitted for Preliminary Approval. [2000 Code
§ 30-55.4]
The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of not
less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet. Contour maps and preliminary
construction plans, including road profiles and utility plans, shall be
submitted as part of the preliminary plan. Separate maps may be required
by the Board for topography, utilities and road details. A soil erosion and
sedimentation control plan and a grading plan shall be included. The plan
shall be designed in compliance with the applicable provisions of Sections
30-56 and 30-57 of this chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
g. Lots. The existing and proposed lot layout, lot dimensions, all required
setback lines, and lot areas of each lot in square feet. Lots shall be
designated by letters for minor subdivisions and by consecutive
numbers for major subdivisions until given official lot number
designations by the City.
h. Date of original plan and any revisions, current name, and the old name
if submitted previously under a different title.
i. Architectural drawings, including floor plans, roof plans, building
elevations and cross sections.
j. Any other information required by the Board.
a. Key Map. A map at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals two
hundred (200) feet showing the entire development, Zoning District,
and its relation to all features shown on the Official Map and Master
Plan located within five hundred (500) feet of the extreme limits of the
development.
b. Lots. Lot layout, lot dimensions, all required setback lines, and
individual lot areas in square feet and acreage. Lots shall be designated
by consecutive numbers until given an official lot number designation
by the City.
c. Other Contents. The plan name, Tax Map sheet and date, if revision,
block and lot numbers, date of plan preparation, reference meridian,
scale, graphic scale and the following names and addresses:
§ 30-55.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-55.4
1:754
1. Record owner or owners of property to be developed. If other than
an individual, the corporate officers or partners or other statutory
agent.
2. List of property owners within two hundred (200) feet.
3. Applicant.
4. Person who prepared map, including seal and license number.
d. Acreage. Acreage of tract to be developed to nearest hundredth of an
acre.
e. Elevations and Contours. Sufficient elevations and contours at two (2)
foot vertical intervals to determine the general slope and natural
drainage of the land and the high and low points for the entire tract and
for a distance of one hundred (100) feet from the tract boundary.
f. Existing and Proposed Features. The location of all existing and
proposed property lines, streets, buildings, structures, parking areas,
driveways, watercourses, railroads, easements, bridges, culverts, drain
pipes, sanitary sewers, water mains, gas mains, power lines and any
natural features such as wooded areas, isolated trees over eight (8)
inches in diameter (measured four (4) feet above ground). This data
shall be determined by field and/or photogrammetric survey.
g. Streets. Preliminary plans and profiles at a scale of not less than one (1)
inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontally and one (1) inch equals five (5)
feet vertically including cross-sections every fifty (50) feet or as
specified by the City Engineer of all proposed streets, curbs, gutters
and sidewalks within the development and proposed connection with
existing or future continuing streets. The radii distances of all street
lines shall be shown.
h. Sewers, Drains, Ditches. Preliminary plans and profiles at a scale of one
(1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontally and one (1) inch equals five (5)
feet vertically of all proposed and existing sanitary sewers, storm
drains, drainage ditches and streams within the development, together
with the locations, sizes, elevations, grades and capacities of any
existing sanitary sewer, storm drain, drainage ditch or stream or
watercourse to which the proposed facility shall be connected.
i. Off-Site Improvements. When the development is contingent upon
improvements outside the boundaries of the lot or tract to be
developed, certification shall be supplied by the applicant, prior to
Planning Board consideration for preliminary approval that the
improvements outside the tract are installed and will be available to the
applicant.
j. Setback Lines. All front, rear and side yard lines shall be shown for all
lots.
§ 30-55.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-55.4
1:755
§ 30-55.5. Final Plan. [2000 Code § 30-55.5]
The final plan and all final plans and profiles of improvements and other
original exhibits shall show or be accompanied by the following, where
applicable:
k. Deed Restrictions. A copy of any existing and proposed covenants or
deed restrictions applying to the land being developed shall be
submitted with the preliminary plan.
l. Open Space. Any open space proposed to be dedicated for public use,
playgrounds or other public purpose shall be shown on the plan.
m. Support Capability. When deemed necessary to determine the
suitability of the soil to support new construction, the Planning Board
shall require test holes or borings to be made by a New Jersey licensed
engineer or an approved testing laboratory at the expense of the
applicant under the direction of the City Engineer.
n. Parking. Indicate parking, loading and unloading areas with
dimensions, traffic patterns, access aisles, parking stalls, curb radii and
bumpers.
o. Solid Waste. Indicate location and design of existing and proposed
methods of solid waste storage and disposal.
p. Landscaping and Buffering. Show what will remain and what will be
planted. Indicate names of plants and trees, dimensions and spacing,
approximate time of planting and maintenance plans. All biotic and
nonbiotic landscape materials must be identified and illustrated, when
necessary, with cross sections and elevations. Landscape plans
submitted as part of an Application for Development under this section
shall be prepared by a landscape architect certified by the New Jersey
State Board of Architects and Certified Landscape Architects.
q. Lighting. Indicate types of standards and fixtures, locations, radii of
light, and intensities in footcandles.
r. Signs. Indicate location, dimensions and details.
s. Architectural Plans. Include plans for proposed buildings prepared by
an architect registered with the New Jersey State Board of Architects
and Certified Landscape Architects. Drawings shall include floor plans,
roof plans, building elevations and cross sections.
a. Identification. Date, name and key map of the development, name of
owner, scale, graphic scale and reference meridian. The final plan shall
be drawn at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet.
b. Survey Data. Tract boundary lines, rights-of-way lines of streets, street
names, easements, and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, and all lot lines with accurate dimensions.
Where appropriate, the bearings, distances, arc lengths, central angles,
§ 30-55.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-55.5
1:756
tangents, and radii of all curves and lot lines and areas of each lot in
square feet shall be shown.
c. Public Use. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated
for public use shall be indicated.
d. Block and Lots. All block, lot and house numbers shall be approved by
the City Engineer and the Tax Assessor, and shall be related to existing
block and lot numbers as shown on the Official Tax Map of the City.
e. Monuments. Location and description of all required monuments shall
be shown.
f. Consent of Owner. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of
the land, or that the owner has given consent to file the plan.
g. Approval. When approval of a plan is required by any officer or body,
whether Municipal, County or State, approval shall be certified on the
plat.
h. Agreements. Agreements providing for ownership of common areas
including the perpetual maintenance and continuance of ownership.
i. Changes from Preliminary Plan. An affidavit signed and sworn to by the
applicant that the final plan is exactly the same as the preliminary plan
approved by the Board. If there are changes, they shall be noted and
the reasons indicated for the changes.
j. Certifications. The following certifications shall appear on the final
plan, where appropriate:
1. "I hereby certify that this map and the survey have been made
under my immediate supervision and comply with the provisions of
the Map Filing Law. (Include the following if applicable). I do
further certify that the monuments as designated and shown
hereon have been set.
______________________________________
Licensed Land Surveyor (affix seal)
______________________________________
Date
If monuments are to be set at a later date, the following
endorsement shall be shown on the map).
(a) "I certify that a bond has been given to the City of Asbury Park
guaranteeing the future setting of the monuments shown on
this map and so designated."
_________________________________
City Clerk
§ 30-55.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-55.5
1:757
§ 30-56. DESIGN STANDARDS—GENERAL. [2000 Code § 30-56]
In reviewing any development, the Planning Board shall consider the items
contained in this section.
§ 30-56.1. Building Orientation. [2000 Code § 30-56.1]
(The orientation and design of buildings and parking areas.) The Board
must strive to ensure that the applicant has provided an aesthetically
pleasing design which is architecturally compatible with other buildings in
the area. Particular attention shall be given to safety and fire protection;
arrangement of buildings to maximize solar access and energy efficiency;
and impact on and from surrounding development and contiguous and
adjacent buildings and lands. No principal building shall be located nearer
to any other principal building less than a distance equal to fifty (50%)
percent of the height of the taller building. If the buildings overlap by
ten (10) feet or less, the distance between them shall be not less than
twenty-five (25%) percent of the height of the tallest building. The minimum
distance between buildings shall not be less than twenty (20) feet.
_________________________________
Date
2. "I have carefully examined this map and find it conforms with the
provisions of the Map Filing Law and the municipal ordinance and
requirements thereto."
_____________________________________
City Engineer (affix seal)
_____________________________________
Date
3. "This application No ______ is approved by the Asbury Park
Planning Board as a major development."
_____________________________________
Chairman
______________________________________
Date
______________________________________
Secretary
______________________________________
Date
§ 30-55.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-56.2
1:758
§ 30-56.2. Vehicular and Pedestrian Circulation. [2000 Code
§ 30-56.2]
The movement of pedestrian and vehicular traffic within and adjacent to
the site. Particular emphasis shall be given to ingress and egress points;
provision and layout of parking areas; off-street loading and unloading;
movement of people, goods and vehicles within the site, between buildings
and between buildings and vehicles.
The Planning Board shall ensure that all parking spaces are usable and are
safely and conveniently arranged. Access to the site from adjacent roads
shall be designed so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on
these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress to
the site.
§ 30-56.3. Landscaping, Screening and Buffering. [2000 Code
§ 30-56.3]
a. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall development
design and integrated into building arrangements, topography, parking,
and buffering requirements. Landscaping should include trees, shrubs,
ground cover, perennials, annuals, sculpture, art (where appropriate),
and the use of building and paving materials in an imaginative and
aesthetic manner. Landscaping shall be maintained and the owner shall
be responsible for replacement of dead plants and damaged
landscaping materials. All developments subject to major development
approval including new public improvements shall include a
landscaping plan prepared by an appropriate professional as part of the
submission. Landscape improvements shall be installed pursuant to an
approved landscape plan and shall be performed by a professional
landscape contractor. Landscape buffers, consisting of screen
plantings, berms, fences, walls, or combinations thereof, shall be
incorporated into the landscape plan where appropriate or required.
Particular emphasis should be given to areas of the site which border
potentially conflicting adjacent land uses (see illustration). Buffering
shall be located to minimize headlights, noise, lights from structures,
and the movement of people and vehicles.
b. Where an application for either a major or minor development is made
before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, such
development plans must provide for one (1) street tree for every fifty
(50) feet of street frontage that the lot(s) contain. In the event that the
applicant can show that there are adequate, viable street trees existing
at the site of the proposed development or that it is not practical to
plant trees at the required location, a contribution equivalent to the
cost of providing the required street trees shall be made to the City and
designated for use by the Asbury Park Shade Tree Commission. When
an applicant represents to the Board that adequate street trees exist
adjacent to a proposed development site, the Planning Board shall
condition its approval upon a determination by the Shade Tree
Commission that the existing trees are viable or that the required
§ 30-56.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-56.3
1:759
§ 30-56.4. Lighting. [2000 Code § 30-56.4]
Appropriate outdoor lighting shall be provided where necessary for the
safety of pedestrians. Outdoor lighting and illuminated signs shall be
shielded so that such lighting will not adversely affect abutting property or
streets.
§ 30-56.5. Utilities. [2000 Code § 30-56.5]
Storm drainage, including water retention and detention, sanitary waste
disposal, water supply and solid waste collection and disposal shall be
reviewed and considered. Particular emphasis shall be given to the
adequacy of existing systems and the need for improvements, both on-site
and off-site, to adequately carry runoff and sewage, and to maintain an
adequate supply of water at sufficient pressure.
§ 30-56.6. Off-Tract Improvements.
(Reserved)
§ 30-56.7. Impact on Natural Environment. [2000 Code § 30-56.7]
Environmental elements relating to soil erosion, preservation of trees,
protection of watercourses and resources, noise, topography, soil and
animal life shall be reviewed and the design of the plan shall minimize any
adverse impact on these elements.
§ 30-56.8. Conformance with Master Plan or Official Map. [2000
Code § 30-56.8]
If the Master Plan or the Official Map provides for the reservation of
designated streets, public drainageways, flood control basins, or public
area such as parks, school sites, historic sites or similar lands within the
proposed development, such areas shall be shown on the plan in locations
planting locations are impractical. The approval shall be further
conditioned upon payment by the applicant of a contribution to the
City in an amount determined by the Shade Tree Commission to equal
the cost of installation of the required street trees. With respect to
the planting of new street trees in connection with an approved major
or minor development, the Shade Tree Commission shall set minimum
standards regarding acceptable species, plant size and planting
procedures.
§ 30-56.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-56.8
1:760
and sizes suitable to their intended uses. The Planning Board may reserve
the locations and extent of such public areas in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44.
§ 30-57. DESIGN STANDARDS-SPECIFIC.
§ 30-57.1. Purpose. [2000 Code § 30-57.1]
It is the purpose of this section to establish reasonable standards for
development in order to mitigate the demand for City services and facilities
and thereby avoid adverse impacts upon the health, safety and welfare
of the general public. These standards are also intended to promote
consistency in development, avoid congestion, and improve and preserve
the aesthetic quality of the City.
§ 30-57.2. Streets, Curbs and Sidewalks. [2000 Code § 30-57.2]
a. General. Proposed streets and extensions of existing streets shall
conform to Master Plan and Official Map recommendations. Those
streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map shall be designed
and located to facilitate orderly circulation patterns, assure access by
emergency vehicles, and provide for future connections to adjoining
property.
b. Specific Requirements for Streets.
1. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
2. Developments abutting primary or secondary arterial streets shall,
at the discretion of the Planning Board, provide reverse frontage
with a buffer strip, or driveways with turnarounds. (See
illustration)
3. The right-of-way and pavement widths shall not be less than the
following:
R.O.W. Cartway
Primary arterial 66' 44'
Collector 60' 36'
Local street 40' - 50' 24' - 32'
Marginal access street 40' 24'
§ 30-56.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-57.2
1:761
The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial development shall be determined on an
individual basis, and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for public safety equipment.
4. No development showing reserve strips controlling access to
streets shall be approved except where such strips have been
deeded to the City.
5. Grades on minor streets shall not exceed ten (10%) percent. No
street shall have a minimum grade of less than one-half of one (.5%)
percent.
6. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible
and in no case shall be less than sixty (60°) degrees.
7. Dead-end streets shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet
and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not less
than forty (40) feet.
8. Developments that include existing streets which do not conform to
pavement and/or rights-of-way widths as shown on the Master Plan,
Official Map, or as required by this article, shall provide for the
dedication and improvement to City specifications of the additional
width. If the development adjoins one (1) side of an existing street
which does not meet City standards, only one-half (1/2) of the
required extra width shall be dedicated and improved to City
specifications.
9. Service features, garages, parking areas and entrances to dwelling
units shall, where possible, be located on a side of the individual lot
having access to a local street. Walkways should be designed to
connect dwelling units with each other and connect each dwelling
unit with common open space.
10. Streets and their appurtenances shall be constructed according to
the following specifications:
All streets shall be improved with a two and one-half (2 1/2) inch
two-course type S.M. bituminous concrete pavement in accordance
with current New Jersey State Highway Department specifications
on a five and one-half (5 1/2) inch thick, two and one-half (2 1/
2) inch size broken stone base. Where subbase conditions of the
proposed street are wet, springy or of such a nature in the opinion
of the City Engineer that paving would be inadvisable without
first treating the subbase, the subbase shall be prepared by the
installation of suitable subsurface drainage or other means as may
be required to meet the special condition. The method employed to
stabilize the base must be approved by the City Engineer.
c. Specific Requirements for Curbs and Sidewalks.
§ 30-57.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-57.2
1:762
§ 30-57.3. Erosion and Sedimentation Control. [2000 Code
§ 30-57.3]
Because a substantial amount of erosion and sedimentation is likely to occur
during construction of development which may impact adjacent properties,
the Development Plan must show measures used to control erosion and
reduce sedimentation. Such measures must be approved by the Monmouth
County Soil Conservation District and installed prior to excavation of the
site.
§ 30-57.4. Utilities and Facilities. [2000 Code § 30-57.4]
1. Curbs. Curbs shall be constructed on both sides of all streets, and
shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches deep and six (6) inches in
width at the top and eight (8) inches in width at the bottom and
shall be constructed of a minimum concrete mixture of one (1) part
cement, two (2) parts washed sand and three (3) parts washed
gravel, or other suitable aggregate. The concrete shall have a
compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds per square
inch after twenty-eight (28) days. The minimum length of blocks
shall be ten (10) feet, with a performed bituminous expansion joint
filler one-half (1/2) inch thick installed every forty-nine (49) feet.
The finish shall be a float finish with corners rounded.
2. Sidewalks. All streets shall be provided with concrete sidewalks at
least four (4) feet in width, and four (4) inches in thickness, except
at driveways where the sidewalk shall be at least six (6) inches in
thickness. The concrete shall have a compressive strength of four
thousand (4,000) pounds per square inch after twenty-eight (28)
days. Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of a street.
a. Underground Utilities. In all developments all utility distribution
services shall be installed underground. The applicant shall arrange
with the serving utility for the underground installation of the utility's
distribution supply lines, in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as part of its
tariff, as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey Board of
Public Utilities Commissioners, and shall submit to the Board, prior to
the granting of final approval, a written instrument from each serving
utility which shall evidence full compliance with the provisions of this
subsection; except, however, that the Board in its discretion may permit
lots which abut existing streets where overhead electric or distribution
supply lines have heretofore been installed on any portion of the street
involved, to be supplied with electric and telephone service from those
overhead lines, but the service connections from the utility's overhead
lines shall be installed underground. All underground utility work which
will be under the pavement of the street shall be laid sufficiently in
advance to allow for complete settlement of the trenches and in no
event shall construction work be permitted over such excavation which,
in the opinion of the City Engineer, has not properly settled.
§ 30-57.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-57.4
1:763
In any particular situation where the applicant can clearly demonstrate
that because of unusual topographic conditions or other unusual
conditions having to do with the land, the installation of such utilities
underground is impracticable or otherwise not feasible due to such
condition, then the Planning Board, in its discretion, may waive this
requirement for underground installation.
Stormwater drainage and wastewater utilities shall be installed as
follows:
1. Stormwater drainage. All streets shall be provided with catch
basins and pipes which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, are
necessary for proper surface drainage. The requirements of this
section shall not be satisfied by the construction of dry wells.
(a) Catch basins shall be designed in accordance with New Jersey
Highway Department standard plans and specifications.
Frames and grates shall be Campbell Foundry Co. Pattern No.
2541 or No. 2548, steam flow grating with eight-inch curb face,
or equal.
(b) Storm drain pipes shall be reinforced concrete culvert pipe,
extra strength, conforming to A.S.T.M. specifications C-76-55
when installed in streets, and may be reinforced concrete
sewer pipe, standard strength conforming to A.S.T.M.
specifications C75-55 when installed off streets. Joints shall be
Bell and Spigot properly caulked with jute or oakum and filled
with cement mortar or shall be provided with a suitable rubber
gasket of a type approved by the City Engineer and installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
(c) Manholes shall be designed in accordance with New Jersey
State Highway Department standard plans and specifications.
2. Wastewater Discharge. Sanitary sewers designed in accordance
with applicable State and local regulations shall be installed in a
manner adequate to handle all present and future developments
subject to the approval of the Construction Official or the City
Engineer. Connection to a City sewer line shall be made only after
issuance of a Street Opening and Connection Permit from the
Department of Public Maintenance.
b. Refuse Storage. Refuse storage areas shall be so designed as to
minimize any detrimental effect on the character of any development.
c. Laundry Facilities. In multifamily developments, adequate laundry
equipment, including washers and dryers, shall be provided and
conveniently located for the sole use of occupants. Drying yards shall be
prohibited.
§ 30-57.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-57.4
1:764
§ 30-57.5. Open Space. [2000 Code § 30-57.5]
Inasmuch as open space contributes to the provision of light and air to
occupants of a development, reduces density and improves the aesthetics of
a development, site plans shall hereafter include designated areas of open
space. Open space may be areas of the site left in an undisturbed natural
condition, provided such is in keeping with the overall aesthetic integrity of
the site plan. Open space may also be provided as landscaped sitting places,
plazas and/or lawn areas. The amount of open space to be provided shall be
in accordance with the open space ratios provided in Schedule 1.
§ 30-57.6. Parking and Loading Standards. [2000 Code § 30-57.6]
See § 30-59.
§ 30-57.7. Signs. [2000 Code § 30-57.7]
See § 30-61.
§ 30-57.8. Fences or Walls. [2000 Code § 30-57.8]
See § 30-63.
§ 30-57.9. Building Facades. [2000 Code § 30-57.9]
All new construction within a historic district now or hereafter designated
in the Historic Preservation Element of the Asbury Park Master Plan shall
include architectural elements which cause such construction to be in
character with the historic district in which it is located. The architectural
elements to be included will be based upon structures of similar use already
existing within the block fronts on either side of the street within which
d. Television Reception. Facilities for television reception shall be built
into all multifamily developments. Individual roof antennae of any kind
shall not be permitted.
e. Swimming Pools. A single swimming pool may be provided as an
accessory use for the sole use of occupants on the same site as a
multifamily development. The pool shall comply in all respects with
Article VI of this chapter, except that pool and any other recreation
facilities shall set back not less than ten (10) feet from any property line
and further provided that such facilities shall not be permitted in any
required front yard.
f. Design and Facilities. In multifamily developments, accessory buildings
and facilities shall be designed to harmonize with the overall character
of the development and shall meet the setback requirements set forth
herein.
g. Storage. Adequate provision for the storage of such items as yard and
garden equipment, fireplace wood, etc., shall be provided in all
multifamily development.
§ 30-57.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-57.9
1:765
the site of the proposed construction is located. If a particular architectural
element such as a cornice, columns, front porch, dormer window, second
story, etc., is present in fifty (50%) percent or more of the existing buildings
within both block fronts of the block where the site of the proposed
residential building is located, that architectural element must also be
included in the design of the proposed construction.
§ 30-57.10. Below Grade Apartments Prohibited. [2000 Code
§ 30-57.10]
No residential building constructed after the effective date of this section
shall contain separate dwelling units in any portion of the building where
the finished floor elevation is below the elevation at the center line of the
street upon which the property has frontage.
§ 30-57.11. Solid Waste Recycling Requirements. [2000 Code
§ 30-57.11]
In order to assure that future development is designed to accommodate the
recycling of solid waste, all site plan drawings submitted for development
approval shall include the following:
§ 30-57.12. Street Tree, Landscape and Planting Requirements.
[2000 Code § 30-57.12]
a. Each application for residential development must include provisions
for the collection, disposition, and recycling of recyclable materials.
The plans shall indicate the location of space equal to at least twelve
(12) square feet of floor area per dwelling unit conveniently arranged
and located as a holding area for a four (4) week accumulation of
materials. Such an area may be within a hidden laundry room,
basement, garage or outdoor accessory building, but shall not be
otherwise located outdoors in the open.
b. Each application for a nonresidential use which utilizes one thousand
(1,000) square feet or more of floor area must include provisions for the
internal collection, disposition and recycling of recyclable materials.
Each application shall quantify the amount of recyclable material it will
generate as part of its weekly operation, including newspapers, white
high grade paper, glass, aluminum, tin and bimetal cans and cardboard.
The application shall provide a storage area sized to contain one (1)
week of recyclable material. The storage area shall also be designed for
truck access for pickup of materials and be suitably screened from view.
a. It shall be unlawful to damage, destroy or remove any street tree in the
City without approval of the Asbury Park Shade Tree Commission. No
Certificate of Zoning Compliance for any new building shall be issued
unless one (1) or more street trees have been planted in accordance
with the provisions of this section and § 30-56.3 of the Land
Development Ordinance.
§ 30-57.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-57.12
1:766
b. An applicant may make a written request that required street tree(s)
will be planted within the earlier of six (6) months or sixty (60) days
prior to the beginning of the next non-planting season. The non-planting
season for the purpose of this section shall be June 15th to September
15th or any time of the year when the ground is frozen more than three
(3) inches below the surface of the soil.
c. Specifications for Street Tree Plantings.
1. Design. Prior to the issuance of a Zoning Permit for the
construction of a new building or the approval of a site plan or
subdivision application, a plan shall be required which shall show
the location of existing and proposed street trees. Trees shall either
be massed at critical points or spaced evenly along the street, or
both. When trees are planted at predetermined intervals along
streets, spacing shall depend on tree size as follows:
Tree Size Planting Interval
Large trees (40' high or higher) 50—60 feet apart
Medium sized trees (30'—40') 40—50 feet apart
Small trees (to 30' in height) 30—40 feet apart
2. Tree type. Tree type may vary depending on the overall effect
desired, but as a general rule, all trees shall be of similar type (e.g.
open vs. dense foliage) and height as the predominant species
found in the immediate area, except to achieve special effects.
Exclusive use of one (1) species should be avoided to prevent the
spread of pest or disease infestation. Selection of tree type shall be
approved by the Planning Board as part of the review of a site plan
or subdivision application, or by the Zoning Officer for new
construction not requiring development approval from the
Planning Board. Every reviewing authority shall request comments
from the Shade Tree Commission pertaining to tree selection, size
and location.
3. Planting specifications. All trees shall have a caliper of three (3)
inches, measured six (6) inches from the base of the trunk. Trees
shall be nursery grown, of substantially uniform size and shape,
and have straight trunks. Trees shall be properly planted and shall
be staked, if necessary or required by the Zoning Officer. Provision
shall be made by the applicant for regular watering and
maintenance until they are established. Dead or dying trees shall
be replaced by the applicant during the next planting season.
d. Planting Requirements for Urban Conditions.
1. Applicability. These requirements shall apply to areas within sites
where more than fifty (50%) percent of the ground surface is paved
and/or where pedestrian traffic is too intense to allow grass to
grow.
§ 30-57.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-57.12
1:767
2. Root zone size requirements. At the time of planting, a prepared
root zone shall be provided at a minimum width equal to one (1)
foot for every five (5) feet of canopy width projected for the tree at
maturity.
3. Soil mixture. The soil mixture for trees planted under the
applicable conditions described herein shall contain not less than
fifty (50%) percent porous aggregate such as an expanded slate
material. Sufficient loam and organic material shall be included in
the mixture to sustain plain nutrients and protect against chemical
changes within the soil.
4. Drainage requirements. A drainage system consisting of
horizontally laid one-inch minimum diameter perforated pvc pipe
shall be installed at least 36 inches below the ground surface on
each side of the prepared root zone. The pipe shall be laid at a
minimum slope of 0.5% and maximum slope of 2.0%, with
perforations facing upward on a three (3) inch layer of crushed
stone and shall be covered by a fiber mat to allow water percolation
without siltation. Where the horizontal pipes intersect there shall
be a vertical perforated pvc pipe of the same diameter extending to
the ground surface in order to provide aeration and a mechanism
for deep watering.
5. Surface material. The surface area over the prepared root zone
shall be covered with either a monolithic pervious pavement, open
jointed pavers or metal air vent grills to prevent soil compaction
and to permit penetration of air and water. Where possible, the
surface material shall have a diameter equal to one-half (1/2) the
mature height of the species being planted, but shall not be less
than the area of the prepared root zone as is required in this
chapter.
e. Site Protection and General On-Site Planting Requirements.
1. Topsoil preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of
construction shall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces so as to
provide at least four (4) inches of even cover to all disturbed areas
of the development and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
2. Removal of debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush,
weeds, excess or scrap building materials or other debris shall be
removed from the site and disposed of in accordance with the law.
No tree stumps, portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried
anywhere in the development. All dead or dying trees, standing or
fallen, shall be removed from the site. If trees and limbs are
reduced to chips, they may, subject to approval of the Zoning
Officer, be used as mulch in landscaped areas.
3. Protection of existing plantings. Maximum effort should be made to
save specimens which are significant due to size or relative rarity.
No material or temporary soil deposits shall be placed within four
§ 30-57.12 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-57.12
1:768
§ 30-58. STORMWATER CONTROL.
§ 30-58.1. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2803 § 58.1]
(4) feet of shrubs or ten (10) feet of trees designated to be retained
on the preliminary and/or final plat. Protective barriers or tree
wells shall be installed around each plant and/or group of plants
that are to remain on the site. Barriers shall not be supported
by the plants they are protecting, but shall be self-supporting.
They shall be a minimum of four (4) feet high and constructed of
a durable material that will last until construction is completed.
Snow fences and silt fences are examples of acceptable barriers.
4. Planting specifications. Deciduous trees shall have at least two and
one-half (2 1/2) inch caliper at planting, measured at six (6) inches
from the base of the trunk. Size of evergreens and shrubs shall be
allowed to vary depending on setting and type of shrub, except that
buffer plantings shall be sufficiently large and planted in such a
fashion that a screen at least six (6) feet in height shall be produced
at the time of planting and a screen of eight (8) feet in height shall
be produced within three (3) growing seasons. Buffer design shall
provide maximum protection to adjacent properties and avoid
damage to existing plant material. Possible arrangements include
planting in parallel, serpentine or broken rows. If planted berms
are used as buffers, the minimum top width shall be four (4) feet,
and the maximum side slope shall be 2:1.
5. Maintenance. Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a manner
appropriate for the specified plant species through the first
growing season, and dead or dying plants shall be replaced by the
applicant during the next planting season. No buildings, structures,
storage of materials, or parking shall be permitted within the buffer
area; buffer areas shall be maintained and kept free of all debris,
rubbish, weeds, and tall grass.
a. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
("BMPs"). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Pollution control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMP's may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
§ 30-57.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.1
1:769
§ 30-58.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2803 § 30-58.2]
For the purpose of this section (only), the following words or phrases shall
have the meanings indicated. Unless specifically defined below, words or
phrases used in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this section its most
reasonable application. The definitions below are the same as or based
on the corresponding definitions in the Stormwater Management Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
BMP or BMPs — shall mean best management practice(s).
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — shall mean the geographic depiction of the
boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and
CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — shall mean those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
COMPACTION — shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined herein.
c. Applicability.
1. This section shall be applicable to all of the following major
development projects subject to municipal review:
(a) Non-residential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the City of Asbury Park.
d. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued pursuant to this section are to be
considered an integral part of development approvals under the
municipal review process and do not relieve the applicant of the
responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this section shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety, and general welfare. This section is not intended to
interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinances, rule or
regulation, statute, or other provision of law except that, where any
provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision
of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards shall control.
§ 30-58.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.2
1:770
CORE — shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — shall mean an agency designated by the
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — shall mean a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
lands, development shall mean: any activity that requires a State permit;
any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1, et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — shall mean a geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — shall mean an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using
the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the Ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing Ordinances.
(2)
§ 30-58.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.2
1:771
EROSION — shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
HIGH POLLUTANT LOADING AREAS — shall mean areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or petroleum products are
loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/
unloaded or stored; areas where hazardous materials are expected to be
present in greater than "reportable quantities" as defined by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; areas
where recharge would be inconsistent with Department approved remedial
action work plan or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for spills
of toxic materials, such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities.
INFILTRATION — shall mean the process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — shall mean any "development" that provides
for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — shall mean the City of Asbury Park.
NODE — shall mean an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
POLLUTANT — shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act
of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011, et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the
State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both
hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REVIEW AGENCY (MUNICIPAL) — shall mean the municipal body or official
that is responsible for the review of a major development project for
compliance with the stormwater management requirements.
SITE — shall mean the lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
§ 30-58.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.2
1:772
SOLID AND FLOATABLE MATERIALS — shall mean sediment, debris, trash,
and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
SOURCE MATERIAL — shall mean any material(s) or machinery, located
at an industrial facility that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to
process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — shall mean an area delineated on the State
Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is
intended to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — shall be defined as the geographic application
of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide
policies, and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — shall mean water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — shall be defined as the time it takes for
runoff to travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed
to the point of interest within a watershed.
§ 30-58.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.2
1:773
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— shall mean a neighborhood given priority access to State resources
through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — shall mean a zone designated by the New
Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60, et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — is defined as previously developed
portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — shall mean an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 30-58.3. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2803 § 30-58.3]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
a. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 30-58.4. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this § apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
§ 30-58.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.3
1:774
§ 30-58.4. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major
Development. [Ord. No. 2803 § 30-58.4]
plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance
with Department rules.
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 30-58.10.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 30-58.4f and g:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of fourteen (14) feet, provided that
the access is made of permeable material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 30-58.4f and g may be obtained for the enlargement
of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the construction or
enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of & and g to the maximum extent
practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 30-58.4f and g, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
§ 30-58.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.4
1:775
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under § 30-58.4d3 above within the
upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would provide
additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of § 30-58.4f
and g that § 30-58.4f were not achievable on-site.
e. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 30-58.4f and
g shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 30-58.4e into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management strategies
identified in § 30-58.4e2 below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post construction;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
§ 30-58.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.4
1:776
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 30-58.4e3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39, et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under § 30-58.4e2i(2) above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For exemptions to
this standard see § 30-58.4e3c below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in § 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 30-58.4g1 are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
§ 30-58.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.4
1:777
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
(i) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long
and one and one-half inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(ii) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch (1") spacing between the bars,
to the elevation of the water quality design storm as
specified in § 30¬58.4g1; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Sections 30-58.4f
and 30-58.4g shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected
to a conservation restriction filed with the Monmouth County
Clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that
ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 30-58.7, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
f. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39, et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
§ 30-58.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.4
1:778
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 30-58.5, either:
(i) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain one hundred (100%) percent of the
average annual pre-construction groundwater
recharge volume for the site; or
(ii) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to (3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
(i) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading as
defined in § 30-58.2; and
(ii) Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material" as
defined in § 30-58.2.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 30-58.5, complete one of
the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two, 10, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the preconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
§ 30-58.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.4
1:779
stormwater leaving the site for the two, 10, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include
the analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use Ordinances in the drainage area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the 2, 10 and 100
year storm events are 50, 75 and 80 percent, respectively,
of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The percentages
apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff that
is attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed. The
percentages shall not be applied to post-construction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with (1), (2) and (3) above shall only
be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff
could increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
g. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids ("TSS") in
stormwater runoff by 80 percent of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System ("NJPDES") rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of non-structural and structural stormwater management
measures.
§ 30-58.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.4
1:780
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMP's designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 7, or found on the Department's website at
www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources of
technical guidance are listed in § 7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMP's in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty (80%) percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall
utilize the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (AXB)/100
Where
§ 30-58.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.4
1:781
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both BMPs,
and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater Wetland 90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment Device See Subsection 30-58.6
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty (80%)
percent TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless
the runoff from the subareas converge on site in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the post-construction
nutrient load from the developed site in stormwater runoff
generated from the water quality design storm. In achieving
reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent practicable, the
design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Sections 4B and 4C. This
standard may be superseded by a more stringent numeric effluent
limitation imposed under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge
Elimination System ("NJPDES") rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a
discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. Daily limits for nutrient loading ("TMDL") may apply
to the site development based on conditions of regulatory
approvals.
6. Additional information and examples of structural stormwater
measures are contained in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual, which may be obtained from the
address identified in § 30-58.7.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
§ 30-58.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.4
1:782
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC 14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the center line of the waterway where
the bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection (1) above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where the applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than one hundred fifty (150) feet as
measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subparagraph shall be subject to review and approval by
the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39, et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site. Stability in the "Standards for Soil
§ 30-58.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.4
1:783
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39, et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within one
hundred fifty (150) feet of the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five (95%) percent TSS postconstruction
removal rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 30-58.4g8 has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to § 30-58.4g8
shall maintain or enhance the current functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection area
as defined in § 30-58.4g8(a)(1) above. In no case shall a stream
corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the Special
Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) § 30-58.4g8 does not apply to the construction of one individual
single family dwelling that is not part of a larger development
on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision approval on
§ 30-58.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.4
1:784
§ 30-58.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater
Recharge. [Ord. No. 2803 § 30-58.5]
or before February 2, 2004, provided that the construction
begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook § 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
or superseding document; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. When selecting or calculating runoff coefficients for pre-developed
project site conditions using any of the above methods, the project
site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods. However, another
land cover may be used to calculate runoff coefficients if: 1) such
land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof site without
interruption for at least five years immediately prior to the time of
application; and 2) the design engineer can document the
character and extent of such land cover through the use of
photographs, affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
If more than one land cover other than woods has existed on the
site during the five years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
(including woods) shall be used for the computations. All predeveloped
land covers shall be assumed to be in good hydrologic
condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to have applied
appropriate conservation practices.
3. In calculating pre-developed site stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall include the effects of all land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows and
culverts, that reduce pre-developed site stormwater runoff rates
and/or volumes.
4. In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall use appropriate twenty-four-hour rainfall
depths as developed for the project site by the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration.
5. In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall separately calculate and then combine the
§ 30-58.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.5
1:785
§ 30-58.6. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. No. 2803 § 30-58.6]
runoff volumes from pervious and directly connected impervious
surfaces within a drainage area.
6. Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the Two-Step
methodology as described in the Department's current Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual or the NRCS methodology
described in the current Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology
for Small Watersheds.
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns.
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one (1) inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of
the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the
water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than one-third (1/3) the width of the
diameter of the orifice or one-third (1/3) the width of the weir, with
a minimum spacing between bars of one-inch and a maximum
spacing between bars of six (6) inches. In addition, the design of
trash racks must comply with the requirements of § 30-58.8d.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
§ 30-58.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.6
1:786
§ 30-58.7. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. No. 2803
§ 30-58.7]
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at §
30-58.8.
6. Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by §
30-58.4 of this section.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 30-58.4 of this §, provided the pollutant removal rates are verified
by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and certified
by the Department.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at 1 and 2 below, which are available from
Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
b. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
§ 30-58.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.7
1:787
§ 30-58.8. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Ord. No. 2803 § 30-58.8]
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of the Freehold Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292¬5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
3. The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
a. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
b. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions:
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
(6) inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed two and one-half (2.5) feet per second under the full
range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300)
lbs/ft sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
§ 30-58.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.8
1:788
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of three hundred (300)
lbs./ft sq.
3. For purposes of this subsection 3, escape provisions shall mean the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in §
30-58.8c a free-standing outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half feet. Such safety ledges
shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four (4) to
six (6) feet in width. One step shall be located approximately
two and one-half (2.5) feet below the permanent water surface,
and the second step shall be located one to one and one-half
feet above the permanent water surface. See § 30-58.8d for an
illustration of safety ledges in a stormwater management
basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
c. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
d. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin:
§ 30-58.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.8
1:789
§ 30-58.9. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Ord. No. 2803 § 30-58.9]
a. The information in Paragraphs 1 through 7 below shall be provided
unless a waiver is approved through Paragraph 8 below:
1. Existing Site Conditions Base Map, including topography, streams,
roads and current built environment. The reviewing engineer may
require upstream tributary drainage system information as
necessary. It is recommended that the topographic base map of the
site be submitted which extends a minimum of three hundred (300)
feet beyond the limits of the proposed development, at a scale
appropriate to show site details, showing two-foot contour
intervals.
2. Environmental Site Analysis: A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
critical areas and to those that provide particular opportunities or
constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s): A map (or maps) at a scale
appropriate for the site indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
§ 30-58.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.9
1:790
4. Stormwater Site Planning and Design Summary: This plan shall
provide a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Sections
30-58.3 through 30¬58.6 are being met, including both
nonstructural and structural approaches. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being managed or developed to
meet the objective of controlling ground water recharge,
stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at the
source by land management and source controls whenever
possible. Refer to the Municipal Stormwater Management Plan
and/or the Municipal Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan for
additional requirements. It should explain in full the maps required
by this section.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map(s): The following
information, illustrated on a map at a scale appropriate for the site,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, land
area to remain in natural vegetation, and details of the
proposed plan to infiltrate, manage, control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention, and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design and discharge
stability calculations for the pre-development and postdevelopment
conditions for the design storms specified in §
30-58.4.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure. The municipality shall be notified of site
investigation activities and given the opportunity to have a
witness, either prior to approval or as a condition of approval,
as appropriate for the specific type of measure. Subsequent to
approval of the major development, post-construction bulk soil
density and infiltration testing shall be required for all
infiltration measures that were used as justification for
§ 30-58.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.9
1:791
§ 30-58.10. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. No. 2803 § 30-58.10]
meeting the recharge standard, to ensure that they were
properly constructed.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan: The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 30-58.10.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements: The review agency may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Paragraphs 1 through 6 above when it can
be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible to
obtain or it would create a significant economic hardship on the
applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
a. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in § 30-58.1c of this § shall comply
with the requirements of Sections 30-58.10b and 10c.
b. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 2 above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection 7 below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
§ 30-58.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-58.10
1:792
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 2 above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by paragraphs 6 and 7 above.
9. The requirements of paragraphs 3 and 4 above do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have thirty (30) days to effect maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
municipal engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its
discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance
and repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses
to perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality or
County may immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost
thereof to the responsible person.
c. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 30-58.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-58.11
1:793
§ 30-58.11. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2803 § 30-58.11]
The City will request all responsible parties to submit annual statements
documenting the operation and maintenance of their facilities. This will
assist the City in completing the Annual Certification Form as well as
provide documentation of all operations and maintenance not conducted
by City personnel on stormwater management facilities. Should the
responsible parties not submit annual statements or fail to conduct the
required maintenance, the City will assess penalties against the owner as
follows and in accordance with the City's Code: (i) the City will first send
the owner a thirty (30)-day written notice of the reporting requirement;
(ii) a five hundred ($500.00) dollar 1st offense fine will be issued if no
annual statement is received within the thirty (30)-day period; (iii) the City
will send a 2nd letter with notice of the offense; (iv) a one thousand five
hundred ($1500.00) 2nd offense fine will be imposed if no annual statement
is received within the second thirty (30)-day period; (v) as a last resort the
City will perform an assessment and liens against the applicable property
for the amount of all penalties and the annual report preparation costs.
Additionally, any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts,
maintains, or uses any building, structure or land in violation of this §
shall be subject to the following penalties: (i) the City will first send the
owner a thirty (30)-day written notice of the reporting requirement; (ii) a
five hundred ($500.00) dollar 1st offense fine will be issued if no annual
statement is received within the thirty (30)-day period; (iii) the City will
send a 2nd letter with notice of the offense; (iv) a one thousand five hundred
($1500.00) dollar 2nd offense fine will be imposed if no annual statement
is received within the second thirty (30)-day period; (v) as a last resort the
City will perform an assessment and liens against the applicable property
for the amount of all penalties and the annual report preparation costs.
§ 30-59. PARKING AND LOADING STANDARDS.
§ 30-59.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-59.1]
The purpose of this section is to insure the provision of adequate off-street
parking and loading areas for all types of development. Unless provisions
are made for off-street parking, such vehicles that are brought into an
area by various land uses will be parked on public streets; including, in
many instances, streets that are residential in character. Reliance on onstreet
parking is detrimental to the public interest, as it causes congestion,
hinders emergency access and tends to have a depreciating effect on an
area or neighborhood.
§ 30-59.2. Maintenance of Conformity. [2000 Code § 30-59.2; Ord.
No. 2777 § 3]
Wherever, as of the effective date of this chapter, off-street parking and
loading facilities are provided conforming in whole or in part with this
section, such off-street parking and loading facilities shall not be reduced
§ 30-58.11 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-59.2
1:794
in quantity, reduced in area or otherwise altered below the requirements
set forth herein. All off-street parking and loading facilities of up to five (5)
spaces must be approved by the City Engineer and City Planner. Facilities
of five (5) spaces or more will require Development Review (Site Plan)
approval.
§ 30-59.3. Maintenance of Availability. [2000 Code § 30-59.3]
Parking and loading spaces shall not be used for any other purpose or
character of automobile parking or loading as to limit their availability for
automobile parking or loading.
§ 30-59.4. Nonconforming Parking. [2000 Code § 30-59.4]
Structures and uses without adequate parking and loading areas as
required in this section, and that predate the effective date of this chapter,
may be continued. Should such structure be increased in area or changed in
use, the parking and loading required shall be determined by applying the
standards set forth herein to the entire structure or use.
§ 30-59.5. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [2000 Code § 30-59.5;
Ord. No. 2735]
Off-street parking shall be provided for all development according to the
following schedule:
Residential Use Parking Requirement
a. Single-family residence 2 parking spaces
b. Two-family residence 3 parking spaces
c. Multifamily residence
1. 0-1 bedroom unit 1 parking space
2. 2 or more bedrooms 2 parking spaces
d. Planned Residential
Development
2 parking spaces per dwelling unit
e. (Reserved)
f. (Reserved)
g. (Reserved)
h. Commercial Use.
1. General Requirements (when specific commercial uses cannot be
identified.
(a) Retail trade services and
office
1 parking space per employee per shift
plus 1 space per 350 gross square feet
of floor space
2. When number of employees
cannot be determined:
§ 30-59.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-59.5
1:795
Residential Use Parking Requirement
Commercial Uses Parking Requirement
(a) Retail (including take-out
food establishment) services
1 parking space per 250 gross square
feet of floor space
(b) General office, banks,
research/laboratory
1 parking space per 300 gross square
feet of floor space
(c) Physicians, dentists,
chiropractors
5 parking spaces per doctor or 1
parking space per 250 gross square
feet of floor space, whichever is
greater
(d) Auditoriums, stadiums,
theaters, arenas and places of
assembly
1 parking space per 5 seats, based on
maximum seating capacity
i. Hotel, motel, rooming house or
equivalent. Uses such as
restaurants, nightclubs and retail
shops that are contained within
the hotel and open to the public
shall be calculated separately as
required herein. Fifty (50%)
percent of the spaces thus
calculated will be added for the
parking requirement for the
hotel.
1 parking space per employee per shift
plus .75 parking spaces per sleeping
unit. Where number of employees
cannot be determined, 1 parking space
per sleeping unit
j. Restaurant, nightclub, bar 1 parking space per employee per shift
plus 1 parking space per 300 gross
square feet of floor area. When number
of employees cannot be determined, 1
parking space per 50 square feet of
customer floor area.
k. Motor vehicle service stations 10 parking spaces plus 1 space per 2
workers employed during busiest shift
l. Motor vehicle repair garage 4 parking spaces per bay plus 1 space
per 2 employees
m. Truck or bus depots 1 parking space per 2 workers
employed or to be employed at any one
time
n. Car washes, drive-through
lubrication stations
1 parking space per 2 workers
employed or to be employed at any one
time plus reservoir space for 10 cars or
5 times the number of cars capable of
being processed at any one time,
whichever is greater.
§ 30-59.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-59.5
1:796
Residential Use Parking Requirement
o. Funeral homes 1 parking space per 60 square feet of
area intended for public occupancy
Industrial Use
p. Manufacturing, assembly,
processing plants; wholesale
trade establishments
1 parking space per 300 gross square
feet of floor area
q. Warehouses 1 sparking space per working
employed at any one time plus 1
parking space per 5,000 square feet of
floor area or fraction thereof; where
number of workers cannot be
determined, 1 parking space per 500
square feet of floor area
Schools
r. Nursery schools, day care
centers
5 parking spaces, plus 1 parking space
per worker employed or to be
employed at any one time
s. Elementary, middle schools 1 1/2 parking spaces per worker
employed or to be employed at any one
time
t. High schools 1 1/2 parking spaces per worker
employed or to be employed at any one
time, plus 1 parking space per 4
students of school capacity
u. Colleges, universities,
professional institutes
1 parking space per employee plus 1
parking space per 2 students enrolled
v. Theme entertainment centers 1 parking space per 45 square feet of
usable visitor floor area
w. Exhibition pavilions 1 space per 200 square feet of usable
visitor area floor
x. Bed and Breakfast
Establishments
.75 per sleeping unit and one (1) space
per employee per shift.
§ 30-59.6. Requirements for Uses and Buildings Not Included in
Schedule. [2000 Code § 30-59.6]
Reasonable and appropriate off-street parking requirements for buildings
and uses not specifically provided for shall be determined by the
Development Coordinator, upon consideration of all factors entering into
the parking needs of such use and by comparison with the uses enumerated
above. In the case of an Application for Development, final determination
shall be made by the Board hearing the application.
§ 30-59.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-59.7
1:797
§ 30-59.7. Determination of Requirements. [2000 Code § 30-59.7]
Where one (1) establishment or development has two (2) or more distinct
uses, each such use shall be measured separately for the purpose of
determining the number of parking and loading spaces required.
§ 30-59.8. Location of Parking Areas. [2000 Code § 30-59.8]
All off-street parking shall be located upon the same lot where the use
occurs. However, in business and industrial zones, parking facilities may
be located within six hundred (600) feet measured along adjacent streets.
All or part of the off-street parking requirement for nonresidential uses
may be met through the provision of off-site parking located within one
thousand (1,000) feet of the lot where the use occurs, measured along
adjacent streets. Up to seventy-five (75%) percent of the off-street parking
requirement for nonresidential uses may be met through the provision
of off-site parking located beyond one thousand (1,000) feet from the lot
where the use occurs, provided that regularly scheduled transportation
to the site is provided from the remote parking facility every fifteen (15)
minutes during the hours when the facility for which the parking is required
is being used. If the remote parking facility is located outside the City
limits, the applicant shall present evidence of all necessary approvals,
including Municipal approval of such parking facility by the Municipality or
Municipalities in which it is located prior to the grant of final development
approval by the Board.
§ 30-59.9. Shared Use of Parking Areas for Day Uses and Evening
Uses. [2000 Code § 30-59.9]
The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment may permit up to fifty (50%)
percent of the total parking spaces required for a land use which occurs
mostly in the evening to be provided with parking spaces devoted to a land
use which occurs mostly during the day. Before such permission is granted
by the Board, an applicant for development approval must demonstrate,
to the satisfaction of the Board, that the daytime parking to be utilized is
available to the proposed development during evening hours and is within
one thousand (1,000) feet, measured along adjacent streets.
Subsections c, d, h2(d) and j of § 30-59.5, except restaurants where less
than seventy-five (75%) percent of public floor area is devoted to food
service, may be considered evening/weekend uses. Subsections h2(b), r, s
and t of § 30-59.5 may be considered daytime weekday uses. In the case of
an Application for Development, final determination of the applicability of
this subsection shall be made by the Board hearing the application.
§ 30-59.10. Off-Premises Parking Sites. [2000 Code § 30-59.10]
All off-premises parking sites, when used to meet the parking requirement
specified in this chapter for a Development Application, shall be addressed
by the applicant through a traffic and parking assessment, subject to
approval by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall review the
§ 30-59.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-59.10
1:798
parking sites for accessibility, safety, convenience and ready identification.
The Planning Board will require the applicant to submit a long-term
instrument, giving the applicant legal right to utilize the off-premises
parking facility for the duration of the use for which the parking is required.
Such legal instrument must be filed with the City Clerk and Board Secretary
after it is reviewed and approved by the Board Attorney. No Certificate of
Zoning Compliance shall be issued for the proposed use unless such valid
legal instrument is filed as set forth herein.
§ 30-59.11. Location of Parking and Loading Areas. [2000 Code
§ 30-59.11]
All off-street parking and loading facilities shall be located to the rear of the
required front yard area as now or hereafter established. The area between
the street line and the setback line, except for vehicle and pedestrian
accessways, shall be landscaped with lawns or other appropriate planting.
In the case of townhouses, one-family or two-family dwellings, the vehicular
accessway/driveway may be utilized for the parking or standing of
registered automobiles or motorcycles. Such driveway may not be directly
in front of the principal structure unless such driveway shall lead to a
garage. Recreational, camping or utility trailers or boats may be stored or
left standing in a side or rear yard in accordance with the provisions of
§ 30-59.17. Where the required parking space is provided by a garage or
other covered space, or by roof parking, the location of such garage or
structure shall be in conformity with the Zoning Regulations relating to the
class of building involved. On corner or through lots, the parking setback for
other than the front street right-of-way shall be not less than ten (10) feet.
This section is not to be construed to permit parking between the street
curblines and the street line of any abutting property, as such is hereby
prohibited.
§ 30-59.12. Parking Spaces and Areas. [2000 Code § 30-59.12]
Parking spaces and areas must be designated and installed as follows:
a. Parking on Vacant Lots. No vacant lot shall be used for parking of one
(1) or more vehicles of any kind unless it shall be properly graded,
paved, lighted and fenced or screened according to specifications
established for this purpose by the Zoning Officer and unless a
Certificate of Zoning Compliance for such use has been issued.
b. Parking on Improved Lots. All parking on lots improved with a building
shall be within hard surface parking areas constructed in conformance
with § 30-59.12 of the Land Development Regulations.
a. All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be arranged in an orderly
manner to avoid unsafe conditions and to provide adequate access for
vehicles and pedestrians using the area.
b. Parking stalls for full-size vehicles shall be provided in accordance with
the following:
§ 30-59.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-59.12
1:799
1. The minimum dimensions for each angle parking stall shall be eight
(8) feet six (6) inches in width and nineteen (19) feet in length.
2. Parallel parking spaces, adjacent to curbs, sidewalks, driveways
and buildings, shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet in width and
twenty-two (22) feet in length.
c. Parking stalls for compact vehicles shall be provided in accordance with
the following:
1. The minimum dimensions for each parking stall shall be seven (7)
feet six (6) inches in width and fifteen (15) feet in length.
2. Compact parking stalls shall be permitted only for those uses set
forth in § 30-59.5c, d, h2b, h2d, i, p, q, s, t and u provided that:
(a) Not more than thirty-five (35%) percent of the parking spaces
required by these regulations shall be for compact vehicles;
(b) The minimum number of parking spaces required by these
regulations shall be in excess of fifty (50) spaces; and
(c) Compact parking stalls shall be grouped in contiguous,
uniform stalls and shall have signs placed in appropriate
locations indicating PARKING FOR COMPACT VEHICLES
ONLY.
3. All or any part of the parking spaces provided in addition to those
required by these regulations may be for compact vehicles.
4. To obtain approval of a parking layout with compact parking stalls,
a site plan must first be submitted to the Planning Board for
approval which demonstrates that sufficient parking is capable of
being provided to meet the minimum requirements of these
regulations for full-size parking stalls. Upon such demonstration,
the Planning Board may then approve an alternate and different
site plan containing compact parking stalls, in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein. In no event shall the provision of
compact parking stalls result in an increase in the floor area or the
number of dwelling units permitted with the provision of full-size
parking stalls.
d. Minimum Aisle Widths.
1. The minimum aisle width required to provide maneuvering space
and access to parking stalls shall be as follows:
Parking Angle
(degree)
Stall Width
(feet)
Aisle Width
(feet)
Stall Width
(feet)
Aisle Width
(feet)
0 7 12 7 12
45 8.5 13
§ 30-59.12 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-59.12
1:800
Parking Angle
(degree)
Stall Width
(feet)
Aisle Width
(feet)
Stall Width
(feet)
Aisle Width
(feet)
9.0 12 7.5 12
9.5 12
60 8.5 18
9.0 16
9.5 15 7.5 14
75 8.5 22
9.0 21
9.5 20 7.5 17
90 8.5 24
9.0 23
9.5 22 7.5 22
2. The stall width shall be measured perpendicular to the direction of
parking. When columns occur along the side lines of parking stalls
located within a building or structure, the width of the stall shall be
determined by dividing the clear dimensions between column
faces, measured perpendicular to the direction of parking, by the
number of stalls between adjacent columns whenever the width of
the stall so determined is less than nine (9) feet. In such cases, the
painted side stripe defining each stall adjacent to a column shall be
placed at the face of column rather than at the center line of the
column, and the space between the column faces shall be divided
into stalls of equal width.
3. The aisle width dimensions as set forth in the chart in Subsection
d1 of § 30-59.12 assume one-way circulation for all parking angles.
At a parking angle of ninety (90°) degrees the same dimensions
apply for two-way circulation.
4. For a parking angle of zero (0°) degrees, add ten (10) feet to the
aisle for two-way circulation.
e. Where parking stalls of different dimensions share the same aisle, the
parking stall requiring the greater aisle width shall govern.
f. All access drives, and parking and loading areas shall be paved with an
appropriate hard-surface pavement that is durable, dust-free and
maintained in good condition.
g. Individual parking and loading spaces, aisles, crosswalks, and
entrances and exits shall be suitably identified with lines and arrows,
subject to the approval of the Zoning Officer.
§ 30-59.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-59.12
1:801
§ 30-59.13. Entrances and Exits; Drainage; Lighting. [2000 Code
§ 30-59.13]
h. The provisions of paragraphs c, d, e and f shall not apply to the parking
requirements for one- and two-family residences.
a. Entrances and exits to parking and loading areas shall be by means of
clearly limited and defined drives. The entrances and exits shall be
located to prevent conflict with pedestrian and vehicular traffic by
providing for the free flow of vehicles at all times. Entrances and exits
shall be arranged to prevent any vehicle from exiting a parking area by
backing onto or across a sidewalk and onto a street.
1. Driveway widths shall be designed in accordance with the following
schedule:
One Way Operation Two Way Operation
Curbline
Opening
(in feet)
Driveway
Width
(in feet)
Curbline
Opening
(in feet)
Driveway Width
(in feet)
Up to 10 family
structures
12-15 10-13 12-30 10-26
10 family or over 1-30 10-26 24-36 20-30
Commercial and
Industrial
18-36 18-34 24-50 24-46
Service Stations 15-36 12-34 24-36 20-34
2. Minimum sight distances. Any driveway providing access to a
public or private street shall be designed, graded and located so as
to permit the following minimum sight distances, measured in each
direction, along the intersecting street. Measurement shall be
made from the driver's seat of a passenger automobile standing on
the exit driveway with the front of the vehicle a minimum of ten
(10) feet behind the edge of the street pavement.
Maximum Allowable Speed
on Road
(MPH)
Minimum Required Sight
Distance
(Feet)
25 150
30 200
35 250
40 300
45 350
50 400
§ 30-59.12 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-59.13
1:802
§ 30-59.14. Buffer Strips and Internal Landscaping. [2000 Code
§ 30-59.14]
3. Minimum distance between driveways. Where two (2) or more
driveways connect a single site to any public or private road, or
individual driveways serve separate and adjoining sites, it is
recommended that a minimum clear distance of fifty (50) feet
measured along the right-of-way line shall separate the closest of
any two (2) such driveways measured from the rights-of-way. A
maximum of two (2) driveways is recommended for any single site
of three hundred (300) feet or less frontage.
4. Minimum distance to property line or intersecting street.
Driveways for other than one- and two-family homes shall not be
located closer than five (5) feet to a side or rear property line or
fifty (50) feet to the closest right-of-way line of any intersecting
street.
b. All parking and loading areas shall be suitably graded, drained and
maintained to prevent erosion and stormwater runoff onto adjacent
streets and properties. The Planning Board may require that drainage
plans be certified by a civil engineer and, in addition, may refer the
plans to the Department of Public Maintenance for its review and
recommendations.
c. All parking and loading areas to be utilized during the nighttime shall
be adequately lighted. Such lighting shall be located to reflect the light
away from adjacent streets and properties. Light fixtures shall not be
higher than sixteen (16) feet above grade.
d. The provisions of paragraphs a, b and c shall not apply to the parking
requirements for one- and two-family residences.
a. All off-street parking and loading areas of five (5) or more spaces,
located between a building or use and the street on which it fronts,
shall be separated from the street with a buffer strip. The buffer strip
shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and landscaped with trees
and shrubs to provide for driver and pedestrian safety and to improve
the appearance of the parking area.
b. All uses permitted in residence zones with off-street parking of five (5)
or more spaces shall provide a buffer strip, a minimum of five (5) feet in
width, on all sides which abut a residence zone or use permitted in a
residence zone.
c. All off-street parking and loading areas of twenty (20) or more spaces
shall be provided with planting islands. The planting islands shall be
landscaped with trees and shrubs to channel internal traffic flow,
prevent indiscriminate movement of vehicles, aid pedestrian circulation
and improve appearance of the parking area. The size, location and
§ 30-59.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-59.14
1:803
§ 30-59.15. Off-Street Motor Vehicle Loading Space to Be Provided.
[2000 Code § 30-59.15]
§ 30-59.16. Parking of Unauthorized Vehicles. [2000 Code
§ 30-59.16]
In a residence district, the following motor vehicles shall not be parked or
left standing in any yard area or on a driveway:
frequency of planting islands shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Board.
d. The treatment of the buffer strips and planting islands shall be subject
to the approval of the Planning Board. All buffer strips and planting
islands must be kept free of rubbish and maintained to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Officer.
e. Where parking and loading spaces abut sidewalks, buffer strips,
planting islands or similar construction, a curb or wheelstop shall be
provided to prevent vehicles from overhanging or otherwise damaging
the construction.
f. The total landscaped area of any parking area must not be less than ten
(10%) percent.
a. There shall be provided clearly marked and posted off-street loading
spaces to serve the following types of buildings and uses: hotels,
hospitals, stores, office buildings, wholesale manufacturing and
industrial buildings, warehouses and railroad and truck freight stations.
b. The minimum area required for each loading space shall be ten (10)
feet in width, twenty-five (25) feet in length and fourteen (14) feet
height clearance. Each loading space shall adjoin a loading dock or
entryway and be provided with adequate apron space for access and
maneuvering.
c. Loading space provided shall be based upon building floor area plus
outside storage area, as follows:
Area Loading Space Requirement
3,000 to 20,000 sq. ft. 1 loading space
20,000 to 80,000 sq. ft. 2 loading spaces
80,000 to 150,000 sq. ft. 3 loading spaces
More than 150,000 sq. ft. 4 loading spaces
d. Loading and unloading areas may be used only for the parking of trucks
and/or trailers used solely to service the facility where located.
e. A sign stating that all truck engines shall be turned off upon parking
shall be prominently posted in all loading and unloading areas.
§ 30-59.14 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-59.16
1:804
§ 30-59.17. Parking and Storage of Boats, Motor Homes and
Recreational Trailers. [2000 Code § 30-59.17]
The parking and storage of boats, motor homes and recreational trailers
shall be permitted in a residential district subject to the following:
§ 30-59.18. Waiver of Parking Requirements. [2000 Code
§ 30-59.18]
If an applicant can clearly demonstrate to the Board or if the Board
determines that, because of the nature of the operation or use, the parking
a. Unregistered motor vehicles of any type or design.
b. Buses other than personal passenger vehicles with seating capacity of
less than ten (10) persons or those parked on premises of a permitted
nonresidential use, such as a church or school, or a senior citizen
housing development.
c. Trucks with commercial registration and/or a rating capacity in excess
of six thousand (6,000) pounds except for trucks parked for a temporary
period for the purpose of rendering services to the premises.
d. Nothing herein shall prohibit the storing or garaging of commercial
vehicles having a capacity of three-fourths (3/4) of a ton or less in an
enclosed garage.
a. No trailer, motor home or boat in excess of twenty-two (22) feet in
length, as measured from outside dimensions, including hitching
devices, shall be parked or stored outside in any yard area.
b. All trailers, motor homes or boats shall be parked or stored either in an
enclosed garage or in the side or rear yard of a lot. No trailer, motor
home or boat shall be parked or stored in the front yard of a lot or
within the street side yard of a corner lot.
c. Any trailer, motor home or boat parked in the side or rear yard of any lot
shall meet the setback requirements and regulations applicable to
accessory buildings within the zoning district.
d. Any boat, motor home or trailer parked or stored in a side or rear yard
and not in an enclosed garage shall be screened from view. Such
screening shall not be less than six (6) feet in height and shall consist of
either a trellis, latticework, decorative block, shrubbery or other similar
material approved by the Zoning Officer, except when such screening
exceeds six (6) feet in height, the same shall consist only of shrubbery. If
such screening involves the use of a fence, such fence shall conform to
the maximum height limitation in § 30-63.1.
e. The area used for the parking or storage of any motor home, boat or
recreational trailer shall not preempt any off-street parking space
required to be provided by any provision of § 30-59.
§ 30-59.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-59.18
1:805
requirements of this section are unnecessary or excessive; the Board shall
have the power to approve a site plan showing less paved parking area
than is required by this section; provided, however, that a landscaped area
of sufficient size to meet the chapter requirement shall be set aside and
reserved for the purposes of meeting future off-street parking requirements
in the event that a change of use or operation of the premises shall make
such additional off-street parking spaces necessary.
§ 30-59.19. Requirement for Freestanding Parking Structures.
[2000 Code § 30-59.19]
Freestanding parking structures where permitted in Sections 30-69 and
30-70 shall be located and designed in accordance with the following:
a. Parking structures located outside the "Renewal Area," as demarcated
in the Waterfront Redevelopment Plan, as amended, shall conform to
the yard requirements of the zone in which they are located.
b. Parking structures located within the "Renewal Area," as demarcated in
the Waterfront Development Plan, as amended, shall be subject to the
height and setback restrictions specified in Figure 1 of Schedule 1,
except that the following requirements shall also apply:
1. No parking structure shall exceed a height of five (5) levels or fifty
(50) feet.
2. A parking structure of two (2) or more levels shall not be located
nearer than thirty (30) feet from a street wherein the center line
forms the zone boundary of an R3, R2 or R1 Zone. The area
between the structure and the street line shall be attractively
landscaped so that the foundation of the structure is screened from
view of neighboring residences. Shade trees shall be located on
both sides of the public sidewalk along the street frontage at
intervals specified in § 30-57.12 of this chapter and shall be
continued, when possible, across the entire block front.
3. A parking structure shall not be located nearer than ten (10) feet to
any interior lot line. A distance shall be maintained between
parking structures and existing buildings on adjacent properties as
is required in § 30-56.1.
4. A parking structure of four (4) or more levels, or more than thirty
(30) feet in height, shall not be located nearer than thirty (30) feet
from a zone boundary of an R3, R2 or R1 Zone.
5. A parking structure of four (4) or more levels, or more than thirty
(30) feet in height, shall not be located nearer than thirty (30) feet
from an adjacent lot containing a use permitted in any residential
zone.
6. The street level of a parking structure shall not be located within
forty (40) feet of Kingsley Street, unless the floor area of the
§ 30-59.18 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-59.19
1:806
§ 30-60. RESIDENTIAL SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS.
§ 30-60.1. General. [Ord. No. 2777 § 4]
All residential development shall be in compliance with the New Jersey
Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-1, et seq. When
standards contained in this Chapter conflict with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards, the Residential Site Improvement Standards shall
govern. However, the board of jurisdiction may grant de minimus exceptions
from the standards when the board of jurisdiction finds that the requested
exception meeting the following criteria: (1) It is consistent with the intent
of the Site Improvement Act; (2) It is reasonable, limited and not unduly
burdensome; (3) It meets the needs of public health and safety; and (4) It
takes into account existing infrastructure and possible surrounding future
development.
§ 30-61. SIGNS.
structure within that distance is devoted to retail commercial space
and the height of the structure within that distance does not exceed
forty (40) feet. No upper level portions of a parking structure which
are devoted to parking shall be located nearer than twenty (20) feet
of Kingsley Street.
7. No parking structure shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of any
other street located within the Waterfront Redevelopment Area.
The area between the structure and the street line shall be
attractively landscaped so that the foundation of the structure is
screened from view as seen from the street. Shade trees shall be
located on both sides of the public sidewalk along the street
frontage at intervals specified in § 30-57.12 and shall be continued,
when possible, across the entire block front.
8. No freestanding parking structure shall be located within a block
having frontage upon a street immediately abutting public parks
along Wesley, Sunset or Deal Lakes.
c. Parking structures shall be designed and constructed to meet or exceed
the following standards:
1. Roof top parking areas shall meet the same interior landscape
requirements as specified for surface parking lots in paragraphs c,
d, e, f of § 30-59.14.
2. The architectural design for the facades of parking structures
facing a public street shall incorporate features such as articulated
parapet walls, ornamental projections, varied planter widths, etc.,
to add visual interest and improve the overall appearance of the
structure as viewed from the street.
§ 30-59.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61.1
1:807
§ 30-61.1. Purposes. [2000 Code § 30-61.1]
The purposes of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use of
signs as a means of communication in the City; to maintain and enhance the
aesthetic environment and the City's ability to attract sources of economic
development; to improve pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; to
minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private
property; and, to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations.
§ 30-61.2. General Regulations. [2000 Code § 30-61.2; Ord. No.
2831 § 2]
A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained
in the City only in conformance with standards, procedures, exceptions, and
other requirements of this chapter. The effect of these regulations as more
specifically set forth herein, is:
§ 30-61.3. Prohibited Signs. [2000 Code § 30-61.3]
Signs prohibited in all zones shall specifically include, but not be limited to,
the following:
a. To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in
nonresidential zones, and a limited variety of signs in residential zones,
subject to the standards and permit procedures of this chapter;
b. To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the
principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to
the substantive requirements of this chapter, but without a requirement
for permits;
c. To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter;
d. To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
e. No sign shall be allowed which obstructs the view or vehicle operators
or pedestrians or interferes with any portion of intersection sight
triangles.
a. Any sign which does not pertain to an occupant, service, or product
actually occupying or provided on the premises where such sign is
located.
b. Signs which project more than five (5) feet from the wall to which they
are attached.
c. Roof signs and signs extending above the wall to which they are
attached.
d. Signs posted on fences, posts, utility poles or trees.
§ 30-61.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-61.3
1:808
§ 30-61.4. Permitted Signs; Special Category Signs. [2000 Code
§ 30-61.4]
e. Signs posted on Municipal property without the consent of the
Governing Body.
f. Signs standing, installed or painted on sidewalks or curbs.
g. Exterior moving signs of any nature.
h. Signs on bridges, abutments, retaining walls, embankments,
standpipes, water towers or similar structures unless approved by the
Governing Body.
i. Signs painted directly on buildings.
j. Commercial outdoor advertising signs (billboards).
k. Signs on accessory buildings.
l. Pylon signs except as otherwise permitted in this section.
m. Signs which flash or make noise.
n. Signs which imitate official traffic signs or signals, or which otherwise
constitute a hazard to the traveling public.
o. Portable signs or "sandwich signs" except as used by non-auto related
commercial establishments authorized to serve customers out of doors,
such as with an outdoor cafe, produce stand or newsstand. Portable
signs used in such a way shall be limited to three (3) square feet in size
and shall be placed so as not to interfere with pedestrian traffic.
p. More than one (1) neon sign per window on storefronts or bars in
commercial zones. A neon sign placed in a storefront or bar window in
accordance with this section shall be of no more than two (2) solid
colors, shall not move or flash and shall not occupy more than three (3)
square feet of window area.
a. Signs Permitted in All Zones. One non-illuminated, temporary ground
sign pertaining to the lease, rental or sale of the same lot or building
upon which it is placed and not exceeding nine (9) square feet in area
on any one (1) side provided such sign is erected or displayed not less
than five (5) feet inside of the property line and shall not be mounted on
or attached to trees. This sign must be removed from the premises
within seven (7) days after the property is sold or leased.
In the case of a building containing three (3) or more dwelling units in
a residential zone, a sign as described herein must be removed upon
the lease or sale of eighty (80%) percent or more of the dwelling units
contained therein. Not more than one (1) such sign shall be permitted
for each premises. Such signs shall be exempt from all other provisions
of this section.
§ 30-61.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61.4
1:809
b. Special Category Signs. [Ord. No. 2831 § 4]
Type
Max.
Size
Max.
Height
(feet) Max. No.
Min.
Setback
Permit
Required
Illumination
Permitted
Notes/
Supplementary
Regulations
Special Category Signs
Construction
Signs for minor
or major
developments:
ground, pole or
wall mounted.
*40
contiguous
square
feet
8 feet
from
grade
1 per
street
front-age
NA Yes No To be placed no
sooner than after
final approval of
the minor or
major
development
project. Such
signs must be
removed after the
issuance of the
first temporary or
final certificate of
occupancy. Must
be constructed of
a rigid material.
Construction
Signs for minor
or major
developments
mounted on
construction
fences.
*No
more
than
25% in
contiguous
length of
the
linear
frontage
of a construction
fence
along a
street
frontage.
8 feet
from
grade or
top of
fence
(whichever
is
lower)
1 per
street
front-age
NA Yes No To be placed no
sooner than after
final approval of
the minor or
major
development
project. Such
signs must be
removed after the
issuance of the
first temporary or
final certificate of
occupancy. May
be used only in
lieu of a ground,
pole or wall
mounted
construction sign.
§ 30-61.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-61.4
1:810
Type
Max.
Size
Max.
Height
(feet) Max. No.
Min.
Setback
Permit
Required
Illumination
Permitted
Notes/
Supplementary
Regulations
Real Estate Signs
for minor or
major
developments:
ground, pole or
wall mounted.
*40
contiguous
square
feet
8 feet
from
grade
1 per
street
front-age
NA Yes No To be placed no
sooner than after
final approval of
the minor or
major
development
project. Must be
constructed of a
rigid material.
Must be removed
after the sale,
lease or rental of
80% or more of
the nonresidential
and/or residential
units contained
therein.
Real estate signs
for minor or
major
developments
mounted on
construction
fences.
*No
more
than
25% in
contiguous
length of
the
linear
frontage
of a construction
fence
along a
street
frontage.
8 feet
from
grade or
top of
fence
(whichever
is
lower)
1 per
street
front-age
NA Yes No To be placed no
sooner than after
final approval of
the minor or
major
development
project. May be
used only in lieu
of a ground or
pole mounted real
estate sign. Must
be removed after
the sale, lease or
rental of 80% or
more of the
nonresidential
and/or residential
units contained
therein.
§ 30-61.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61.4
1:811
Type
Max.
Size
Max.
Height
(feet) Max. No.
Min.
Setback
Permit
Required
Illumination
Permitted
Notes/
Supplementary
Regulations
Building wrap
signs for minor
or major
developments
Shall not
extend
beyond
the
exterior
building
wall.
Text may
not
exceed
10% of
the area
of the
sign or
400
square
feet,
whichever
is less,
along
any
street
frontage.
NA 1 per
street
front-age
NA Yes No To be placed only
after completion
of the structural
framing of a
building. Must be
removed after
completion of the
exterior building
wall. Building
wrap signs shall
display a graphic
reproduction of
the completed
building façade
located behind the
sign.
*The combined area of construction signs and real estate signs which are ground, pole or wall mounted
shall not exceed 40 square feet along any street frontage. If both sign types are proposed along a street
frontage, they shall be combined into a single sign board.
*The combined length of construction signs and real estate signs which are mounted on construction
fences shall not exceed 25% of the linear frontage of the construction fence along any street frontage. If
both sign types are proposed along a street frontage, they shall be combined to create a single sign.
§ 30-61.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-61.4
1:812
§ 30-61.5. Signs Permitted in Residential Districts. [2000 Code
§ 30-61.5]
Examples for purposes of guidance are shown below:
Photographic examples of construction and real estate signs from
other communities may be found in the City Offices.
a. Signs accessory to parking areas for multifamily residences, planned
development and institutional uses. Signs designating entrance or exits
to or from a parking area shall be limited to one (1) sign for each such
exit or entrance, with a maximum of two (2) square feet for each sign.
One (1) sign per parking area designating the conditions of use or
identity of such parking area and limited to a maximum size of six (6)
square feet shall be permitted. Private driveway signs indicating the
private nature of a driveway shall be permitted, provided that the size
of any such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet.
b. Nameplate and identification signs for single-family or two-family
dwellings. A sign indicating the name and address of the occupant may
be permitted provided that the sign shall be no larger than one (1)
square foot.
§ 30-61.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61.5
1:813
§ 30-61.6. Signs Permitted in Nonresidential Zoning District. [2000
Code § 30-61.6]
c. Multiple-family dwelling structures may erect one (1) illuminated wall
identification sign not to exceed ten (10) square feet in area; and/or one
(1) illuminated freestanding ground identification sign not to exceed
twenty (20) square feet in area on either side nor a height of four (4)
feet; and/or one (1) illuminated directory of occupants wall mounted
sign not to exceed four (4) square feet.
d. Institutional Signs. Signs on schools, colleges and other institutions of a
similar public or semi-public nature may be erected and maintained,
either illuminated or non-illuminated, provided that:
1. The size of any freestanding sign shall not exceed ten (10) square
feet and not more than one (1) such sign is placed on the property,
unless such property fronts upon more than one (1) street, in which
instance a sign may be erected on each frontage.
2. Signs may be affixed to a maximum of two (2) walls of a structure.
The total sign area on each wall shall not exceed twenty (20) square
feet or two (2%) percent of the wall, whichever is less. The wall
area shall be measured from ground level to the bottom of the roof
eaves and from the side of the building to the other side.
3. For churches, primary and secondary schools, one (1) ecclesiastical
changeable-letter ground sign may be erected referring to service
and events to be held on the premises, provided the sign is not
more than twenty (20) square feet in area. The sign may be
illuminated, but it may not be closer than ten (10) feet to any
property line.
e. Signs for Professional Offices in Residences in Residential and
Nonresidential Districts. Not more than one (1) non-illuminated sign
not to exceed two (2) square feet in area shall be permitted.
a. Number and Size of Exterior Identification Wall Signs. No
nonresidential establishment shall be permitted a total of more than
two (2) signs; provided, however, that no single exterior wall for any
one (1) establishment shall contain more than one (1) of the two (2)
permitted signs. The total sign area for signs permitted on the face of
any wall shall not exceed ten (10%) percent of the wall area, or forty
(40) square feet, whichever is less. Except as noted below, no such sign
shall be freestanding or perpendicular to the street line.
b. Rear and Side Wall Signs. No signs shall be permitted on rear or side
walls when the wall is within one hundred (100) feet of a residential use
or residential zone line.
c. Identification projecting signs may be substituted for identification wall
signs, as permitted in Subsection a above, provided that no
identification projecting sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in
§ 30-61.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-61.6
1:814
area on either side or project more than five (5) feet from the wall to
which it is attached. The use of wall signs and projecting signs shall not
be combined for the same establishment.
d. One (1) identification ground sign may be permitted for any one (1)
commercial property, in addition to identification signs permitted in
paragraphs a. or b. above. Such ground sign must not exceed forty-five
(45) square feet on any one side nor twenty (20) feet in height measured
to the top most part of the sign. The leading edge of the sign must not
be nearer than five (5) feet from the street line.
e. Signs accessory to off-street parking facilities will be permitted in
accordance with Subsection a of § 30-61.5.
f. Signs for multi-use or multi-structure developments such as shopping
centers, industrial parks and planned developments shall be governed
by the following regulations:
1. Each such development shall submit a Signing Plan to the Planning
Board for approval. Such Signing Plan shall include details on:
(a) Letter style
(b) Lighting
(c) Color
(d) Construction and materials
(e) Height of sign
(f) Height above grade or below roofline
(g) Locations
(h) Standards.
2. The Signing Plan shall be based on an integrated design theme to
include all of the elements (a) through (h) above. All of the above
elements shall be designed to be in harmony and consistent with
each other, the architecture and materials of principal structure
and the landscaping plan. The Planning Board, in its sole
discretion, shall determine if a proposed Signing Plan meets the
goals and objectives of this section.
§ 30-61.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61.6
1:815
§ 30-61.7. Sign Regulations for Specific Uses. [2000 Code § 30-61.7;
Ord. No. 2735 § 4]
3. The total area of all signs affixed to a structure shall not exceed five
(5%) percent of the facade of the structure, or forty (40) square
feet, whichever is less. The Planning Board may permit in total sign
area up to seven (7%) percent of the building facade, if, in the
Planning Board's judgment, such additional area shall assist in
developing a harmonious and integrated sign plan in accordance
with the goals and objectives of this subsection.
4. Freestanding signs may be permitted in a multi-use development
upon the sole discretion of the Planning Board as part of site plan
approval. They may be on poles, kiosks, stanchions or similar
supports and shall be not higher than twelve (12) feet above grade.
The Planning Board may permit a total sign area of up to fifty (50)
square feet, if in its judgment, such additional area shall assist in
achieving the goals and objectives of this section.
Only one (1) such freestanding sign shall be permitted on any
single property regardless of the number of establishments on
the property except that the Planning Board may authorize an
additional freestanding sign if the property has access from more
than one (1) public street. The freestanding sign shall comply with
all setback requirements of the zone.
a. Marquee and Canopy Signs. In addition to those other signs generally
permitted under this article, theaters may display the following signs:
1. Removable lettering on the front and/or sides of a canopy or
marquee, which may be back lighted, and which shall advertise
current or coming attractions only.
2. Not more than two (2) additional signs, each not more than twelve
(12) square feet in size, may be attached to the front wall of the
theater and which shall be used to advertise coming or current
attractions only.
3. Ticket booth signs shall be governed by regulations affecting
window lettering and window signs.
b. Service Station Signs. Gasoline service stations and repair garages
shall be permitted to display only the following signs:
1. One (1) temporary sign, located inside the property line,
specifically advertising special or seasonal servicing of motor
vehicles, provided such sign does not exceed seven (7) square feet
in size to a side.
2. One (1) non-moving, freestanding or pylon sign advertising the
name of the station or garage and/or the principal products sold,
including any special company or brand name, insignia or emblem,
§ 30-61.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-61.7
1:816
provided that the actual sign area does not exceed thirty (30)
square feet in size to a side, and further provided that such sign
shall be more than ten (10) feet but less than twenty (20) feet above
ground level and is no closer than five (5) feet to any property line.
3. Additional signs or lettering displayed over individual entrance
doors or bays, bearing legends essentially the same or similar to
the following: "washing, lubrication, repairs, mechanic on duty."
There shall be no more than one (1) such sign over each entrance
or bay, such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in size, nor
shall the lettering on such signs be greater than twelve (12) inches
high.
4. Customary lettering or other insignia, which are an integral part of
a fuel pump and consist only of fuel name, lead warning sign, price
indicator and any other sign or signs as required by law. Such sign
shall not exceed three (3) square feet in aggregate area on each
pump.
5. A single, non-illuminated credit card sign, not exceeding two (2)
square feet in size, may be placed on or near each pump island.
c. Commercial Advertising Billboard Signs.
1. The further erection or construction of signs known as commercial
advertising billboard signs, except as provided below, is prohibited.
2. Existing billboard signs may be relocated on the same lot provided
that the estimated useful life of the sign is not extended by such
relocation.
3. Existing billboard signs shall be removed where the Code
Enforcement Official has determined that the cost of repairs
necessary to comply with § 30-61.2 of this section, would exceed
fifty (50%) percent of the replacement cost of the sign. For the
purposes of this section, the end of the useful life of a billboard sign
shall be when the cost of necessary repairs as described in this
subsection exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the replacement cost of
the billboard sign.
4. As per N.J.A.C. 16:41-8.4, no outdoor advertising structure will be
permitted which is abandoned or disused for a fixed period of one
(1) year after originally reported by the Code Enforcement staff.
The owner of record shall be officially notified by letter of the
classification of disuse or abandonment in order that appropriate
remedial action may be taken.
(a) A sign shall be considered abandoned when it is determined to
be structurally unsound by a professional engineer, or it is in
an aesthetically blighted condition, when twenty-five (25%)
percent of the surface requires a reconditioning of the
§ 30-61.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61.7
1:817
§ 30-61.8. Window Lettering and Window Signs. [2000 Code
§ 30-61.8]
Window lettering and window signs shall be permitted only in
nonresidential zoning districts. For the purpose of enforcing this section,
window lettering and window signs shall be construed as signs, and are
subject to the following restrictions:
protective or decorative coating as evidenced by, but not
limited to, peeling or flaking paint.
(b) A sign which remains blank, void of advertising copy for fixed
period of one (1) year shall be considered disused.
5. Existing billboard signs or structures may be relocated to a
different lot upon the approval of the City Council. The City may
approve the relocation of an existing billboard sign or structure
provided that:
(a) No more than one (1) such sign or structure shall be permitted
on any lot.
(b) The sign or structure when relocated will comply with all other
applicable provisions of this section.
(c) The sign or structure will not obstruct, impair or diminish the
visibility of any business or commercial enterprise from the
roadway on which it is located.
(d) The aesthetic and environmental effects caused by the
placement of the sign or structure in its new location will be
less adverse than those caused by the sign or structure in the
location from which it is to be removed.
(e) No billboard or structure may be relocated to any lot or
property adjacent to any residential zone.
(f) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in other sections or
subsections of this chapter, the provisions of Subsection c of §
30-61.7 shall not be varied or waived or otherwise modified by
action of the Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board of the
City.
(g) The relocation of an existing billboard to another lot as
provided in paragraphs (a) through (f) above, shall not extend
the estimated useful life of the billboard sign.
d. Bed and Breakfast Establishments.
1. One (1) freestanding sign shall be permitted which shall not exceed
six (6) square feet in size. Externally illuminated lighting is
permitted. The sign shall not exceed three (3) feet in height.
§ 30-61.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-61.8
1:818
§ 30-61.9. Permitted Exceptions. [2000 Code § 30-61.9; Ord. No.
2018-30]
The following signs shall be exempt from the provisions of this section:
a. All window lettering and signs shall be inside the window.
b. Permanent window lettering and signs shall be permitted only if the
space confining such lettering and signs, or the background upon which
it appears, does not exceed twenty (20%) percent of the window area.
Any painted area of any window shall be construed as window lettering
or signs, whether or not such area actually contains letter or
advertising.
c. Window lettering or signs shall pertain only to that establishment
occupying that portion of the premises where the window is located.
d. Temporary window lettering or signs, advertising special sales or
events, shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:
1. Such lettering or signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days
after erection;
2. Such window lettering or signs, in conjunction with permanent
window lettering or sign, shall not cover, in the aggregate, more
than fifty (50%) percent of the window area.
3. Such temporary window signs do not require a sign permit.
e. The following window lettering and signs are specifically prohibited:
1. Those containing or having as part of them any source of
illumination with the exception of one (1) neon sign per window on
storefronts or bars in commercial zones. A neon sign placed in a
storefront or bar window in accordance with this section shall be of
no more than two (2) solid colors, shall not move or flash and shall
not occupy more than three (3) square feet of window area.
2. Those having an exterior source of illumination, which is
intermittent or flashing in nature, or that produces glare which
interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
3. Moving signs.
f. All window lettering and signs shall be kept in good repair.
g. The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to order the removal of any
window lettering or sign which does not conform to these
specifications. Any owner or tenant not complying within seventy-two
(72) hours of such an order shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
this chapter.
a. Official signs.
§ 30-61.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61.9
1:819
§ 30-61.10. Permits. [2000 Code § 30-61.10]
Permits shall be required for all signs.
b. A sign located within a building not attached directly to or painted on a
window, and not located within eighteen (18) inches of a window or
entrance.
c. No more than two (2) show cards not to exceed twenty-eight (28) by
twenty-two (22) inches, advertising matters of current public interest
may be displayed in show windows of occupied business establishments
for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days.
d. Political signs; however, these signs may not be erected more than
forty-five (45) days prior to an election and must be removed no later
than ten (10) days after an election.
e. On vacated property, one (1) sign not to exceed six (6) square feet in
area, giving the name, business and new address of the former
occupant, may be displayed for not more than sixty (60) days.
f. Signs, banners or devices for which special permission may be granted
by resolution of the City Council in each instance.
g. For the purpose of advertising matters of a public, semi-public or
charitable character, temporary permits may be granted at the
discretion of the City.
h. Banners, streamers and advertising flags to advertise openings and sale
days, providing that such devices shall not be displayed on any one (1)
property for more than thirty (30) days in any calendar year.
i. Flags representing a Nation, State or established organization provided
same are properly hung or mounted on a flagpole or equivalent
supporting structure attached to a building or upon a freestanding
flagpole.
j. Public access signs, subject to the following:
1. Signs shall be erected at all public access points identifying the
area as such.
2. Public access signs shall be maintained by the property owner and
kept clear of obstruction and shall be visible to the public.
a. Permits Required. Unless otherwise permitted herein, no person shall
erect, alter, locate or relocate, or reconstruct or maintain, or cause to
be erected, located or relocated, or reconstructed or maintained within
the limits of the City, any sign or signs without first having obtained and
having in force and effect, a permit for the location of such sign or signs
from the Zoning Officer.
§ 30-61.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-61.10
1:820
§ 30-61.11. Revocation of Permit. [2000 Code § 30-61.11]
b. Application Information and Contents. Any persons desiring to procure
a permit to maintain a sign in the City shall file with the Zoning Officer a
written application which shall contain an accurate description of the
location or proposed location where such sign is to be erected and a
diagram of each sign that the applicant desires to erect, alter, locate or
relocate, use or maintain. Such application shall be signed by the
applicant, who shall also indicate his/her post office address and supply
any and all information that the Zoning Officer may reasonably require
in order to determine properly whether the proposed location of the
sign complies with the provisions of this section.
c. Inspection of Premises; Issuance Procedure. The Zoning Officer, upon
receipt of an application, shall examine the premises upon which it is
proposed to erect the sign and, if the proposed structure is in
compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and all other laws
and ordinances of the City, the Zoning Officer shall then issue the
permit. If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed
within four (4) months after the date of issuance, the permit shall
become null and void.
a. Causes for Revocation. A permit to erect or maintain a sign may be
revoked for any one (1) or more of the following causes:
1. Whenever the application used in obtaining a permit is knowingly
false or misleading.
2. Whenever any of the provisions of this chapter are violated.
3. Whenever a licensed structure is not being maintained in a safe,
sound and good condition.
b. Notice; Hearing. No permit shall be revoked for any of the above causes
until a five (5) day notice has been given the permittee, which five (5)
day notice shall be served either personally or by first-class mail. Any
permittee will be given a hearing thereon by the City Manager, if
requested in writing within a five (5) day period, addressed to the
Zoning Officer and the City Manager at City Hall.
c. Removal of a Sign, Advertising Structure, Space or Wall. When a permit
for a sign is revoked, the permittee shall remove the sign, advertising
structure or space within ten (10) days from the date of the revocation
of the permit.
1. Failure to Remove. Whenever a person fails to remove an
advertising structure or space after the expiration date of the
removal notice, legal proceeding may be instituted against the
person, or the power of removal may be exercised.
2. City Removal; Costs. Whenever the removal power is exercised for
the elimination of a violation, the cost and expense incurred may be
§ 30-61.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-61.11
1:821
§ 30-61.12. Fees. [2000 Code § 30-61.12]
The fees paid to the City for a sign permit shall be:
Sign Permit $25.00
Relocation Permit: $10.00
§ 30-61.13. Appeals. [2000 Code § 30-61.13]
If any person, firm or corporation claims a special hardship by reason of any
ruling which has been or may be imposed by the Zoning Officer, an appeal
may be made to the Board of Adjustment and its determination shall be
final.
§ 30-61.14. Computations. [2000 Code § 30-61.14]
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign
height.
charged against the person responsible for it. A bill rendered for
the cost of the removal shall bear legal interest charges and
collection shall be made accordingly.
a. Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of a sign face (which
is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one (1) face)
shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits
of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with
any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the
display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop against
which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework,
bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise
meets zoning regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
b. Computation of Area of Multifaced Signs. The sign area for a sign with
more than one (1) face shall be computed by adding together the area
of all sign faces visible from any one (1) point. When two (2) identical
sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed
from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of
the same sign structure and are not more than twenty-four (24) inches
apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one (1) of
the faces.
c. Computation of Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the
distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be
construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to construction, or
(2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any
filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of
locating the sign.
§ 30-61.11 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-61.15
1:822
§ 30-61.15. Design, Construction, and Maintenance. [2000 Code
§ 30-61.15; Ord. No. 2831 § 3]
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with
the following standards:
§ 30-62. (RESERVED)
§ 30-63. FENCES. [2000 Code § 30-63; Ord. No. 2015-52, Ex. B]
No fence shall be erected in the City except upon issuance of a Zoning
Permit certifying compliance with the following requirements.
§ 30-63.1. Type of Fences Permitted. [2000 Code § 30-63.1; Ord. No.
2015-52, Ex. B]
Any fence erected on or after the effective date of this section shall be one
of the following fence types, or equivalent thereto in the discretion of the
Zoning Officer.
Examples of fences:
a. All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code.
b. Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs
conforming in all respects with the requirements of this section, all
signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be
permanently attached to the ground, building, or other structure by
direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure.
c. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance
with the Uniform Construction Code, and this section, at all times. All
signs must be maintained in their original condition at the time of
installation. Additionally, if the sign is defaced or damaged, it shall be
removed or repaired.
§ 30-61.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-63.1
1:823
§ 30-63.2. Maximum Height and Location. [2000 Code § 30-63.2;
Ord. No. 2015-52, Ex. B]
a. Any fence or wall shall be located at least one (1) foot removed from the
nearest edge of the property line. Any fence erected within a City street
right-of-way shall be removed by the property owner if its removal is
required by the City.
§ 30-63.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-63.2
1:824
§ 30-63.3. General Regulations on Fences and Walls. [2000 Code
§ 30-63.3; Ord. No. 2015-52, Ex. B]
§ 30-63.4. Retaining Walls - Fence Setback Required. [2000 Code
§ 30-63.4; Ord. No. 2015-52, Ex. B]
In the event that a retaining wall is constructed or maintained within five
(5) feet of a property line, any fence which is subsequently erected behind
the retaining wall shall be set back five (5) feet from the top of the wall. The
height of a fence placed as set forth herein shall be measured in the same
manner as a fence erected on level ground.
§ 30-64. (RESERVED)
b. In all zones, no fence or wall of more than four (4) feet in height shall be
erected between any building facade facing public street and the street
line, except that for properties with frontage on two (2) parallel streets,
a fence up to six (6) feet tall may be placed along the rear property line.
Chain link and solid fencing is prohibited for all street facing fences.
c. The maximum height for any fence or wall on a property shall be six (6)
feet, except as provided for in Subsection b. above.
a. Sightlines. Fences at all street intersections shall conform to the
sightline preservation regulations as now or hereafter established by
the Monmouth County Department of Public Works and Engineering.
b. Vegetative Barriers. Hedges and other landscaping shall be exempt
from the height limitations of this section but shall not be located so as
to conflict with Subsection a. above.
c. "Good Neighbor" Provision. Any fence type that has only one (1)
finished side shall be erected so that the finished side faces the street or
any adjacent property.
d. Types of Fences Prohibited. No fence shall be constructed with barbed
wire, razor wire, metal spikes other than decorative wrought iron style
fences. Canvass or cloth fences, electrically charged fences, temporary
fences except when used around construction sites, or expandable/
collapsible fences shall be prohibited.
e. Maintenance. Every fence shall be erected in a professional,
workmanlike manner and maintained in a safe, sound upright condition.
Every fence shall be uniform in color and appearance. Posts shall be
uniform in height where possible according to the topography and
metal posts shall be capped.
f. Drainage. Retaining walls shall be designed and constructed so as not
to block the flow of surface water and to permit adequate drainage.
§ 30-63.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-64
1:825

ARTICLE VI
Zoning
§ 30-65. PURPOSE AND INTENT. [2000 Code § 30-65]
§ 30-66. ZONE DISTRICTS.
§ 30-66.1. Designation of Zoning Districts. [2000 Code § 30-66.1]
For the purpose of this chapter, the City is hereby divided into districts or
zones, to be designated as follows:
R1 Single Family Residential
R1A Single Family Attached Residential
R2 Two to Four Family Residential
R3 Medium Density Residential
B1 Downtown Retail District
B2 Main Street Retail Sales and Service
NC Neighborhood Commercial
L-I Light Industrial
PO Professional Office
P1 Parks
P2 Municipal Property
P4 Schools
WRA Waterfront Redevelopment Area
§ 30-66.2. Zoning Map. [2000 Code § 30-66.2]
The location and boundaries of the above districts are hereby established
on the Zoning Map of the City, which is adopted by and made a part of this
a. The purpose of this article is to provide precise and detailed standards
by which to guide the type and intensity of development in the City. It is
intended to facilitate controlled growth and redevelopment in
accordance with the Master Plan; including the Waterfront
Redevelopment Plan and any other Master Plan amendments or
revisions hereafter adopted.
b. This Zoning Article shall be termed permissive in structure. After the
effective date of this article no use or structure shall be permitted in the
City which is not listed as a permitted, accessory, or conditional use, or
unless permitted by action of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 30-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-66.2
1:827
Chapter. The map or maps and all notations, references and designations
shown thereon shall be a part of this Chapter as if the same were all fully
described and set forth herein. The map shall also be the Official Map of the
City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32. (The Zoning Map can be found in the
City offices.)
§ 30-66.2A. Zoning Map Amendments. [Ord. No. 2638]
§ 30-66.3. Designation of District Boundaries. [2000 Code
§ 30-66.3]
a. S.T.A.R.S. Redevelopment Zone and Waterfront Redevelopment Zone.
1. The City Engineers, T&M Associates, have updated the City Zoning
Map to add the S.T.A.R.S. Redevelopment Zone and the Waterfront
Redevelopment Area boundaries.
2. The areas that were added were based upon the S.T.A.R.S.
Redevelopment Area Ordinance 2548, which was certified on July
6, 2000, and the Waterfront Redevelopment Area Ordinance No.
2607, certified June 6, 2002.
3. The specific changes to the Zoning Map are as follows:
(a) The S.T.A.R.S. Area boundary has been added and the new
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) S.T.A.R.S. District along with
the Residential Redevelopment (RR) District have been shown.
No separate designation has been provided for the S.T.A.R.S.
Neighborhood Commercial Area (NC) Zone, other than a
distinct color differentiation from the existing NC Zone, which
exists throughout the City.
(b) The Waterfront Redevelopment Area boundary has been added
and there has been a differentiation of the Renovation Infill
Overlay Zone from the Prime Renewal Area. The Prime
Renewal Area is shown as the "WRA" Zone and now fully
encompasses the entire existing Prime Renewal Area and the
P1 and P2 Properties which were previously designated on the
Zoning Map in the Prime Renewal Area. The southern half of
Block 141 (Lots 1 to 5), fronting on Sewall Avenue, between
Grand Avenue and Heck Street, is now part of the Professional
Office (PO) Zone.
The Zoning Map is added, as amended above and annexed
hereto and made a part hereof, to § 30-66.2 and shall replace
the prior Zoning Map in said subsection. (The Zoning Map can
be found in the City offices.)
a. Unless otherwise noted, the district boundary lines are intended
generally to follow the center lines of streets; the center lines of
railroad rights-of-way; existing lot lines; the center lines of rivers,
streams and other waterways; and Municipal boundary lines. However,
§ 30-66.2 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-66.3
1:828
§ 30-67. SCHEDULE OF ZONE DISTRICT AREA, YARD AND
BUILDING REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 2211, Schedule 1; Ord. No.
2301 § 1; Ord. No. 2409]
The Schedule of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is contained in
Schedule 1. (2000 Code § 30-67)
SCHEDULE 1: SCHEDULE OF HEIGHT, YARD AND BULK
REQUIREMENTS — COMMERCIAL
City of Asbury Park
(§ 30-67)
Commercial Uses Part 1
ZONE Min. Lot Size
Min. Lot
Width Min. Side Yd.
Min. Agg.
Side
Min. Front
Yd.
B1 None None None or 5' to
abutting bldg.
-- None
B2 None None Same as B1 -- 10 ft.
NC 5,000 s.f. 50 ft. Same as B1 -- 10 ft. min.
PO 5,000 s.f. 50 ft. Same as R1 Same as R1 Same as R1
LI None None Same as B1 -- 10 ft.
WRA PURSUANT TO WATERFRONT REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
where a district boundary line does not follow such a line, its position
shall be shown on the Zoning Map by a specific dimension expressing
its distance in feet from a street line or other boundary line as
indicated.
b. In the event a district boundary line divides one (1) or more lots, then
the zone boundary line shall be considered the lot limit for computing
all area, bulk, yard, buffer and any other dimension requirements
specified in this article, unless a zone district boundary line falls within
twenty (20) feet of a lot line existing at the time of passage of this
chapter, then the lot line shall be considered the zone boundary line.
c. In cases of uncertainty or disagreement as to the true location of any
district boundary line, the determination shall be made by the Board of
Adjustment.
§ 30-66.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-67
1:829
Commercial Uses Part 2
ZONE
Min. Rear
Yd.
Max.
Density Max. FAR Min. OSR
Max.
Bldg.
Cov.
Max.
Height
Height/
Acc.
Bldg.
B1 10% Lot
Depth: 1
-- 2.5 -- 90%
above
1rst. St.
6 st. 75 ft. Same as
Princ.
Struc.
B2 Same as
B1
-- 1 -- Same as
B1
3 st. 40 ft. Same as
Princ.
Struc.
NC 30 ft. -- 0.75 -- 50%/80%
w.
Parking
3 st. 30 ft. Same as
Princ.
Struc.
PO Same as
R1
-- 0.75 -- 35%/50%
w.
Parking
3 st. 30 ft. Same as
Princ.
Struc.
LI Same as
B1
-- 2.5 -- Same as
B1
3 st. 40 ft. Same as
Princ.
Struc.
WRA PURSUANT TO WATERFRONT REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
*Notes can be found at the end of the Schedule.
SCHEDULE 1: SCHEDULE OF HEIGHT, YARD AND BULK
REQUIREMENTS — RESIDENTIAL
City of Asbury Park
(§ 30-67)
Residential Uses Part 1
ZONE Min. Lot Size
Min. Lot
Width Min. Side Yd.
Min. Agg.
Side
Min. Front
Yd.
R1 5000 sq. ft. 50 ft. 6 ft. 14 ft. 25 ft.
R1A 5000:22000
T.H.
50:20 T.H.(a) 6:0-10 T.H. 14:0-10 T.H. 25 ft.
R2 2500 s.f./unit 50 ft. 6 14 25 ft.
R3 10000 s.f. 50:100 Multi. 6:Multi. 20%
Lot Width
14:Multi. 40%
Lot Width
30 ft.
PO 2500 s.f./unit 50 ft. Same as R2 Same as R2 Same as R2
NC Same as R2 Same as R2 Same as R2 Same as R2 Same as R2
WRA PURSUANT TO WATERFRONT REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
§ 30-67 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-67
1:830
Residential Uses Part 2
ZONE
Min. Rear
Yd.
Max.
Density Max. FAR Min. OSR
Max. Bldg.
Cov.
Max.
Height
Height/
Acc. Bldg.
R1 25 ft. 8 D.U./Ac. 0.5 -- 25% 2.5 st. 30
ft.
15 ft.
R1A 25 ft. 10 D.U./Ac. 0.5 0.35 T.H. 25%:n.a.T.H. 3 st. 30 ft. 15 ft.
R2 25 ft. 17 D.U./Ac. 0.5 -- 25% 2.5 st. 30
ft.
15 ft.
R3 30 ft. 50 D.U./Ac. 0.5 0.3 25%/35%
Multi.
5 st. 60 ft. 15 ft.
PO Same as R2 Same as
R2
Same as R2 -- 35% 3 st. 30 ft. 15 ft.
NC Same as R2 17 D.U./Ac. 0.75 -- 35% 3 st. 40 ft. Same as
Princ.
Struc.
WRA PURSUANT TO WATERFRONT REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
*Notes can be found at the end of the Schedule.
NOTES: SCHEDULE 1 - Height, Yard and Bulk Requirements.
(a) Minimum tract area for townhouse developments is twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet and minimum tract frontage is one hundred (100) feet
(See § 30-73.5, "Townhouse Developments"). Developments using three (3)
or more attached "townhouse" style dwelling units and where the entire
development is in a condominium form of ownership shall be considered
multi-family residential uses and shall conform to the requirements of the
zones in which they are located.
(b) All residential dwelling units in a Commercial Zone shall be located on
the second floor or above. Setback pertains to the portion of the building
used for residential purposes in whole or in part.
(c) The open space requirement in the Residential and B1 Zones may
be met through provision of interior recreation areas, balconies and roof
terraces.
(d) Minimum lot sizes, lot widths and yard requirements apply to multifamily
residential developments with densities equal to or less than the
maximum permitted in the zone. A lot that has lot area or lot width less
than the minimum permitted in the zone shall be developed in accordance
with all requirements of a less dense residential zone containing minimum
lot size and width requirements to which it conforms. One-family dwellings
are permitted according to the requirements of the R1 Zoning districts and
two-family uses may be developed according to R2 Zone requirements.
(e) Front yards shall be appropriately landscaped with trees and shrubs.
Landscape treatment subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
§ 30-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-68
1:831
§ 30-68. SUPPLEMENTARY ZONE DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
§ 30-68.1. General. [2000 Code § 30-68.1]
§ 30-68.2. Lot Regulations. [2000 Code § 30-68.2]
a. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or
structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land or building be designed, used, or intended to be used for any
purpose or in any manner other than as specified among the uses listed
as permitted, accessory or conditional in the district in which such
building or land is located.
b. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally
altered to exceed in height the limit designated for the district in which
such building or structure is located.
c. No building or structure shall be erected, no existing buildings or
structures shall be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open
space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area and building location
regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such
building or open space is located.
d. No yard or other open space provided for any building for the purpose
of complying with the provisions of this article shall be considered as
providing a yard or other open space for any other building on any other
lot.
e. No land in a residential zone shall be used to fulfill open space,
minimum area, minimum yard and setback requirements, parking or
other similar requirements for uses in nonresidential zones.
f. The area or dimension of any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall
not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this article; and if
already less than the minimum required by this chapter, the area or
dimension shall not be further reduced.
g. The maximum floor area ratio specified in this article shall not be
exceeded, or, if already more than the maximum, shall not be further
increased. The minimum open space ratio specified in this article shall
be maintained, or, if already less than the minimum, shall not be further
reduced.
a. Nonconforming Lot. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
Article, any existing nonconforming lot in the R1, R1A, R2 and R3 Zones
which is not adjacent to any other lot under the same ownership and
which is nonconforming due to width or area may be improved with a
new building or structure in accordance with the requirements of this
article, provided that:
§ 30-68 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-68.2
1:832
§ 30-68.3. Height Regulations. [2000 Code § 30-68.3]
1. The minimum setbacks and other requirements shall be as
specified in Schedule 1 except as noted below.
2. Required side street setbacks on corner lots may be reduced one
(1) foot for each three (3) feet the lot is under the minimum width
required in the zone district but shall not be reduced below onehalf
(1/2) the minimum required setback.
3. In no case shall a detached residential structure be less than
twenty (20) feet in length or width.
b. Lot Width. On regularly shaped lots, the minimum lot width of any lot
shall be measured at the front property line and required front yard
setback line as required for the zone in which it is located and shall be
maintained for a distance of not less than forty (40) feet to the rear of
the required front yard setback line. Where lots front on culs-de-sac or
curved streets, the minimum lot width may be sixty-five (65%) percent
of the required minimum or fifty (50) feet, whichever is greater,
measured on the arc of the right-of-way line.
c. Corner Lots. The required front yard shall be maintained on both
streets except as otherwise permitted in this article.
d. Through Lots. A through lot in a residence zone shall be considered as
having two (2) street frontages, both of which shall be subject to the
front yard requirements of this article. Where a lot is bounded on three
(3) or more sides by roads, the side opposite the front yard shall be
considered the rear yard and the minimum rear yard setback shall be
maintained. The remaining frontage shall be considered side yard but
the front yard setback shall be maintained for the side street.
e. Frontage Upon a Street. Every principal building shall be built upon a
lot with the minimum required frontage upon an approved street which
shall be improved in accordance with the street standards established
by the City.
f. Number of Buildings Restricted. There shall not be more than one (1)
principal structure on each lot in the R1 through R3 districts.
g. For the purposes of this section, the "front yard" or "front yard setback"
shall mean the "minimum front yard" specified in § 30-67. When the
prevailing setback of existing buildings along a block front is less than
the setback required in § 30-67, the prevailing setback may be applied
as the "front yard setback" for a new building along the same block
front, provided that such setback shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
a. General Application. No building or structure shall have a greater
number of stories or greater height than permitted in the zone where
such building or structure is located.
§ 30-68.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-68.3
1:833
§ 30-68.4. Yard Regulations. [2000 Code § 30-68.4]
§ 30-69. COMMUNITY DESIGN REGULATIONS.
b. Permitted Exceptions:
1. Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this chapter shall not
apply to the following when attached to a principal structure:
spires; belfries; cupolas and domes; monuments; chimneys;
flagpoles; fire towers; tanks; water towers and standpipes; radio
and satellite dish antennas when attached to nonresidential
principal buildings. Freestanding structures that are not principal
buildings shall be considered accessory structures and shall meet
the height requirements set forth in Schedule 1 except as
otherwise specified in the Land Development Regulations.
2. Mechanical appurtenances such as condensers, elevator
penthouses, exhaust fans, air-conditioning equipment and other
similar equipment are exempt from height restrictions, provided
they do not extend more than twelve (12) feet above the maximum
height limitations, cover no more than twenty (20%) percent of the
roof area, and are properly shielded by a parapet wall.
3. In the B1, B2 and LI Zone Districts, penthouses are exempt from
height restrictions provided they cover not more than twenty (20%)
percent of the main roof area, are not more than twelve (12) feet,
and further provided that all building service equipment and
appurtenances are enclosed in the penthouse in addition to any use
permitted in the zone where located.
a. Required yards shall be open to the sky and unobstructed, except that
parapets, windowsills, door posts, rainwater leaders and similar
ornamental or structural fixtures may project up to one (1) foot into
such yards.
b. Cornices, eaves, bay windows and chimneys may project up to two (2)
feet into any minimum required front, side or rear yard as set forth in
Schedule 1.
c. Uncovered steps only may project up to five (5) feet into a required
front or rear yard unless they are a structural component of a porch as
defined in § 30-15.
d. Room air-conditioning equipment, barbecues or patios or fire escapes
may be located within any side or rear yard but shall not be less than
five (5) feet from any property line.
e. Where any lot abuts a street right-of-way which is proposed to be
widened as indicated on the Asbury Park Master Plan or Waterfront
Redevelopment Plan, or Master Plan of Monmouth County, or by the
State of New Jersey, setbacks and height restriction areas shall be
measured from such proposed right-of-way.
§ 30-68.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-69.1
1:834
§ 30-69.1. Purposes. [2000 Code § 30-69.1]
Pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65i, this section
is intended to preserve and protect the character of the residential
neighborhoods in the City in a manner consistent with their architectural
history as set forth in the Historic Preservation Element of the Asbury Park
Master Plan (1990) and the Land Use Plan Element of the Asbury Park
Master Plan (1994). The standards contained herein are designed to provide
for new development on vacant lots and additions to existing structures that
are consistent and complimentary to the original homes and buildings in low
density residential neighborhoods so as to preserve and enhance property
values for the public welfare.
§ 30-69.2. Applicability. [2000 Code § 30-69.2]
The standards of this section shall apply to all residential historic districts,
now or hereafter designated and to all R1, R2 R1A and PO residential
zones, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, as amended, which are hereby
designated as historic districts for the purposes of this section.
§ 30-69.3. Rehabilitation. [2000 Code § 30-69.3]
No porch or other architectural feature such as cornices, columns, dormer
windows, railings, doors, etc., required under this section and present
on an existing building in a historic district on the effective date of this
section shall be removed unless it is replaced with same, if element is
architecturally accurate, or replaced with construction to be in character
with the building and historic district in which it is located and is replaced in
accordance with the standards set forth herein. The architectural elements
to be included will be based upon the building's style and structures of
similar use already existing within the block fronts on either side of the
street within which the site of the proposed construction is located. Primary
entrance doors cannot be relocated to face side yard.
§ 30-69.4. New Construction. [2000 Code § 30-69.4]
In addition to the standards for height, bulk and yards set forth in § 30-67,
the following standards shall be met:
a. Building Height. A building to be constructed on a vacant lot within a
designated district as described in this section must have two (2)
stories, unless more than fifty (50%) percent of the existing homes on
the same block and facing the same street have less than two (2)
stories.
b. Massing. A building to be constructed on a vacant lot within a
designated district as described in this section must include a variety of
structural or ornamental indentations and/or projections consistent
with those present on at least fifty (50%) percent of the existing homes
on the same block and facing the same street. At minimum, an open
front porch, constructed of wood and with railings and trim consistent
§ 30-69.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-69.4
1:835
with other homes in the immediate neighborhood, shall be provided
unless more than fifty (50%) percent of the existing homes on the same
block and facing the same street have no front porch. Other examples
of applicable recessed or projecting features include dormers, bay
windows, turrets, recessed entrances, chimneys, etc. All porch and
deck railings shall be thirty-six (36) inches in height or as otherwise
required under the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23, et seq.)
and shall include either square, cylindrical or lathed balusters spaced
two (2) to four (4) inches apart (see illustration), or decorative railings
made of wrought iron or other style and material compatible with
Victorian Period architecture.
c. Roof Treatments. A building to be constructed on a vacant lot within a
designated district as described in this section must be designed with at
least one (1) roof type present on two (2) or more homes within the
same block and facing the same street. In the event that two (2) or more
adjoining lots become vacant within a block front, the home
constructed on any individual lot must include a roof consistent with
one (1) or more of the following: Gambrel, High or acute angle Gable,
Mansard, or Hip. These roof types are illustrated below.
d. Ornamentation. A building to be constructed on a vacant lot within a
designated district as described in this section must be designed with at
least one (1) type of ornamentation present on two (2) or more homes
within the same block and facing the same street. In the event that two
(2) or more adjoining lots become vacant within a block front, the home
constructed on any individual lot must include ornamentation
consistent with one (1) or more of the following: Palladian window or
equivalent; cornices or sashes; small paned windows; door openings
§ 30-69.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-69.4
1:836
§ 30-69.5. Additions to Existing Homes. [2000 Code § 30-69.5]
In addition to the standards for height, bulk and yards set forth in § 30-67,
the following standards shall be met:
with fan and side windows; polygonal or cylindrical towers; stained
glass windows; lathed balusters; etc. These examples are illustrated
below.
e. Materials. A building to be constructed on a vacant lot within a
designated district as described in this section must be designed with at
least one (1) type of building material used for siding and roofing
present on two (2) or more homes within the same block and facing the
same street. In the event that two (2) or more adjoining lots become
vacant within a block front, the home constructed on any individual lot
must include a siding or roofing material consistent with one (1) or
more of the following: clapboard or cedar shingle siding or equivalent;
shingle roof - including slate shingles, if feasible; standing seam metal
roofs; brick or stucco facades, etc. Some of these examples are
illustrated in the composite illustration above.
f. Doors. A building to be constructed on a vacant lot within a designated
district as described in this section must have the primary facade and
front entrance of the principal structure facing the public sidewalk and
street. Front/primary entrance doors are not permitted facing side
yards.
a. One Story Additions. An addition to an existing home within a
designated district that is proposed at one (1) story in height shall be
limited to the side or rear yard and should use common materials with
§ 30-69.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-69.5
1:837
§ 30-69.6. Undeveloped Lots. [2000 Code § 30-69.6]
A building to be constructed on a vacant lot located in a block shall include
design features typical of the election district in which the property is
situated. Such design features shall include the height of the building, its
massing, roof treatment, ornamentation and construction materials. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review applications for the development
of residences on vacant properties to determine whether the provisions
of § 30-69 are satisfied. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may refer such
applications to the Planning Board.
§ 30-70. USE REGULATIONS - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
§ 30-70.1. Principal Permitted and Conditional Uses.
(Reserved)
§ 30-70.2. Accessory Uses.
(Reserved)
the main house. Rooflines may be extended from the eaves of the
second story roof or may incorporate a new compatible roof based on
this section. Safety railings for new decks and porches shall conform
with § 30-69.4b.
b. Two Story Additions. An addition to an existing home within a
designated district that is proposed at two (2) stories in height shall be
limited to the side or rear yard and should use common materials with
the main house.
Rooflines may be extended from the existing house or may incorporate
a new compatible roof based on this section. The same standards for
ornamentation shall be applied to two (2) story additions as are applied
to new construction. Safety railings for new decks and porches shall
conform with § 30-69.4b.
§ 30-69.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-70.3
1:838
§ 30-70.3. (R1) - Single Family Residential Zone. [2000 Code
§ 30-70.3]
§ 30-70.4. (R1A) - Attached Single Family Residential Zone. [2000
Code § 30-70.4]
a. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Detached single family homes on individual lots of at least fifty (50)
feet in width and five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Essential municipal services facilities.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Garages for the storage of motor vehicles or noncommercial
property.
2. Personal recreational facilities such as swimming pools, basketball
hoops, etc., subject to the requirements of this chapter.
3. Driveways for the parking of personal vehicles, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
4. Any other structure which is clearly incidental to the principal
residential use of the premises.
5. Minor home occupations.
c. Permitted Conditional Uses. Pursuant to § 30-76.3 of this chapter:
1. Major home occupations.
2. Houses of worship.
d. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for any newly constructed
or converted single family dwelling.
Requirement may be met through provision of an enclosed garage
and driveway of at least twenty (20) feet in length between the
property line and garage.
a. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Detached single family homes on individual lots of at least fifty (50)
feet in width and five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Essential municipal services/facilities.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Garages for the storage of motor vehicles or noncommercial
property.
§ 30-70.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-70.4
1:839
§ 30-70.5. (R2) - Two to Four Family Residential Zone. [2000 Code
§ 30-70.5]
2. Personal recreational facilities such as swimming pools, basketball
hoops, etc., subject to the requirements of this chapter.
3. Driveways for the parking of personal vehicles, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
4. Any other structure which is clearly incidental to the principal
residential use of the premises.
5. Minor home occupations.
c. Permitted Conditional Uses. Pursuant to § 30-76.3 of this chapter:
1. Major home occupations.
2. Funeral homes and houses of worship.
3. Attached single family residential developments of tracts of at least
twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet and a maximum
residential density of ten (10) dwelling units per acre.
a. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Detached single family homes on individual lots of at least fifty (50)
feet in width and five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Two-family, three-family, or four-family dwellings within one (1)
principal structure on a lot of not less than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet per dwelling unit.
3. Essential municipal services facilities.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Garages for the storage of motor vehicles or noncommercial
property.
2. Personal recreational facilities such as swimming pools, basketball
hoops, etc., subject to the requirements of this chapter.
3. Driveways for the parking of personal vehicles, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
4. Any other structure which is clearly incidental to the principal
residential use of the premises.
5. Off-street parking facilities as required by this chapter and used
exclusively by the occupants of a permitted residential use.
6. Minor home occupations.
c. Permitted Conditional Uses. Pursuant to § 30-76.3 of this chapter:
§ 30-70.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-70.5
1:840
§ 30-70.6. (R3) - Medium Density Multifamily Residential Zone.
[2000 Code § 30-70.6]
1. Major home occupations.
2. Funeral homes and houses of worship.
3. Rooming and boarding houses.
d. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. Single family dwellings: Pursuant to § 30-70.3 of this chapter.
2. Two-family dwellings: Three (3) off-street parking spaces. Parking
spaces within enclosed garages may be counted towards the
parking requirement provided that not more than one (1) driveway
parking space is located behind any one (1) garage space.
3. Three- to four-family dwellings: One and one-half (1 1/2) parking
spaces per dwelling unit.
a. Permitted Principal Uses.
1. Detached single family homes on individual lots of at least fifty (50)
feet in width and five thousand (5,000) square feet.
2. Two-family, three-family, or four-family dwellings within one (1)
principal structure on a lot of not less than two thousand five
hundred (2,500) square feet per dwelling unit.
3. Low rise multifamily residential dwellings on a tract of at least ten
thousand (10,000) square feet at a maximum residential density of
fifty (50) dwelling units per acre and a flood area ration of 2.0. For
the purposes of this chapter, low rise shall mean three (3) or more
units arranged to provide individual access from ground level and
no hallways common to more than two (2) units. Such
arrangements may include townhouse style units in clusters of not
more than four (4) units per building and may include condominium
or cooperative forms of ownership.
4. Essential municipal services/facilities.
b. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Garages for the storage of motor vehicles or noncommercial
property.
2. Personal recreational facilities such as swimming pools, basketball
hoops, etc., subject to the requirements of this chapter.
3. Driveways for the parking of personal vehicles, subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 30-70.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-70.6
1:841
§ 30-71. USE REGULATIONS - NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
§ 30-71.1. (Reserved)
§ 30-71.2. Accessory Uses. [2000 Code § 30-71.2]
Customary accessory uses such as signs (subject to § 30-61) and parking
facilities (subject to § 30-59) are permitted in the B1, B2 and LI Zones.
Storage trailers are specifically prohibited as accessory uses.
§ 30-71.3. (B1) - Downtown Retail District. [2000 Code § 30-71.3]
4. Any other structure which is clearly incidental to the principal
residential use of the premises.
5. Off-street parking facilities as required by this chapter and used
exclusively by the occupants of a permitted residential use.
6. Minor home occupations.
c. Permitted Conditional Uses. Pursuant to § 30-76.3 of this chapter:
1. Major home occupations.
2. Funeral homes and houses of worship.
3. Attached single-family residential developments of tracts of at least
twenty-two thousand (22,000) square feet and a maximum
residential density of ten (10) dwelling units per acre.
4. Mid-rise multifamily residential buildings on tracts of twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet or greater and a maximum height of
five (5) stories and sixty (60) feet with common hallways accessible
to not more than five (5) dwelling units per hallway and a maximum
residential density of fifty (50) dwelling units per acre at a floor
area ratio of 2.0.
d. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. Single-family dwellings: Pursuant to § 30-70.3 of this chapter.
2. Two-family dwellings: Three (3) off-street parking spaces. Parking
spaces within enclosed garages may be counted towards the
parking requirement provided that not more than one (1) driveway
parking space is located behind any one (1) garage space.
3. Three- to four-family dwellings: One and one-half (1 1/2) parking
spaces per dwelling unit.
4. Multi-family dwellings:
Zero to one bedroom apartment One (1) parking space
Two or more bedroom apartment Two (2) parking spaces
§ 30-70.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-71.3
1:842
a. Permitted Uses:
1. Stores and shops for the conduct of any retail sales or services not
specifically prohibited.
2. Business and professional offices, banks and fiduciary institutions.
3. Restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, delicatessens, and ice cream
parlors.
4. Art galleries, museums, and theaters.
5. Bakeries.
6. Business, secretarial, and trade schools.
7. Gymnasiums, and health and fitness clubs.
8. Artist studios.
9. Dance studios, martial arts schools, and similar instructional
schools.
10. Sound recording and rehearsal studios above the first floor of a
building.
11. Upper story residences, subject to § 30-73.11.
b. Prohibited Uses:
1. Nursing homes.
2. Licensed health care facilities.
3. Soup kitchens and food pantries.
4. Houses of worship and places of assembly.
5. Social clubs.
6. Retail sales and service establishments providing goods and repair
services for vehicles.
7. Bars.
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Microbrewery or brew pub.
2. Wholesale establishments that provide a retail storefront.
3. Check cashing services, provided adequate interior space is
provided for patron queuing.
d. Off-Street Parking Requirements:
§ 30-71.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-71.3
1:843
§ 30-71.4. (B2) - Main Street Retail Sales and Service. [2000 Code
§ 30-71.4; Ord. No. 2017-18 Exh. B]
1. For new development on vacant property: One (1) parking space
per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area.
Parking requirement may be met through lease of Municipal
parking within one thousand (1,000) feet of this site.
a. Permitted Uses:
1. Retail sales and services permitted in § 30-71.3.
2. Business and professional offices, banks, and fiduciary institutions.
3. Automobile rental establishments, excluding properties with
frontage on Main Street.
4. Appliance rental establishments.
5. Laundromats.
6. Restaurants.
7. Take-out restaurants.
8. Bars.
9. Upper store residences, subject to § 30-73.11.
b. Prohibited Uses:
1. Nursing homes.
2. Licensed health care facilities.
3. Soup kitchens and food pantries.
4. Houses of worship and places of assembly.
5. Social clubs.
6. Retail sales and service establishments providing goods and repair
services for vehicles.
7. Used car sales.
8. Motor vehicle repair garages.
9. Motor vehicle body repair garages.
10. Drive-throughs. [Ord. No. 2017-18 Exh. B]
c. Conditional Uses:
1. Gas stations.
§ 30-71.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-71.4
1:844
§ 30-71.5. (NC) - Neighborhood Commercial. [2000 Code § 30-71.5]
2. Check cashing services, providing adequate interior space is
provided for patron queuing.
d. Off-Street Parking Requirements:
1. For new development on vacant property: One (1) parking space
per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area.
Parking requirement may be met through lease of Municipal
parking within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site.
a. Permitted Uses:
1. Hardware stores.
2. Personal services.
3. Take-out and sit-down restaurants.
4. Delicatessens.
5. Convenience stores.
6. Card and gift shops.
7. Pharmacies.
8. Florists.
9. Laundromats.
10. Dry cleaners and tailors.
11. Groceries and supermarkets.
12. Upper story residences, subject to § 30-73.11.
b. Prohibited Uses:
1. Nursing homes.
2. Licensed health care facilities.
3. Soup kitchens and food pantries.
4. Houses of worship and places of assembly.
5. Social clubs.
6. Retail and used car sales.
7. Motor vehicle repair garages.
8. Motor vehicle body repair garages.
§ 30-71.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-71.5
1:845
§ 30-71.6. (LI) - Light Industrial. [2000 Code § 30-71.6]
§ 30-71.7. (PO) - Professional Office. [2000 Code § 30-71.7]
9. Nightclubs and cabarets.
10. Gas stations.
c. Off-Street Parking Requirements:
1. For new development on vacant property: One (1) parking space
per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area.
Parking requirement may be met through lease of Municipal
parking within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site.
a. Permitted Uses. All uses permitted under § 30-71.3 through 30-71.5
plus the following uses: cabinet makers; furniture makers; glass and
mirror cutters; machine shops; welders; manufacture, assembly or
fabrication of tangible products that does not involve emission of
smoke, fumes or dust and does not generate noise in excess of sixty (60)
decibels beyond the property line; warehousing; wholesaling; repair
shops, not to include motor vehicle repair.
b. Prohibited Uses. Any residential uses; bars; nightclubs; used car
wholesalers.
c. Conditional Uses.
1. Motor vehicle engine or body repair garages.
2. Retail used car sales.
d. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. For new development on vacant property:
(a) Warehousing: One (1) parking space per one thousand (1,000)
square feet of gross floor area.
2. All other uses: One (1) parking space per five hundred (500) square
feet of gross floor area.
Parking requirement may be met through lease of Municipal
parking within one thousand (1,000) feet of the site.
a. Permitted Uses.
1. Professional Offices. For the purposes of this chapter only, a
professional office shall be any office used by one (1) or more
persons licensed or certified by the State of New Jersey, or any
professional society or association with recognized State and
National affiliations, to provide a professional service to the public.
Such professions shall specifically include licensed medical
§ 30-71.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-71.7
1:846
§ 30-71.8. (P1) - Parks and (P2) - Municipal Property. [2000 Code
§ 30-71.8]
§ 30-71.9. (WRA) - Waterfront Redevelopment Area. [2000 Code
§ 30-71.9; Ord. No. 2735 § 2]
practitioners; chiropractors; psychologists; real estate
practitioners; accountants; financial or insurance practitioners;
legal practitioners; planning, design and engineering professionals;
and travel consultants.
2. Residential uses pursuant to § 30-70.5 of this chapter.
b. Prohibited Uses. Any uses not listed as permitted or conditional uses in
this chapter and any uses listed as prohibited uses in subsections
30-71.3 through 30-71.6 of this chapter.
c. Conditional Uses.
1. Accessory apartments pursuant to § 30-76.3t of the Land
Development Regulations.
d. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. For new professional office development on vacant property: One
(1) parking space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor
area.
Parking requirement may be met through lease of Municipal
parking within five hundred (500) feet of this site.
a. Permitted Uses.
1. Uses permitted by Mayor and Council.
b. Prohibited Uses. Any use not specifically authorized by Mayor and
Council.
a. Renovation Infill Area Overlay.
1. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
in the Renovation Infill Area of the Waterfront Redevelopment
Area:
(a) Conditional Uses permitted by the underlying zone district
regulations.
(b) Bed and Breakfast establishments subject to the following
conditions:
(1) A Bed and Breakfast establishment shall contain no more
than six (6) guest bedrooms and shall accommodate no
more than twelve (12) guests at any one time;
§ 30-71.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-71.9
1:847
§ 30-72. PUBLIC LAND - P1, P2 AND P4 DISTRICTS. [2000 Code
§ 30-72]
§ 30-73. SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS.
§ 30-73.1. Buffers. [2000 Code § 30-73.1]
All properties used for commercial or industrial purposes shall provide a
planted buffer strip of at least ten (10) feet in width on every side which
abuts a use permitted in a residence zone. Treatment of the buffer strip
must be subject to the approval of the Zoning Officer through issuance of
a Zoning Permit. Existing commercial or industrial buildings or uses are
exempt from the provisions of this section, except that if the footprint of
such existing building or use is expanded or the off-street parking facilities
are increased in size, the provisions of this section shall apply.
§ 30-73.2. Arcades. [2000 Code § 30-73.2]
Establishments containing four (4) or more coin-operated amusements,
including video games, pinball machines, jukeboxes, pool tables, or games
of chance, shall be considered arcades and may be permitted in the B2
(2) The principal structure of a Bed and Breakfast
establishment shall have not less than three hundred (300)
square feet in principal rooms for the exclusive use of
guests, including, but not limited to, parlors, dining rooms,
libraries and solariums, but not including hallways;
(3) Cooking and smoking in guest rooms of Bed and Breakfast
establishments is prohibited;
(4) Bed and Breakfast establishments shall provide a meal to
the guests in the forenoon of each day, but shall not
operate as a restaurant open to the general public;
(5) Bed and Breakfast establishments shall be renovated in a
historically accurate manner consistent with § 30-69;
(6) A Bed and Breakfast establishment is not a rooming house
or boarding house as defined by N.J.S.A. 55:13B-3; and
(7) A Bed and Breakfast establishment shall have at least one
(1) bathroom per square floor.
a. In all P1 Zoning Districts the land shall be used as public parks only.
b. In all P2 Zones the land or buildings located thereon shall be used for
any purpose or use as may be determined by resolution of the Mayor
and Council.
c. In all P4 Zones the land or buildings located thereon shall be used for
school purposes only.
§ 30-71.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-73.2
1:848
Zoning District only. Three (3) or fewer coin-operated amusements may
be permitted as an accessory use in hotels, nightclubs, teen clubs, bars
or other entertainment related uses in nonresidential zoning district, (as
approved by the Zoning Officer).
§ 30-73.3. Conversions. [Deleted by Ord. No. 2777 § 5]
(Reserved)
§ 30-73.4. Dwelling Unit Size Requirements. [2000 Code § 30-73.4]
In accordance with § 30-3, and with specific attention to paragraphs a., c.,
and q., all dwelling units hereafter erected, altered or converted, unless
otherwise specified in this chapter must contain gross floor area no less
than the following:
a. Each establishment containing coin-operated amusements must obtain
a mercantile license from the Mercantile Officer specifying the number
and type of machines to be located in that establishment.
b. No establishment containing one (1) or more coin-operated
amusements shall be internally accessible from another establishment
also containing one (1) or more coin-operated amusements.
c. All establishments containing coin-operated amusements available for
use by minors shall provide proper adult supervision at all times.
a. Conventional Multi-family Uses.
Efficiency (Studio) 500 square feet
One Bedroom 750 square feet
Two Bedrooms 900 square feet
Three Bedrooms 1,100 square feet
> Three Bedrooms 200 square feet for each additional
bedroom
Senior Citizen Multi-family Uses.
Efficiency (Studio) 350 square feet
One Bedroom 600 square feet
Two Bedrooms 750 square feet
Three Bedrooms 900 square feet
b. Two-Family Uses. Each dwelling unit to be a minimum of nine hundred
(900) square feet measured from the interior surfaces of the perimeter
walls of the unit. Dwelling units with more than two (2) bedrooms shall
conform to the minimum size requirements for "conventional" dwelling
units specified in Subsection a above.
c. One (1) bedroom dwelling units shall contain a minimum of eight
hundred (800) square feet and two (2) bedroom units shall contain a
§ 30-73.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-73.4
1:849
§ 30-73.5. Townhouse Developments. [2000 Code § 30-73.5]
Townhouse developments may be permitted through site plan approval of
the Planning Board according to the following provisions:
minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet of living space measured
from the perimeter of the interior walls of the dwelling unit.
a. Tract Development:
1. Minimum Tract Area. Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet,
except that tracts of seventeen thousand (17,000) square feet or
more may be permitted where twenty (20%) percent or more of the
townhouses are made affordable to households with family income
equal to eighty (80%) percent of regional family median income or
less.
2. Open Space. Not less than thirty-five (35%) percent of the total
tract area shall be dedicated for green open space, either for
recreation or some other suitable use, public or private, as
approved by the Planning Board. For the purpose of this
subsection, individual lots or portions thereof shall not be
construed as open space.
3. Minimum Tract Frontage. One hundred (100) feet.
4. Development Density. Each dwelling unit shall be constructed on
an individual lot, and there shall be a minimum of three thousand
two hundred fifty (3,250) square feet of tract area per dwelling unit
in R1A Zones. Development density in the R3 Zone shall not exceed
sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre.
b. Individual Lots.
1. Minimum Width. The required average width of all individual lots
shall be not less than twenty (20) feet, and no individual lot shall
have a width of less than eighteen (18) feet, the width to be
measured at the actual building setback line for each individual lot.
In developments where twenty (20%) percent or more of the
townhouses are made affordable to households with family incomes
of eighty (80%) percent of median income or less, the average
width may be eighteen (18) feet and minimum width may be sixteen
(16) feet.
2. Minimum Area. The required average area of all individual lots
shall be not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet, and no
individual lot shall have an area of less than one thousand eight
hundred (1,800) square feet. In addition, for each individual lot
with an area less than the required average, there shall be not less
than one (1) individual lot with an area greater than the required
average, and the deviation from the required average of the larger
lot shall be at least equal to the deviation from the required
§ 30-73.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-73.5
1:850
average of the smaller lot. In developments where twenty (20%)
percent or more of the townhouses are made affordable to
households with family incomes of eighty (80%) percent of family
median income or less, the required average lot area may be
one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet and the required
minimum lot size may be one thousand six hundred (1,600) square
feet.
3. Front and Rear Yards. The required average for front and rear
yards on all individual lots shall be not less than twenty-five (25)
feet, and no individual lot shall have a front or rear yard of less than
twenty (20) feet, except that where the front or rear property line
of an individual lot abuts open space as defined in Subsection a2
above, and which open space shall have a minimum dimension of
fifty (50) feet measured at right angles along the full length of the
abutting property line, then the required average and minimum
yard requirements set forth herein may be reduced by not more
than ten (10) feet for the abutting yard.
4. Side Yards. There shall be a single side yard of not less than ten
(10) feet required only for each individual lot occupied by a semiattached
dwelling unit.
c. Buildings.
1. Design.
(a) Each dwelling unit shall have not less than two (2) means of
ingress and egress.
(b) Each dwelling unit shall have not less than two (2) exposures.
(c) There shall be no more than eight (8) dwelling units in any
single group of dwelling units.
(d) No living space shall be permitted above the second story.
(e) No more than two (2) adjacent dwelling units may be
constructed without providing a front wall setback of not less
than four (4) feet.
2. Siting.
(a) Each group of dwelling units shall set back not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from all streets, roads or ways, whether
public or private. New buildings shall not project closer to the
street than the established setback, except where a prevailing
setback has been established on improved lots within two
hundred (200) feet of the subject lot. However, in no case need
the setback from any public street exceed fifty (50) feet.
(b) Each group of dwelling units shall set back not less than
twenty-five (25) feet from a zone district boundary line except
§ 30-73.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-73.5
1:851
that where abutting an R3 Zone the setback may be reduced to
ten (10) feet.
(c) Each group of dwelling units within a tract shall have a setback
not less than thirty (30) feet from any other group of dwelling
units within the same tract and shall set back not less than
fifteen (15) feet from the tract boundary line.
d. Garages.
1. Design. All garages shall conform architecturally to and be of
similar materials as the principal building in the development.
2. Location. Garages may be built into townhouses or may be
constructed on individual lots or on common areas, all subject to
the approval of the Planning Board.
3. Private Garages. Garages constructed on individual lots under this
article shall be subject to paragraphs d1 and d2 above and the
following:
(a) A garage need not set back from one (1) side line of an
individual lot and may be attached to a garage on an adjacent
individual lot.
(b) No garage which is not attached to or part of a townhouse on
the same individual lot shall be closer than twenty (20) feet to
the townhouse.
4. Common garages shall meet the setback requirements for parking
areas as set forth in § 30-59, except that the rear walls of such
garages may be situated as close as twenty-five (25) feet to a
peripheral public street subject to any greater existing setbacks
and approval by the Planning Board.
e. Ownership of Common Areas. Common areas of any tract utilized for a
townhouse development which are not accepted by the City shall be
deeded to a corporation, association, individual or individuals, or other
legal entity consisting of a majority of the property owners within the
development for their use, control, management and maintenance. Any
agreement providing for such ownership shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Attorney to ensure that adequate safeguards are
included guaranteeing the continuance of the agreement in perpetuity
and protecting the City from harm. In any event the agreement shall
give the City the right to perform maintenance and assess the cost to
the property owners in the event the property owners fail to maintain
the property in accordance with the agreement. In a case where the
common area is distributed as a planted buffer strip around the
perimeter of the tract, each individual unit owner shall be responsible
for maintaining that portion of the buffer strip which directly abuts the
townhouse lot upon which their unit is located.
§ 30-73.5 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-73.6
1:852
§ 30-73.6. Trailers, Dumpsters and Refuse Containers. [2000 Code
§ 30-73.6]
Trailers, as defined in § 30-15 of this chapter, shall not be permitted except
as specified below:
§ 30-73.7. Outdoor Storage. [2000 Code § 30-73.7]
No outdoor storage of merchandise, articles or materials shall be permitted
in any zone except as part of a permitted new car or used car dealership.
The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit customary
accessory uses in residential zones such as patios, picnic tables, outdoor
fireplaces and similar uses.
§ 30-73.8. Commercial Uses in Waterfront Redevelopment Area.
[2000 Code § 30-73.8]
In accordance with the goals and objectives of the Waterfront
Redevelopment Plan and Master Plan, as well as Subsection o. of § 30-3,
commercial uses shall be permitted within or accessory to a residential
building or complex in the Residential Zones, provided that they are on
parcels with frontage on Kingsley Street and/or the boardwalk and are
compatible with new residential development within that zone. Uses
incompatible with residential development would include uses which would
generate large volumes of traffic, noise, trash, offensive odors, or have
a. A trailer which is a customary accessory use incidental to a principally
permitted residential use in a R1, R1A, and R2 Zone.
b. A trailer which is an accessory use to a manufacturing or warehouse
use in the LI Zone.
c. Trailers, dumpsters and refuse containers, as defined in § 30-15 of this
chapter, used by contractors in conjunction with construction activity
on a site may be located on said site until the completion of such
construction activity, provided that any dumpster or refuse container
must be removed from a construction site within ten (10) working days
after a cessation of construction activity or upon the filling of the
container to a point level with the top of the container. No final
Certificate of Zoning Compliance shall be issued until all trailers,
dumpsters and refuse storage containers are removed from the site of a
completed construction or rehabilitation project. No contractor shall
cause or allow a dumpster or refuse storage container to be used for
general refuse and garbage disposal.
d. Trailers used in conjunction with the activities or operations of a public
agency.
e. No trailers otherwise prohibited by this subsection shall be permitted
by variance, except that the City Council may grant permission for the
temporary use of a trailer for living or working quarters in special
situations.
§ 30-73.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-73.8
1:853
extended hours of operation and loitering. Uses which are compatible with
residential development would include sit-down restaurants, delicatessens,
health clubs, hair salons, card or gift shops, and other businesses directly
supported by residential development. Commercial uses permitted within
or accessory to hotels, theme entertainment centers, arenas, or exhibition/
convention facilities in the P2 Zone shall be compatible with and related to
the principal structure and use.
§ 30-73.9. Proximity Requirements, Bars. [2000 Code § 30-73.9]
No bar, as defined in this chapter, shall be permitted within any land or
building located within one thousand (1,000) feet of an existing bar, as
measured between the nearest property lines. This section shall not be
applicable to properties in the WRA Zone.
§ 30-73.10. Minor Home Occupations. [2000 Code § 30-73.10]
A minor home occupation is any gainful occupation or profession engaged
in by an occupant of a dwelling unit which meets the following conditions
and requirements:
a. The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling and carried on
by the inhabitants hereof and no others.
b. The primary use shall be residential and the minor home occupation
shall be secondary to the residential use of the property. The
appearance of the structure shall not be altered, and the occupation
within the residence shall not be conducted in a manner that would
cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by use
of colors, materials, construction, lighting, signs, or the emission of
sounds or vibrations that carry beyond the premises.
c. No more than one (1) room of the dwelling may be used for the home
occupation.
d. There shall be no advertising, display, or other indications of a home
occupation on the premises, except as permitted in § 30-61.5e.
e. There shall not be conducted on the premises the business of selling
stock or merchandise, supplies, or products, provided that orders for
such goods may be taken at the premises by either mail order or
telephone. There shall be no direct pick up of such orders at the
residence. Parties for the purpose of selling merchandise or taking
orders shall not be held more than once a month.
f. There shall be no storage or display of goods visible from outside the
structure.
g. Use or storage of material or equipment not recognized as being part of
the normal practices of owning and maintaining a residence is not
permitted. In any event, there shall be no storage of hazardous or extra
hazardous materials as defined by NJDEPE and USEPA.
§ 30-73.8 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-73.10
1:854
§ 30-73.11. Upper Story Residences in Nonresidential Zoning
Districts. [2000 Code § 30-73.11]
Upper story residences in nonresidential business districts shall comply
with the following requirements:
§ 30-74. (RESERVED)
§ 30-75. ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
§ 30-75.1. Accessory Structures in All Zones. [2000 Code § 30-75.1;
Ord. No. 2017-18 Exh. A]
Accessory structures not attached to a principal structure may be erected
in a side or rear yard in accordance with the following regulations:
h. Deliveries from commercial suppliers shall not be made more than once
per week, and the deliveries shall not restrict traffic circulation.
a. There shall be not more than four (4) apartments on any commercial
property.
b. Access to all apartments shall be separate from any access to
nonresidential use in the same building.
c. Apartments shall not be permitted on the first floor of any building in a
nonresidential zoning district, and shall not be permitted on any floor in
a building which floor contains a nonresidential establishment.
d. Apartment shall not consist of more than three (3) bedrooms.
e. A commercial building that is enlarged to provide for one (1) or more
upper story residences shall be required to provide one (1) additional
off-street parking space per apartment.
f. The applicant shall submit a proposal for the handling and disposal of
solid waste, including the means by which differing recycling
requirements between commercial and residential uses will be
reconciled and shall comply with all applicable requirements regarding
same.
a. No accessory structures shall be located in the required side yard.
b. In the R1, R1A and R2 Zones, accessory structures may be erected in
the rear yard not closer than five (5) feet to the side lot line and three
(3) feet to the rear lot line. Accessory structures over fifteen (15) feet in
height shall be set back from side and rear lot lines a distance equal to
one-half (1/2) the height of the structure.
c. Except where otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter,
accessory structures in multifamily and nonresidential zones shall meet
the setback requirements of the principal building.
§ 30-73.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-75.1
1:855
§ 30-75.2. Personal Recreational Facilities in Residential Zones.
[2000 Code § 30-75.2]
Except for portable swimming pools less than three (3) feet in height and
less than ten (10) feet in length or diameter, the following regulations shall
apply to permanent and portable swimming pools, tennis courts and similar
personal recreation facilities:
§ 30-75.3. Ham Radio and Satellite Dish Antennas. [2000 Code
§ 30-75.3]
Freestanding radio operator antennas and satellite dish antennas may be
permitted as accessory uses in all zones subject to the following:
d. No portion of any accessory structure shall be used for living quarters
for people.
e. When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building it
shall be considered as a part of the principal building and it shall
comply in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable
to the principal structure.
f. Accessory structures shall be included in meeting the maximum
building coverage requirements in Schedule 1.
g. In the R3 Zone and in all nonresidential zones, the distance accessory
structures shall be located from any principal structure shall be
determined as part of site plan review.
h. For restaurants in the LI Zone with less than two (2) interior tables for
patrons, exterior tables are permitted as well as seasonal (no more than
six (6) months) sun protection, provided that the sun protection is
canvas or canvas like material and does not have advertising or
branding. [Ord. No. 2017-18 Exh. A]
a. The use shall be erected on the same lot as the principal structure and
shall require a Construction Permit.
b. The use may be erected in the side and/or rear yard and shall be not
less than five (5) feet from any lot line.
c. The use shall be appropriately screened and fenced so as not to
adversely affect adjoining properties.
d. Lighting which extends the hours of operation, other than in-pool lights,
shall be prohibited.
e. In the case of swimming pools, all measurements shall be from the pool
apron and provision for drainage shall be approved as part of the
Construction Permit.
§ 30-75.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-75.3
1:856
§ 30-76. REGULATIONS GOVERNING CONDITIONAL USE.
§ 30-76.1. Purpose. [2000 Code § 30-76.1]
It is recognized that certain uses, activities and structures, some of which
are necessary to serve the needs and conveniences of City residents, and
others which are provided for in the State or Constitutional Law, cannot
be specifically classified or regulated in a particular district without
consideration in each case to existing conditions and the impact upon the
neighborhood and surrounding area and upon the public health, morals,
safety and general welfare. Such uses, activities and structures as specified
a. In R1, R1A and R2 Residential Zones one (1) antenna may be permitted
to the rear of a detached one- or two-family structure upon issuance of
the Zoning Permit by the Zoning Officer.
b. In R3 and Nonresidential Zones, the location of any freestanding ham
radio or satellite dish antenna for multi-family residential buildings and
nonresidential buildings must be approved as a Minor Site Plan
application by the Planning Board. Antennas which are mounted on the
roof of a multifamily building or nonresidential building must be set
back five (5) feet from the edge of the roof and may be permitted
through the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the Zoning Officer.
c. In a R1, R1A or R2 Zone, the height of a freestanding ham radio
antenna must not exceed five (5) feet above the maximum height
limitation for a principal structure in the zone. The height of a
freestanding satellite dish must not exceed the maximum height
allowed for an accessory structure in the zone where it is to be erected.
The height of both ham radio antennas and satellite dish antennas shall
be measured from the finished grade at the base of the antenna to the
highest part of the antenna.
d. The setback of a freestanding antenna in a residential zone must
conform with the setback requirement of other accessory structures as
required in this section.
e. In any residential zone, one (1) ham radio or satellite dish antenna may
be erected on the roof of or otherwise attached to a residential building.
The height of any antenna which is attached to a principal building in a
residential zone shall not exceed a height equal to twenty-five (25%)
percent of the height of the principal building measured from the
average finished elevation of the base of the building to the highest part
of the building, regardless of roof type. Ham radio or satellite dish
antennas mounted on the roof of nonresidential structures in any zone
shall be exempt from the height limitations of this section.
f. The Zoning Officer or Planning Board may require landscaping, fencing
or other provisions to ensure that an antenna will not adversely impact
adjacent properties.
§ 30-75.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.1
1:857
elsewhere in this chapter as conditional uses shall be permitted only
through issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Board.
§ 30-76.2. General Standards. [2000 Code § 30-76.2]
Conditional Use approval may be granted after determination by the
Planning Board that the proposal is in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this section and this chapter, the specific standards of this
section, and after consideration of the following where applicable:
§ 30-76.3. Specific Standards. [2000 Code § 30-76.3; Ord. No. 2735]
a. The density of use and bulk of buildings.
b. Conservation of property values and impact on adjacent properties as
compared to uses and structures permitted as a matter of right.
c. Health, safety and well being of residents or workers on adjacent
properties and in the surrounding neighborhood.
d. Traffic volume, flow and control with reference to pedestrian and
vehicular safety and convenience and access in case of catastrophe and
emergency.
e. Adequacy of yards and open space, screening and buffering.
f. Existing land use in the area.
g. Compliance with this chapter and the Master Plan of the City.
a. (Reserved) [Superseded by Ord. No. 2607]
b. Residential Health Care Facilities. Residential health care facilities as
defined in this chapter may be permitted by conditional use permit in
zoning districts where specified in § 30-69, provided the following
standards and conditions are complied with:
1. A statement setting forth full particulars on the operations of the
structure or use is filed in triplicate by the applicant. This
statement shall contain a sworn affidavit that no developmentally
disabled person, outpatient from a mental institution, or any person
who has been committed after having been found not guilty of a
criminal charge, shall reside or be housed at the proposed facility.
2. The residential health care facility proposes to be duly licensed
under the New Jersey "Hospital Licensing Act" or the "Health Care
Facilities Planning Act" (P.L. 1971, c. 136; c. 26:2H-1 et seq.).
3. There must be one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area per
bedroom unit which must include one hundred (100) square feet of
recreation area per bedroom unit to be located with due concern
for the safety and convenience of the residents for whose use it is
intended. The site plan shall indicate the manner of development,
§ 30-76.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-76.3
1:858
including the location of specific facilities such as benches,
walkways and landscaping. Interior recreational areas may be
included in the calculation of required recreational area.
4. There must be front, rear and side yards provided as follows:
Front yard — twenty (20) feet per story; thirty (30) feet min., fifty
(50) feet max.
Rear yard — twenty (20) feet per story; thirty (30) feet min., fifty
(50) feet max.
Side yards — thirty (30) feet.
5. The ratio of gross floor area to lot area, or floor area ratio (F.A.R.)
shall not exceed 0.8.
6. The height of any structure must not exceed three (3) stories above
the average elevation of the finished grade adjacent to its exterior
walls.
7. Off-street parking facilities must be provided on the premises
behind the setback of not less than one (1) parking space per four
(4) beds plus one (1) parking space per two (2) employees in the
largest working shift.
8. The proposed use shall in no way be apparently detrimental to
surrounding property values, and the structure or uses proposed
will further the general welfare of the City.
9. There must not be another residential health care facility or
rooming/boarding house within one thousand five hundred (1,500)
feet of the proposed site.
c. Community Residences for the Developmentally Disabled, for Victims of
Domestic Violence, for Persons with Head Injuries, or for the Terminally
Ill. Community residences for the developmentally disabled, for victims
of domestic violence, for persons with head injuries, or for the
terminally ill (hereinafter, "community residences"), as defined by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, shall be a permitted use in all residential districts
of a municipality and the requirements for such residences shall be the
same as for single family dwelling units within such district.
d. Adult Bookstores and Establishments of Adult Entertainment. The
Mayor and Council recognize the rights inherent in the U.S.
Constitution which guarantee freedom of expression, as well as the
position of the courts in protecting that freedom by invalidating any
attempt by local ordinance to restrict particular uses based upon their
content. However, the Mayor and Council also recognize their duty to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Asbury Park
from the adverse impact that a concentration of certain uses have been
shown to exert on the property values of adjoining and proximate
residential and commercial property. Of particular concern is the
§ 30-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.3
1:859
potential concentration of adult bookstores and establishments that
provide adult entertainment, which are distinguished from
conventional bookstores and entertainment establishments by the fact
that they are required to exclude access to minors by virtue of age
under the pornography statutes of the State of New Jersey.
In promulgating the conditions for permitting adult restricted
establishments listed below, the Mayor and Council considered the
experience of recent years where two (2) or more adult establishments
had located within a three (3) block area of the beachfront district
between Fourth Avenue and Cookman Avenue near Kingsley Street and
contributed to the economic decline of the beachfront by discouraging
families with children from patronizing the beach and conventional
commercial establishments in the area. This adverse effect was
recognized by the Mayor and Council in 1984, when the area described
above was included within a larger area of the beachfront declared
blighted and for which a redevelopment plan is now in effect.
In order to control the location and prevent the concentration of adult
uses and thereby protect the public welfare and support the progress
of redevelopment, adult bookstores and establishments of adult
entertainment, as defined in § 30-15, will be permitted in commercial
zones within the City where conventional bookstores and entertainment
establishments are also permitted uses, except that a Conditional Use
Permit shall first be issued by the Planning Board for such adult
bookstore or establishment or adult entertainment. The Planning Board
may issue a Conditional Use Permit only after an applicant has
demonstrated compliance with the following standards and conditions:
1. The application shall include a complete statement setting forth all
the particulars of the structure and the proposed use thereof.
2. Based upon past experience as described in this section and an
analysis of block dimensions typical of commercial zones within the
City by the Office of Planning and Zoning, as well as studies of "skid
row" uses performed in other urban areas such as Detroit,
Michigan, and elsewhere, the Mayor and Council has determined
that a minimum distance equal to the greater of two (2) full City
blocks or one thousand (1,000) feet will be required between a
proposed adult bookstore or establishment of adult entertainment
and any existing adult bookstore or establishment of adult
entertainment to achieve adequate dispersion of adult uses. For
purposes of measurement, the required distance of separation shall
be measured between the nearest property lines and along public
streets so that City Tax Maps may be used.
3. Because the City contains residential neighborhoods in close
proximity to commercial areas wherein adult uses might be
permitted, and because it is determined to be in the public interest
to provide adequate separation between such residential
neighborhoods, with their attendant support uses such as schools
§ 30-76.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-76.3
1:860
and houses of worship, and the subject adult uses, the Mayor
and Council has determined that a minimum distance equal to the
greater of two (2) full City blocks or one thousand (1,000) feet will
be required between a proposed adult bookstore or establishment
of adult entertainment and the property line of any land in any
residential zone, or any public, private or parochial school, library,
park, playground, recreational facility or house of worship.
4. Advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall not
be shown or exhibited so as to be visible to the public from
pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other areas, public or
semipublic. All building openings, entries, windows, etc., for adult
uses shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to
prevent a view into the interior from any public or semipublic area.
5. One (1) identification sign bearing the name of the adult bookstore
or establishment of adult entertainment, the hours of business and
customer age restrictions is permitted in accordance with § 30-61.
6. Waiver provisions:
(a) The provisions of this section which provide for the separation
of adult uses from residential zones, schools, etc., and the
dispersion of adult uses within commercial zones, may be
waived by the Planning Board subject to the submission by the
applicant of a petition containing the signatures of fifty-one
(51%) percent of the property owners within the affected area,
as herein described, stating that they do not object to the
proposed adult use.
(b) The petition shall be attached to a signed and notarized
affidavit attesting to the validity of the signatures on the
petition. The petition shall be submitted to the Tax Assessor for
verification that the signatures correspond to the correct
property owners as listed in the Tax Records of the City and
that they represent fifty-one (51%) percent or more of the total
property owners within the affected area as described herein.
e. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2465 § 26]
f. Philanthropic or Eleemosynary Uses. Fraternal, social, civic,
recreational, or philanthropic or eleemosynary uses may be permitted
in the LI zones and permitted by Conditional Use Permit in the B1 Zone,
provided that no lodging or boarding facilities are included. A
Conditional Use Permit may be granted by the Planning Board provided
the following conditions are complied with:
1. A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation of the
structure or use is filed with the Planning Board by the applicant in
triplicate.
§ 30-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.3
1:861
2. It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the proposed use is a
bona fide nonprofit organization.
3. It is ascertained by the Planning Board that the proposed location
is appropriate for the proposed use and the use will not detract
from the area or adversely affect the value of adjacent properties.
4. The proposed use and/or structure shall conform to the minimum
area and yard requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located, except that these requirements may be increased at the
discretion of the Planning Board.
g. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2465 § 26]
h. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2465 § 26]
i. Motor Vehicle Service Stations. Motor vehicle service stations, as
defined in this chapter, may be permitted in the LI Zone upon receipt of
a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Board. The Planning Board
may issue a Conditional Use Permit only after the following standards
and conditions are complied with:
1. A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation of the
structure or use is filed with the Planning Board by the applicant in
triplicate. The statement shall include a sworn affidavit that the
premises shall not be used for auto repair as defined in this chapter.
2. No entrance or exit may be located within two hundred (200) feet
along the same side of the street of any school, public playground,
church, hospital, public building or institution, except where such
property is in another block or on another street which the lot in
question does not abut.
3. There must be an oil draining pit or visible appliance for any
purpose other than filling pumps located within twenty (20) feet of
any street line or within fifty (50) feet of any residential district
except where such appliance or pit is within a building. Gasoline
pumps may be located no closer than fifteen (15) feet from the
street line.
4. No motor vehicle service station shall be located within one
thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an existing motor vehicle
service station, measured from the nearest lot lines.
5. The premises must not be used for the storage of junk motor
vehicles incapable of normal operation. The storage of vehicles
other than those awaiting servicing is not permitted.
6. The premises must not be used for the leasing, rental, or sale of
motor vehicles unless such a use has been applied for and granted
as part of the Conditional Use Permit. Adequate on-site parking
must be provided to accommodate such a use.
§ 30-76.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-76.3
1:862
7. Off-street parking shall be provided as required in § 30-59.
8. Planted islands must be provided to control ingress and egress as
well as circulation through the site. A planted buffer strip of no less
than five (5) feet in width shall be provided around the perimeter of
the property. A buffer of no less than ten (10) feet in width must be
provided along any property line that abuts a residence zone. The
treatment of all buffers shall be subject to the approval of the
Planning Board.
9. The proposed use shall in no way be apparently detrimental to
surrounding property values, and the structures or uses proposed
will further the general welfare of the City.
j. Motor Vehicle Repair Garages. Motor vehicle repair garages, as defined
in this chapter, may be permitted in the LI Zone upon receipt of a
Conditional Use Permit from the Planning Board. The Planning Board
shall not issue a Conditional Use Permit unless the following conditions
are complied with:
1. A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation of the
structure or use is filed with the Planning Board by the applicant in
triplicate.
2. No motor vehicle repair garage may be located within one hundred
(100) feet of an existing residence, school, church, or library,
measured from the nearest property line.
3. No motor vehicle repair garage may be located within one
thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an existing motor vehicle
repair garage, measured from the nearest property line.
4. Off-street parking must be provided as required in § 30-59.
5. A planted buffer strip no less than five (5) feet in width must be
provided around the perimeter of the property. A planted buffer
strip of no less than ten (10) feet in width shall be provided along
any property line which abuts a residence zone. The treatment of
all buffer strips shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Board.
6. The proposed use shall in no way be detrimental to surrounding
property values, and the structures or uses proposed will further
the general welfare of the City.
7. The premises must not be used for the storage of unregistered or
inoperable motor vehicles unless they are awaiting servicing. Any
vehicle left unserviced for thirty (30) days or more shall be
considered in storage.
k. Used Car Sales/Leasing. A retail used car dealership may be permitted
in an LI Zone upon receipt of a Conditional Use Permit from the
Planning Board. The Planning Board may issue a Conditional Use
§ 30-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.3
1:863
Permit provided the following standards and conditions are complied
with:
1. A statement setting forth the particulars of the proposed use and
containing a sworn affidavit that no engine or auto repair work will
be done on the premises must be filed in triplicate with the
Planning Board. No used car wholesaling will be permitted.
2. A retail used car dealership must not be located within two
thousand (2,000) feet of an existing used car dealership, measured
from the nearest property line.
3. The site plan must indicate the parking stalls used for displaying
motor vehicles as well as those designated for customers and
employees. The total number of vehicles on the premises at any one
(1) time must not exceed the total number of display spaces so
indicated. All display and parking spaces must be marked with
painted lines on a properly paved asphalt surface.
4. Off-street parking for customers and employees must be provided
equal to one (1) parking space per ten (10) display spaces plus one
(1) parking space per two (2) employees to be employed at any one
(1) time.
5. A planted buffer strip no less than five (5) feet in width must be
provided around the perimeter of the property. A planted buffer
strip of no less than ten (10) feet in width must be provided along
any property line that abuts a residence, school, church, or a
residential zone. The treatment of all buffers shall be subject to the
approval of the Planning Board.
6. Signs shall conform to § 30-61.
7. The proposed use shall in no way be apparently detrimental to
surrounding property values, and the structure or uses proposed
will further the general welfare.
l. Child Day Care Centers. Recognizing the growing need for child day
care facilities created by an economic climate that has caused the need
for both parents to become wage earners, and also recognizing the
incidental nature of such a use in a residential neighborhood, child day
care centers may be permitted in any residence zone upon receipt of a
Conditional Use Permit from the Planning Board. The Planning Board
may issue a Conditional Use Permit provided the following standards
and conditions are complied with:
1. A statement setting forth the full particulars on the operation of the
structure or intended use shall be filed in triplicate with the
Planning Board.
§ 30-76.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-76.3
1:864
2. The operator of the facility must meet any and all qualifications and
possess any license or certification required by the State of New
Jersey for the operation of a child day care facility.
3. There must be one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area per
child. Suitable recreation area must be provided in the amount of
one hundred (100) square feet per child. Outdoor recreation areas
shall be enclosed by a fence of no less than four (4) feet in height.
4. Off-street parking must be provided equal to five (5) parking spaces
plus one (1) parking space per worker employed or to be employed
at any one (1) time. A planted buffer of no less than five (5) feet in
width shall be provided between a surface parking area and
adjacent properties. Treatment of the buffer strip shall be subject
to the approval of the Planning Board.
5. In determining the appropriateness of a proposed site for a child
day care center, the Planning Board will consider the volume of
traffic on adjacent streets. The Board may also require that a traffic
study be submitted to document the estimated traffic to be
generated by the proposed use.
6. The structure shall conform to the most restrictive setback
requirements of the zoning district in which it will be located.
7. A child day care center may not be located within a two-family or
multifamily dwelling unless appropriate accommodations are
provided to prevent any adverse impact to the residents of such
dwellings.
8. The proposed use shall in no way be apparently detrimental to
surrounding property values, and the structure or use will further
the general welfare of the City.
m. (Reserved)
n. Planned Developments. It is recognized that there is a need in Asbury
Park for standards encouraging and promoting flexibility and economy
in layout and design through the use of planned developments. To
address that need, planned developments, appropriate to the zone or
zones in which they are proposed, may be permitted by issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Board. The Board may issue a
Conditional Use Permit provided the following standards and conditions
are complied with:
1. The minimum tract area must be three (3) acres.
2. The Planning Board may authorize a greater density or intensity of
land use in one (1) section or sections than in others provided the
overall development density shall not exceed that which is
permitted in the zoning district where the tract is located. In the
event that the tract lies in more than one (1) zone, the overall
§ 30-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.3
1:865
density must not exceed that which would result if the area of the
tract in each zone were developed individually according to the
specified densities of each zone.
3. A planned unit residential development is encouraged to include a
variety of housing types, arranged in residential clusters linked by
common open areas with pedestrian walkways separated from
roads and parking areas. Residential clusters must be designed
wherever possible, so that the buildings are oriented for maximum
solar access. Buildings shall be energy efficient and designed for
maximum passive solar gain.
4. A planned unit residential development may include appropriate
commercial uses to service the needs of the residents, subject to
approval by the Board.
5. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of §
30-59.
6. Not less than thirty (30%) percent of the total tract area shall be
dedicated for green common open space.
7. Ownership of Common Areas. Common areas of any tract utilized
for planned development which are not accepted by the City for
public use and maintenance, shall be deeded to the corporation,
association, individual or individuals, or other legal entity
consisting of a majority of the property owners within the
development for their use, control, management and maintenance.
Any agreement providing for such ownership shall be reviewed and
approved by the City Attorney to ensure that adequate safeguards
are included guaranteeing the continuance of the agreement in
perpetuity and protecting the City from harm. In any event the
agreement shall give the City the right to perform maintenance and
assess the cost to the property owners in the event the property
owners fail to maintain the property in accordance with the
agreement.
8. A planned development may be constructed in phases over a period
of years provided that an approval by Planning Board of a greater
concentration of density or intensity of land use for any section to
be developed be offset by a smaller concentration in any completed
prior stage or by appropriate reservation of common open space on
the remaining land by grant of easement or by covenant in favor of
the City; further provided that such reservation shall, as far as
practicable, defer the precise location of common open space until
an application for final approval is filed, so that flexibility of
development can be maintained.
9. The height and bulk of uses and structures in a planned
development shall conform to those standards specified for like
uses and structures otherwise permitted in this chapter for the
§ 30-76.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-76.3
1:866
zoning district in which the proposed site is located. Uses and
structures shall be designed and arranged to complement land
uses adjacent to the site and adequate landscaped buffers shall be
provided, subject to the approval of the Board.
10. Semi-detached one-family dwelling clusters in a R1A Zone or in
planned development.
(a) Except as part of the townhouse development, the minimum lot
width and area shall be the same as required for a one-family
detached dwelling.
(b) Such uses shall be constructed in attached pairs
simultaneously on contiguous lots, except when constructed as
a twin on a lot of at least seventy-five (75) feet in width and
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet in area.
(c) The minimum remaining side yard shall be not less than thirty
(30%) percent of the lot width.
(d) Twin houses shall have side yards of ten (10) feet or more.
(e) Semi-detached structures may be attached by garages,
covered porches or patios, or common roof areas.
11. Prior to the approval of a planned development, the Planning Board
shall find the following facts and conclusions:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to § 52c
(C. 40:55D-65c.) of the Municipal Land Use Law.
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space are reliable, and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
(c) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation
and visual enjoyment are adequate.
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is
proposed to be established.
(e) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development are
adequate.
§ 30-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.3
1:867
o. Nightclubs, Teen Clubs. Nightclubs and teen clubs may be permitted
where indicated in § 30-70 by issuance of a Conditional Use Permit from
the Planning Board. The Planning Board may issue a Conditional Use
Permit provided the following standards and conditions are complied
with:
1. Adjacent parking must be provided as specified in § 30-59 for
restaurants, bars and nightclubs.
2. Teen clubs shall mean nightclubs which do not serve alcoholic
beverages and which permit the patronage of persons under the
age of twenty (20). The hours of operation of teen clubs shall be
limited so that no such club shall be open between the hours of 1:00
a.m. and 12 noon on any given day. No teen club shall be open when
any City school is in session.
3. All premises used as teen clubs or nightclubs must be appropriately
fenced and landscaped to buffer such activity from nearby
residences.
4. No noise emanating from a teen club or nightclub will be permitted
which is audible at the nearest property line.
5. Operators of teen clubs shall be responsible for the behavior of
their patrons while they are on the premises. Such responsibility
will include appropriate supervision both inside the club and in the
parking areas.
p. Churches, Houses of Worship and Funeral Homes. Churches, houses of
worship and funeral homes, as defined in this chapter may be permitted
by Conditional Use Permit from the Planning Board in zones as
provided in Sections 30-69 and 30-70. The Planning Board may issue a
Conditional Use Permit provided the following standards and conditions
are complied with:
1. A written statement setting forth the full particulars of the intended
use must be filed in triplicate with the Planning Board. Such
statement must include the estimated seating capacity, worship
schedule, if applicable, and a description of activities likely to occur
on the premises. The statement is required in order for the
Planning Board to assess the impact, if any, of the proposed use on
the surrounding area due to traffic, noise, etc.
2. In order to prevent excess parking on adjacent streets, there must
be off-street parking provided equal to one (1) parking space per
four (4) seats for churches and houses of worship. Funeral homes
shall conform to the parking requirements of Subsection o of §
30-59.5. All other provisions of § 30-59 shall apply with respect to
the layout and design of such off-street parking areas.
3. In order to insure adequate area for off-street parking and
associated buffers, the minimum lot size must be twelve thousand
§ 30-76.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-76.3
1:868
five hundred (12,500) square feet and the minimum lot width must
be one hundred (100) feet.
4. The Planning Board may require planted buffers or other screening
for the purpose of mitigating any adverse effect of light or noise
generated in connection with the use of the property.
5. All buildings and structures shall comply with the yard
requirements of the zone within which they are located, except that
church buildings may be constructed to a height not exceeding two
and one-half (2.5) stories and fifty (50) feet, not including steeples,
cupolas, bell towers, or other such architectural features.
q. Planned Arena Development in the Waterfront Redevelopment Area. It
is anticipated that a need may arise within the Waterfront
Redevelopment Area between the beachfront and the Central Business
District for a major arena facility and that such a facility may require
related facilities for convention use such as exhibition facilities. While
the underlying zoning in the area between the beachfront and the
Central Business District is residential, a Planned Arena Development
will be permitted within an Arena Overlay District through the issuance
of a Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Board, subject to
conformance with the following conditions:
1. The Arena Overlay District shall be the area south of Asbury
Avenue which is currently residential and which borders on the B1
(Central Business District) Zone to the west and the B2 (Main
Street Commercial) Zone to the east. The Overlay District shall
consist of Block 129.01; Block 129.02; Block 142; Block 131; Block
128; Block 118, Lots 1, 2, 9 and 10.
2. The site for the Planned Arena Development shall consist of all of
the properties within the Arena Overlay District.
3. The arena site may include properties on both sides of a public
street or public open space, but development plans must indicate
improvements to be installed to provide for safe vehicular and
pedestrian circulation through the complex.
4. The arena building and its attendant parking facilities must be
confined to the north side of Cookman Avenue. Related facilities,
such as freestanding special exhibition pavilions and outdoor
theaters, may be located south of Cookman Avenue but must not
cover more than thirty-five (35%) percent of the total portion of the
site devoted to those structures. Freestanding structures devoted
to related facilities must not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height.
5. The arena building must not exceed a FAR of 3.0 exclusive of floor
area devoted to structured parking.
§ 30-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.3
1:869
6. Parking for a Planned Arena Development, inclusive of related
facilities such as exhibition pavilions, shall be required equal to one
(1) parking space per five (5) seats, based on maximum seating
capacity. Parking may be provided on-site and/or off-site in
accordance with subsections 30-59.8, 30-59.9 and 30-59.10, except
that no on-site parking shall be located south of Cookman Avenue.
7. The area of the site located south of Cookman Avenue must be
landscaped in a manner designed to create an aesthetic and
functional relationship with the proposed Wesley Lake Waterfront
Park and Bikeway. Vehicular access to the interior of this area must
be restricted to service and emergency vehicles only so that the
pavilions containing the related uses become architectural
elements within a pedestrian oriented, park-like setting.
8. Pedestrian walkways must be connected to adjacent public
sidewalks and public spaces so as to facilitate convenient public
access through and around the site.
9. Arena and residential uses shall not be combined within the Arena
Overlay District.
r. (Reserved) [Superseded by Ord. No. 2735]
s. Artist Loft Apartments in Commercial Buildings. The following
conditional use regulations shall apply to artist loft apartments in
commercial buildings within the B1 (CBD) Zone. Artist loft apartments
in commercial buildings shall be permitted only upon the issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit by the Planning Board, or, if a variance of a
condition solely applicable to the conditional use is required, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. Application for a Conditional Use Permit
shall address the conditions as specified in other regulations of this
chapter in addition to the following:
1. The apartment must be located above the street level floor of the
commercial building.
2. The apartment must have a separate entrance at street level and
the entrance door thereto must be self-closing and locking.
3. An affidavit executed by the owner of the premises proposed for an
artist loft apartment, certifying to the Board that the occupancy of
the apartment during the term of its use shall require at least one
(1) person, who shall be engaged in the full time pursuit of the fine
arts (e.g., painting, sculpture, music, dance, theater, photography)
or a recognized design profession (i.e., architecture, landscape
architecture, interior design, theatrical set design, graphic design).
4. A Certificate of Zoning Compliance must be issued prior to
occupancy and the artist or designer must meet the following
standards:
§ 30-76.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-76.3
1:870
(a) Lofts occupied by artists. Subsequent to the issuance of a
Conditional Use Permit and Certificate of Zoning Compliance
for an artist loft apartment, the owner shall submit, by the last
day of each year, an affidavit attesting to the participation of
the artist in one (1) of the events, if any, designated by
resolution of the Mayor and Council as being sponsored or
cosponsored by the City. Such affidavit shall state the dates
and manner in which art work or artistic performances were
made available to the public.
(b) Lofts occupied by designers. Designers must possess:
(1) A bachelor's degree in architecture, landscape
architecture, interior design or related design profession;
or
(2) One (1) year of apprenticeship with a licensed design
professional; or
(3) Proof of membership in a recognized national professional
association; or
(4) A professional license issued by the appropriate
administrative agency of the State of New Jersey.
5. Artist loft apartments located in commercial buildings shall contain
a segregated work area of at least three hundred (300) square feet.
The total size of the apartment, including the work area, shall not
be less than nine hundred (900) square feet. The apartment may be
arranged in a "great room" or studio format and contain open
mezzanine or "loft" levels, provided that compliance with all
Health, Fire and Housing Codes is maintained.
6. Occupancy of an artist loft apartment shall be limited to one (1)
person per three hundred (300) square feet of floor area, exclusive
of the work area.
7. A commercial building which is enlarged to provide for one (1) or
more artist loft apartments shall be required to provide one (1)
additional off-street parking space per apartment.
8. The applicant shall submit a proposal for the handling and disposal
of solid waste, including the means by which differing recycling
requirements between commercial and residential uses will be
reconciled and shall comply with all applicable requirements
regarding same.
t. Accessory Apartments in Commercial Buildings. The following
conditional use regulations shall apply to accessory apartments in
commercial buildings where indicated as a conditional use within this
chapter. Accessory apartments in commercial buildings shall be
permitted only upon the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit by the
§ 30-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.3
1:871
Planning Board, or, if a variance of a condition solely related to the
conditional use is required, the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Application for a Conditional Use Permit shall address the conditions
as specified in other regulations of this chapter in addition to the
following:
1. The accessory apartment must be located above the street level
floor of the commercial building.
2. The apartment may have a separate entrance at street level and the
entrance door thereto must be self-closing and locking.
3. An affidavit executed by the owner of the premises proposed for an
upper level accessory apartment, certifying to the Board that the
occupancy of the apartment during the term of its use shall be
restricted to at least one (1) person who is either an owner of the
premises or an owner or employee of a business located on the
street level of the building that will contain the apartment.
Subsequent to the issuance of the initial Certificate of Zoning
Compliance for the accessory apartment, the owner shall submit,
each year, an affidavit certifying compliance with this section. The
affidavit shall be submitted at the time of the renewal of the
mercantile license for the principal commercial use to which the
apartment is an accessory. Upon a change in ownership of the
building, the residential use of the apartment shall be terminated
unless the new owner submits an affidavit to the Zoning Officer
certifying that the residential use continues to conform to the
above restrictions.
4. There shall be not more than one (1) apartment that is accessory to
any one (1) commercial space.
5. Accessory apartments located in commercial buildings shall
conform to the minimum size requirements of § 30-73.4.
6. A commercial building which is enlarged to provide for one (1) or
more accessory apartments shall be required to meet the parking
requirement for the commercial use plus off-street parking space
for each accessory apartment until therein, except that fifty (50%)
percent of the total residential parking requirement may be met
through the provision of parking spaces for commercial uses within
the same building which occur primarily on weekdays and which
close by 6:00 p.m.
7. The applicant shall submit a proposal for the handling and disposal
of solid waste, including the means by which differing recycling
requirements between the commercial and residential uses will be
reconciled and shall comply with all applicable requirements
regarding same.
u. Helistops. The following conditional use regulations shall apply to
helistops where permitted as a Conditional Use within this chapter.
§ 30-76.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-76.3
1:872
Helistops shall be permitted only upon the issuance of a Conditional
Use Permit by the Planning Board, or, if a variance of a condition is
required, the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Application for a Conditional
Use Permit shall address the conditions as specified in other
regulations of this chapter in addition to the following:
1. A statement detailing the proposed use of the site including a
description of the proposed level of activity measured in flights per
hour or per day, hours of operation, etc.
2. A plan, drawn to scale, depicting the layout of the site, inclusive of
the following:
(a) Site security to include a fence of not less than four (4) feet in
height on three (3) sides and/or security personnel, employed
by the applicant, to supervise takeoffs and landings for safety
purposes, subject to the approval of the New Jersey Office of
Aviation (NJOA).
(b) Marking indicators at each corner of the landing area pursuant
to minimum requirements of the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and New Jersey Office of Aviation (NJOA).
(c) Wind sock or equivalent.
(d) Passenger shelters and walkways, if any.
3. The helistop shall not include the fueling or maintenance of
helicopters and helicopters shall not be parked at the helistop
except when loading or discharging passengers.
4. The hours of operation of a helistop within a R5 (High Density
Multi-family Residential) Zone shall not include flights prior to 6:00
a.m. or after 10:00 p.m., unless under special circumstances
approved by the Planning Board.
5. Any passenger shelters approved by the Planning Board as part of
the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit shall be not higher than
fifteen (15) feet and shall be equipped with a trash receptacle
cluster for regular and recyclable waste. No advertising signage
shall be permitted on the shelter or trash receptacle cluster.
6. The operation of the helistop shall make reasonable
accommodations, where possible, for the use of public
transportation and "kiss and ride" pick-up/drop-off.
7. The Conditional Use Permit issued for a helistop under this section
shall be subject to a favorable determination by the NJOA after
impact tests and public hearings conducted during the nine (9)
month period of that agency's Temporary Permit.
v. Rooming and Boarding Houses.
§ 30-76.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-76.3
1:873
§ 30-77. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES.
§ 30-77.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.1]
The intent of this section is to comply with all applicable regulations of
the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and to provide regulation for
the establishment and/or expansion of personal wireless services within
the City of Asbury Park while protecting neighborhoods and minimizing
the adverse visual and operational effects of personal wireless service
facilities through careful design, siting and screening. More specifically, this
regulation has been developed in order to:
1. Rooming and boarding houses shall contain a maximum of one
hundred (100) beds.
2. A property containing a rooming or boarding house shall be located
at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any property used for a
rooming or boarding house.
a. Provide for full wireless communications services within the City while
at the same time minimizing the total number of personal wireless
service facilities throughout the City.
b. Enhance the ability of the providers of personal wireless services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
c. Encourage the utilization of existing structures, such as tall buildings,
bell towers and municipal structures, to mount and install personal
wireless telecommunications antennas and equipment.
d. Minimize the location of facilities in visually sensitive areas.
e. Encourage users of personal wireless service sites to configure them in
a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the personal wireless
service facility through careful design, siting, screening and innovative
camouflaging techniques.
f. Protect historic and residential areas from potential adverse impacts of
personal wireless service facilities and equipment.
g. To encourage as many antennas as possible, of as many of the wireless
communications carriers as possible, to be collocated on the fewest
number of existing structures within the City, while complying with the
provisions of this article.
In furtherance of these goals, the City of Asbury Park shall give due
consideration to the City Master Plan, zoning map, existing land uses
and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location
of personal wireless service facilities.
§ 30-76.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-77.2
1:874
§ 30-77.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.2]
ANTENNA — shall mean a device used to receive or transmit
electromagnetic waves. Examples include but are not limited to whip
antennas, panel antennas and dish antennas.
COLLOCATION — shall mean use of a personal wireless service facility or
a common site by two or more wireless license holders or by one wireless
license holder for more than one type of communications technology and/
or placement of a personal wireless service facility on a structure owned or
operated by a utility or other public entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE — shall mean any personal wireless
services as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 which
includes FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services,
including cellular, personal communications services, specialized mobile
radio, enhanced specialized mobile radio, paging and similar services that
currently exist or that may in the future be developed. It does not include
any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a federally licensed
amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only
antennas, nor does it include noncellular telephone service.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — shall mean a facility for the
provision of wireless communications services, including, but not limited to
telecommunications antennas and equipment cabinets.
PICOCELLS — shall mean a self-contained wireless communications device
designed to provide cellular telephone coverage to a limited, targeted and
small area and are used to add coverage or capacity to an existing wireless
service provider's network where it is not feasible to build a large personal
wireless service facility.
PUBLIC VIEW — shall mean visible from a public thoroughfare, bicycle
path, boardwalk, public lands, or public buildings and the horizontal view
from any contiguous or adjacent structure or building.
§ 30-77.3. Comprehensive Plan. [Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.3]
a. In order to effectuate the purposes, objectives and goals of this section,
any applicant to the City must prove by substantial evidence that a bona
fide need exists for the facility and that no reasonable combination of
locations, techniques or technologies will obviate the need for the
proposed facility. Therefore, the applicant shall provide an overall
comprehensive plan indicating how it intends to provide full service
throughout the City and, to the greatest extent reasonably possible,
shall indicate how its plan specifically relates to and is coordinated with
the needs of all other providers of wireless communications services
within and around the City.
b. More specifically, the overall comprehensive plan shall indicate the
following:
§ 30-77.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-77.3
1:875
§ 30-77.4. Location Priorities. [Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.4]
1. The mapped location and written description of all existing
antennas and existing and approved supporting structures within
the City controlled by the applicant;
2. How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s) specifically
addresses the suitability or unsuitability of structures to be utilized
to provide the intended wireless communication;
3. How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s) specifically
addresses the anticipated need for additional antennas and
supporting structures within and near the City by the applicant and
by other providers of wireless communications within the City;
4. How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s) specifically
addresses the objective of collocating the antennas of many
different providers of wireless communications services on a single
site, while complying with the provisions of this article;
5. How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s) specifically
addresses the overall objective of providing full wireless
communications services within the City while, at the same time,
limiting the number of personal wireless service facilities to the
fewest possible.
a. The locations for siting personal wireless service facilities are listed
below, in order of preference:
1. Buildings with existing personal wireless service facilities, located
within a commercial or mixed-use zone district in the City of Asbury
Park, including commercial or mixed-use areas of a duly adopted
redevelopment plan, provided that the building shall be no less
than four (4) stories and forty-five (45) feet in height as measured
to the top of the parapet wall.
2. Buildings with existing personal wireless service facilities located
within a residential zone district in the City of Asbury Park,
including residential areas of a duly adopted redevelopment plan,
provided that the building shall be no less than four (4) stories and
forty-five (45) feet in height as measure to the top of the parapet
wall.
3. Buildings without existing personal wireless service facilities,
located within a commercial or mixed-use zone district in the City
of Asbury Park, including commercial or mixed-use areas of a duly
adopted redevelopment plan, provided that the building shall be no
less than four (4) stories and forty-five (45) feet in height as
measured to the top of the parapet wall.
4. Buildings without existing personal wireless service facilities,
located within a residential zone district in the City of Asbury Park,
§ 30-77.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-77.4
1:876
§ 30-77.5. Personal Wireless Service Facilities a Conditional Use.
[Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.5]
The installation and operation of personal wireless service facilities shall be
a conditional use in all zones, subject to the following condition:
§ 30-77.6. Design Criteria. [Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.6]
All applications for personal wireless service facilities shall adhere to the
following design criteria:
§ 30-77.7. Radio Frequency Emissions. [Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.7]
Applicants shall provide current FCC information concerning personal
wireless service facility and radio frequency (RF) emission standards to
the Board. Upon documentation by a qualified expert, proposed wireless
communications antenna projects which meet the current FCC standards
shall not be conditioned or denied on the bases of RF impact.
§ 30-77.8. Removal of Abandoned Personal Wireless Service
Facilities. [Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.8]
Any personal wireless service facility that has been abandoned shall be
removed within ninety (90) days of notice from the Zoning Officer that the
personal wireless service facility has been abandoned.
including residential areas of a duly adopted redevelopment plan,
provided that the building shall be no less than four (4) stories and
forty-five (45) feet in height as measured to the top of the parapet
wall
1. Personal wireless service facilities shall be placed or mounted on an
existing building.
a. Antennas should be affixed to the existing building structure and the
height thereof shall not exceed the top of the parapet wall, penthouse,
stair tower or chimney to which it is affixed;
b. The entire facility including the antennas and equipment boxes or
cabinets shall be clustered where practical;
c. All personal wireless service facilities equipment including the
antennas and equipment boxes or cabinets must be painted or finished
to minimize their visual impact. Colors chosen shall match those on the
existing building;
d. All of the equipment boxes or cabinets shall be screened from the public
view via use of continuous screening walls and/or parapets;
e. Equipment boxes or cabinets or any structure containing equipment
necessary for the use of the facility shall not exceed more than two
hundred (200) square feet in rooftop area.
§ 30-77.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-77.9
1:877
§ 30-77.9. Nonconforming Personal Wireless Service Facilities.
[Adopted 11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 2853; § 30-77.9]
Any personal wireless service facility in existence on the date of the
adoption of this section, which does not comply with the requirements of
this section, are subject to the following provisions:
A preexisting nonconforming personal wireless service facility may continue
in use for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without
complying with this section;
A preexisting nonconforming personal wireless service facility which is
partially damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may, within
ninety (90) days, be repaired and restored to its former use, location and
physical dimensions subject to obtaining a building permit therefore, but
without otherwise complying with this section. If this destruction is greater
than partial, then repair or restoration will require compliance with this
section.
The owner of a preexisting nonconforming personal wireless service facility
may repair, rebuild and/or upgrade, but not alter the size, location or
number of antennas or other equipment without having to conform to
provisions of this section.
§ 30-77.10. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.10]
Personal wireless service facilities shall be maintained to ensure their
continued structural integrity. The owner of the personal wireless service
facility shall also perform such other maintenance of the structure and of
the site as to ensure that it does not create a visual nuisance.
§ 30-77.11. Site Plan Submission and Approval Requirements. [Ord.
No. 2853 § 30-77.11]
a. Personal wireless service facilities shall require preliminary major site
plan and final major site plan approval in accordance with the
requirements of the City's Land Development Regulations.
b. In addition, the applicant shall provide to the Planning Board a written
report or reports addressing the
1. Overall comprehensive plan items enumerated in section 30-77.3 of
this article
2. The design criteria enumerated in section 30-77.6 of this article;
3. Compliance with radio frequency emission standards as
enumerated in section 30-77.7 of this article;
4. Documentation by a qualified expert that any existing structure
proposed for the location of the personal wireless service facility
will have sufficient structural integrity to support the proposed
facility.
§ 30-77.9 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-77.12
1:878
§ 30-77.12. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2853 § 30-77.12]
§ 30-78. through § 30-79. (RESERVED)
§ 30-80. NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES.
§ 30-80.1. Continuation of Use. [2000 Code § 30-80.1; Ord. No.
2851]
A use, building or structure, lawfully in existence on the effective day of
the adoption of this chapter or amendment thereto, which shall be made
nonconforming by this chapter or amendment, may be continued except as
otherwise provided in the Land Development Regulations.
§ 30-80.2. Nonconforming Lots. [2000 Code § 30-80.2]
See § 30-68.2.
§ 30-80.3. Improved Nonconforming Lot. [2000 Code § 30-80.3]
Where a lot exists as a separate isolated lot, and is improved with a building
or structure which is nonconforming due to location, the lot may be further
improved by an addition to the building or structure or any accessory
building or structure provided that the existing nonconforming setbacks
may be extended but not further encroached upon; and further provided
that the minimum side yard shall be not less than three (3) feet.
§ 30-80.4. Regulation of Nonconforming Uses. [2000 Code
§ 30-80.4; Ord. No. 2851]
a. Equipment used for public safety operations, including but not limited
to communications for the federal, county, state or municipal
government is hereby specifically exempted from the requirements of
this section. However, all other applicable sections of the Code of the
City of Asbury Park do apply.
b. The installation of picocells within existing buildings is hereby
specifically exempted from the requirements of this section.
a. No existing building, structure or premises devoted to a nonconforming
use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or
structurally altered except when changed to a conforming use, or as
follows:
1. Restoration. Except as in Subsection 2. below any nonconforming
use or structure damaged by fire, casualty or act of God may be
repaired, restored, reconstructed or used as before; provided that
the area of such use or structure shall not exceed the area which
existed prior to such damage and the cost of necessary
construction, alterations or repairs does not exceed fifty (50%)
percent of the assessed value of the structure. All repairs shall be
§ 30-77.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-80.4
1:879
commenced within one (1) year after damage occurs and shall be
completed within two (2) years of such date or such use shall not
be rebuilt except as a conforming use.
2. Destruction. If in the opinion of the Construction Official a
structure is damaged beyond repair, any new structure and the use
thereof shall be in compliance with this chapter.
3. Repairs. Normal maintenance and repair of a structure containing
nonconforming use is permitted provided it does not extend the
area or volume of space occupied by the nonconforming use, does
not increase the intensity of use and that the costs of repairs
required to bring the structure into compliance with applicable
Building and Health Codes does not exceed fifty (50%) percent of
the present value of the structure unless the nonconforming use is
replaced with a conforming use. For the purposes of this section
"present value" shall equal the assessed value listed on the records
of the Tax Assessor unless a higher value is certified by a licensed
real estate appraiser and submitted to the Zoning Officer.
b. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe or lawful condition any part of any building or structure declared
unsafe or unlawful by the Construction Official or other authorized
State or City official, subject to the provisions of Subsection a above.
c. Abandonment of Nonconforming Use. The burden of proof shall be on
the owner to produce evidence of action taken by the owner that clearly
demonstrates the intent of the owner to continue the nonconforming
use. If the nonconforming use is ruled to be abandoned by the Zoning
Officer, the use of the building or property must be made to conform to
the Land Development Regulations. The owner may obtain the decision
of the Zoning Officer in writing and exercise the options provided in
Subsection a. of § 30-22.3.
d. A nonconforming use shall not be substituted in the place of any other
nonconforming use in any zone, nor shall a nonconforming use be
substituted in place of any conforming use in any zone.
§ 30-80.4 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-80.4
1:880
ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)
§ 30-81. through § 30-109. (RESERVED)
§ 30-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-81
1:881

ARTICLE VIII
Redevelopment Plans
§ 30-110. REDEVELOPMENT PLANS ADOPTED.
§ 30-110.1. Central Business District (CBD) Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2646 adopted 6-25-2003. An ordinance establishing a
redevelopment plan for the Central Business District Redevelopment Area.
Ordinance No. 2719 adopted 1-5-2005. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to increase the maximum permitted
height on a parcel within the Central Business District (CBD)
Redevelopment Area.
Ordinance No. 2720 adopted 1-5-2005. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to incorporate Streetscape
Improvement Standards for the Central Business District Redevelopment
Area.
Ordinance No. 2730 adopted 4-6-2005. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to clarify retail use within the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan pursuant to the local Redevelopment
and Housing Law.
Ordinance No. 2761 adopted 1-18-2006. An ordinance amending the
Central Business District Redevelopment Plan to increase the maximum
height on certain lots within the Central Business District Redevelopment
Area to permit the construction of a structured parking deck.
Ordinance No. 2788 adopted 6-7-2006. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan relating to Site Plan Review.
Ordinance No. 2893 adopted 2-18-2009. An ordinance amending the
Central Business District Redevelopment Plan to allow for parking as a
permitted principal use through
December 21, 2012 for certain identified parcels pursuant to the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law.
Ordinance No. 2908 adopted 6-3-2009. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to allow for parking as a permitted
principal use through December 21, 2012 for certain identified parcels
pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law.
Central Business District (CBD) Redevelopment Plan — Continued
Ordinance No. 2912 adopted 8-5-2009. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to alter the parking requirement for
newly constructed nonresidential space within the redevelopment area.
Ordinance No. 2922 adopted 12-2-2009. An ordinance amending the
Central Business District Redevelopment Plan to alter the parking
§ 30-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-110.1
1:883
requirement for newly constructed nonresidential space within the
development area.
Ordinance No. 2947 adopted 9-1-2010. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to allow for certain entertainment
uses within the Cookman Retail Core.
Ordinance No. 2950 adopted 9-15-2010. An ordinance amending the
Central Business District Redevelopment Plan to allow for certain
entertainment uses within the CBD Mixed-Use District.
Ordinance No. 2966 adopted 1-5-2011. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to streamline the application and
approval process for sound mitigation measures.
Ordinance No. 2972 adopted 4-6-2011. An ordinance authorizing the Mayor
and City Council of the City of Asbury Park to enter into a revised financial
agreement between the City of Asbury Park and AVB Asbury Urban
Renewal, LLC for certain property within the Central Business District
Redevelopment Area.
Ordinance No. 2976 adopted 5-4-2011. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to allow for certain entertainment
uses within the Cookman Retail Core.
Ordinance 2996 adopted 8-3-2011. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to establish a revised contribution
amount for developers with on site parking deficiency.
Ordinance No. 3015 adopted 5-2-2012. An ordinance amending the Central
Business District Redevelopment Plan to allow additional uses in the
Central Business District.
Ordinance No. 3026 adopted 8-1-2012. Amends the Central Business
District Redevelopment Plan, 625 Bangs Avenue.
Central Business District (CBD) Redevelopment Plan — Continued
Ordinance No. 3035 adopted 11-19-2012. Amends the Central Business
District Redevelopment Plan for parking and height requirements.
Ordinance No. 3043 adopted 4-3-13. Amends the Central Business District
Redevelopment Plan at 208 Bond Street.
Ordinance No. 3049 adopted 8-7-13. Amends the Central Business District
Redevelopment Plan at 527 Lake Avenue.
Ordinance No. 3092 adopted 12-17-2014. Amends the Central Business
District Redevelopment Plan regarding craft distilleries.
Ordinance No. 2015-6 adopted 2-25-2015. Amends the Central Business
District Redevelopment Plan at 621 Lake Avenue.
§ 30-110.1 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-110.1
1:884
Ordinance No. 2016-08 adopted 3-30-2016. Amends the Central Business
District Redevelopment Plan relating to the subdivision of Overlook Park.
Ordinance No. 2016-26 adopted 6-15-2016. Amends the Central Business
District Redevelopment Plan to review certain uses for sound mitigation.
Ordinance No. 2016-44 adopted 10-26-2016. Amends the Central Business
District Redevelopment Plan relating to parking and circulation, Cookman
Avenue Retail Core and to implementation of the Plan.
Ordinance No. 2018-2 adopted 2-14-2018. Removed three on-street parking
spaces (metered parking space numbers 5406, 5513 and 5514).
§ 30-110.2. Main Street Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2886 adopted 11-12-2008. An ordinance adopting the Main
Street Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2015-01 adopted 2-11-2015. Amends the Main Street
Redevelopment Plan relating to the community shopping zone and adds
microbreweries.
Ordinance No. 2018-6 adopted 2-28-2018 amends the Main Street
Redevelopment Plan relating to recording studios, metered parking and
valet parking.
Ordinance No. 2018-31 adopted 8-22-2018. Amends the Main Street
Redevelopment Plan.
§ 30-110.3. Scattered Site Redevelopment Area.
Ordinance No. 2637 adopted 5-7-2003. An ordinance approving a
Redevelopment Plan for the Scattered Site Redevelopment Area pursuant
to the New Jersey Local Redevelopment and Housing Law.
Ordinance No. 2668 adopted 12-3-2003. An ordinance approving a
redevelopment plan for the Scattered Site Redevelopment Area.
Ordinance No. 2676 adopted 3-17-2004. An ordinance adopting an
amendment to the Scattered Sites Redevelopment Plan at 603 First Avenue.
Ordinance No. 2775 adopted 5-3-2006. An ordinance approving and
adopting an amendment to the Scattered Site Redevelopment Plan, Phase
1A, 408 Third Avenue.
Ordinance No. 2869 adopted 5-7-2008. An ordinance amending Phase 1A of
the Scattered Site Redevelopment Plan relating to the former Metropolitan
Hotel Site, located at 309 Asbury Avenue (Block 147, Lot 1).
Ordinance No. 3012 adopted 4-18-2012. An ordinance amending the
Scattered Site Redevelopment Plan, Phase 1A, relating to the property
located at 408 Third Avenue.
§ 30-110.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-110.3
1:885
Ordinance No. 3014 adopted 5-2-2012. An amending the Scattered Site
Redevelopment Plan, Phase 1A, relating to the property located at 309
Asbury Avenue.
Ordinance No. 2017-38 adopted 10-25-2017. Allows certain property to be
used as an accessory parking lot to service philanthropic use of another site.
§ 30-110.4. Springwood Avenue Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2862 adopted 2-6-2008. An ordinance adopting the
Springwood Avenue Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 3076 adopted 8-20-2014. Amends the Springwood Avenue
Redevelopment Area.
Ordinance No. 2016-13 adopted 4-13-2016. Amends the Springwood Avenue
Redevelopment Plan to add certain blocks and lots and add certain bicycle
rack provisions.
Ordinance No. 2018-24 adopted 5-23-2018. Amends the Springwood Avenue
Redevelopment Plan.
§ 30-110.5. S.T.A.R.S. Redevelopment Plan.
(Strategic Target Area Rebuilding Spirit (STARS))
Ordinance No. 2548 adopted 7-5-2000. An ordinance creating the STARS
Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2609 adopted 7-17-2002. An ordinance adopting an
amendment an amendment to Strategic Target Area Rebuilding Spirit
(S.T.A.R.S.) Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2814 adopted 1-17-2007. An ordinance amending the
Strategic Target Area Rebuilding Spirit (STARS) Redevelopment Plan,
relating to the properties located at 1406-1422 Springwood Avenue (Block
96, Lots 1 through 3 and Lots 42 through 45).
Ordinance No. 2861 adopted 2-6-2008. An ordinance amending the
Strategic Target Area Rebuilding Spirit (STARS) Redevelopment
Plan — Borden Avenue.
Ordinance No. 2885 adopted 11-12-2008. An ordinance amending the
Strategic Target Area Rebuilding Spirit (STARS) Redevelopment Plan,
relating to the properties located in Blocks 98, 99 and 100 (area bounded
by Borden Avenue, Springwood Avenue, Avenue "A," Atkins Avenue and the
Neptune Township border).
§ 30-110.6. Washington Avenue Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2555 adopted 12-6-2000. An ordinance authorizing the City
Planning Board to prepare a Redevelopment Plan for the "Washington
Avenue" Area.
§ 30-110.3 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-110.6
1:886
Ordinance No. 2948 adopted 9-1-2010. An ordinance adopting the
Washington Avenue Redevelopment Plan relating to the Washington Avenue
Redevelopment Area.
§ 30-110.7. Waterfront Redevelopment Plan. [Rescinded by Ord. No.
2956]
Ordinance No. 2607 adopted 6-5-2002. An ordinance adopting amended
Waterfront Redevelopment Plan of the City of Asbury Park.
Ordinance No. 2630 adopted 3-19-2003. An ordinance memorializing and
codifying findings regarding recommendation of the Planning Board
relating to the adoption of the amended Waterfront Redevelopment Plan for
the City of Asbury Park.
Ordinance No. 2650 adopted 8-6-2003. An ordinance amending Waterfront
Redevelopment Plan - 1701 Park Avenue.
Ordinance No. 2664 adopted 11-5-2003. An ordinance amending the
Waterfront Redevelopment Plan for property located at 317 Sixth Avenue.
Ordinance No. 2696 adopted 8-4-2004. An ordinance setting forth
development application review and plan amendment review procedures
within the renovation infill area of the Waterfront Development Area.
Ordinance No. 2729 adopted 3-2-2005. An ordinance amending the
Waterfront Redevelopment Plan — Plan amendments.
Ordinance No. 2740 adopted August 3, 2005. An ordinance amending the
Waterfront Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2754 adopted 12-7-2005. An ordinance amending the
Waterfront Redevelopment Plan relating to the development controls
associated with Blocks 131, 142 and 143.
Ordinance No. 2776 adopted 5-3-2006. An ordinance amending the
Waterfront Redevelopment Plan relating to the property located at 1007
Bergh Street (Block 163, Lot 14).
Ordinance No. 2784 adopted 6-7-2006. An ordinance amending the
Waterfront Redevelopment Plan to permit redevelopment of the site located
at Block 178, Lots 10-16, commonly known as the Salvation Army site, as a
Mixed-Use Retail and Residential site.
Ordinance No. 2824 adopted 3-21-2007. An ordinance amending the
Waterfront Redevelopment Plan to allow for the installation of
telecommunications equipment on the rooftop of the property located at
206 First Avenue, also known as Block 146, Lots 2 and 3 (Philips Seaview
Tower).
Ordinance No. 2858 adopted 1-23-2008. An ordinance vacating a portion of
St. James Place, and dedicating said portion to Block 130 (proposed Block
130.01) and accepting the dedication of a portion of Block 130 (proposed
§ 30-110.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-110.7
1:887
Block 130.01) to be used as a City street known as Wesley Lake Drive, and
vacating a portion of Lake Avenue and dedicating said portion to proposed
Block 130.02 subject to the reservation of an access and utility easement
to the City of Asbury Park and subject to a vehicular access easement,
and confirming the areas of Block 130.01, Lot 1 and Block 130.02, Lot 1,
pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1
et seq.
Ordinance No. 2859 adopted 1-23-2008. An ordinance vacating a portion of
a public road (Ocean Avenue) pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et seq. and the
City's Waterfront Redevelopment Plan.
Ordinance No. 2880 adopted 9-3-2008. An ordinance amending the
Waterfront Redevelopment Plan dated June 5, 2002 to permit development
of the site located at Block 178, Lots 10-16, commonly known as the
Salvation Army site, as a Mixed-Use Retail and Residential site.
Ordinance No. 2887 adopted 12-3-2008. An ordinance vacating a portion
of proposed Bradley Terrace (extension of Deal Lake Drive) and dedicating
said portion to Block 222, Lot 1, and accepting a dedication of a portion of
Bock 222, Lot 1 to be used as a part of City streets North Ocean Avenue and
Deal Lake Drive, pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law.
Ordinance No. 2956 dated 10-6-2010. An ordinance rescinding Ordinance
No. 2880 in the City of Asbury Park, New Jersey, as adopted on September
3, 2008.
Ordinance No. 2018-15 adopted 6-13-2018. Amends certain provisions of
the Plan.
§ 30-110.8. Redevelopment Plan for 1001 First Avenue.
Ordinance No. 2018-8 adopted 3-14-2018. Adopts a Redevelopment Plan for
1001 First Avenue.
§ 30-111. AMENDMENTS TO REDEVELOPMENT PLANS;
PROCEDURES; FEES.
§ 30-111.1. Amendment Application Process. [Ord. No. 2015-05
§ 30-81.1]
The owner of any real property located within a redevelopment area in the
City of Asbury Park may submit an application to the Mayor and Council of
the City of Asbury Park requesting an amendment to a redevelopment plan
for its real property. A "developer," as that term is used in the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or "redeveloper", as that term is
used in the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et
seq., may submit an application for an amendment to a redevelopment plan,
provided that such application is submitted with the written consent of the
owner of the affected property. Within the Waterfront Redevelopment Area,
§ 30-110.7 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-111.1
1:888
the owner, developer, or redeveloper shall also provide the written consent
of the Master Developer of the Waterfront Redevelopment Area.
§ 30-111.2. Required Submissions. [Ord. No. 2015-05 § 30-81.2]
§ 30-111.3. Distribution. [Ord. No. 2015-05 § 30-81.3]
Upon receipt of all required submissions, the Director of Planning and
Redevelopment shall distribute twelve (12) of the twenty-four (24) copies
of the application to the Mayor and Council and appropriate professionals.
The remaining twelve (12) copies shall be distributed to the Planning Board
Secretary for distribution to the Planning Board and Planning Board
professionals, which distribution shall only occur if and when the proposed
amendment is referred to the Planning Board by the Mayor and Council.
§ 30-111.4. Procedure. [Ord. No. 2015-05 § 30-81.4]
The procedure to amend a redevelopment plan shall be as specified in the
Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1, et seq.
§ 30-111.5. Application Fee. [Ord. No. 2015-05 § 30-81.5]
An application fee, in the non-refundable amount of five hundred ($500.00)
dollars, shall be paid at the time that an application is filed.
§ 30-111.6. Escrow Deposit. [Ord. No. 2015-05 § 30-81.6]
a. Each application for an amendment to a redevelopment plan shall
include all required fees and escrows and twenty-four (24) copies of the
following:
1. Completed Application Form;
2. A precise, written description of the proposed amendment to the
redevelopment plan, including proposed uses, and the nature of
any deviations from the redevelopment plan requested; and
3. Conceptual plans to describe the amendment requested and any
other deviations required. These can include a sketch site plan and
floor plans. Plans need not be prepared by a licensed professional,
but must be of sufficient detail to describe the amendment
proposed.
b. The Mayor and Council, City staff, and Planning Board may request
additional information that is found necessary to complete their review.
a. Escrow fees, in the amount of three thousand ($3,000.00) dollars, shall
also be deposited at the time that an application is filed. Applicants
shall supplement the escrow deposit, as required, to cover the cost of
professional services provided in the review of the application.
§ 30-111.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-111.6
1:889
§ 30-111.7. Professional Services Covered by Escrow Deposits. [Ord.
No. 2015-05 § 30-81.7; Ord. No. 2015-52, Ex. C]
Professional services contemplated hereunder shall include, but not be
limited to the following:
b. Any escrow funds not needed to pay outstanding invoices of
professionals who have provided professional services for the
application shall be returned to the applicant within a reasonable time
after the application is concluded.
c. If an escrow account contains insufficient funds at any time to enable
the City and/or the approving authority(ies) to perform the required
application reviews or inspections, the City will provide the applicant
with a notice of the amount of insufficient funds. Said notice will also
provide that in order for work to continue on the application the
deficiency must be paid within the time frame set forth in the notice. If
the applicant does not comply with the terms of the notice all work on
the application will cease until such time as the applicant complies with
the terms of the notice.
a. Director of Planning and Redevelopment.
b. Zoning Officer.
c. Assistant City Planner.
d. City Engineer.
e. City Attorney.
f. Construction Official.
g. Attorneys engaged by the Mayor and Council or Planning Board.
h. Professional planners, consultants, engineers and advisors to the
Mayor and Council or Planning Board.
i. Any other professional or consultant hired or engaged by the Mayor and
Council or Planning Board to aid and assist them in reviewing,
evaluating and acting upon the application, including the hiring of
experts for reports and testimony, if deemed appropriate and necessary.
j. Professional Court Reporter/Stenographer.
§ 30-111.6 ASBURY PARK CODE § 30-111.7
1:890