Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Bridgeton of a
general and permanent nature adopted by the City Council of the City of
Bridgeton, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through
370, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as the "Code of the City of Bridgeton," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such
ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in
force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Municipal Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of
Bridgeton by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
City, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Bridgeton" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Bridgeton, pursuant to law, shall cause this Adopting
Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this Adopting
Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for inspection
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee to
be set by the City Council. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City
of Bridgeton to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter saved from repeal.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 6, 2003.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. All vehicles and traffic legislation, including but not limited to Chapter
IX of the 1970 Revised General Ordinances and any and all
amendments thereto.
O. Ordinance No. 90-9 establishing the Solid Waste Utility.
P. Ordinance Nos. 02-4, 02-5 and 02-7.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Violations and penalties. The following sections have been amended (or
added) to refer to the general penalty found in Chapter 1, Article III, of
the Code: §§ 80-6, 98-11, 107-2, 112-6, 126-14, 135-3, 141-4, 167-8,
176-11, 189-10, 197-6, 200-15, 203-3, 203-20, 203-27, 212-4, 221-4,
226-5, 230-5, 238-6, 242-8, 247-5, 247-21, 251-10, 254-9, 254-17,
254-28, 260-6, 265-3, 265-6 (Section PM-106.2.1), 265-7H, 265-14,
265-22, 277-16, 277-22, 277-27, 277-39, 286-2, 294-4, 294-7C, 300-16,
300-28, 307-2, 307-17A, 321-14, 328-4, 334-22A, 370-35D and
370-87D(1).
C. Fees. In the following sections, fees have been moved to Chapter 149,
Article II, Schedule of Fees, and language added to refer to said
chapter: §§ 77-3C, 80-4A, 83-2E, 83-4M, 83-11E, 112-2A, 126-4, 126-6,
126-10, 126-11, 154-2, 162-7A, 162-8B, 189-3, 200-7, 203-24C, 242-4,
242-5, 242-6, 254-3, 254-14, 260-2, 277-12A, 277-20A, 277-35B(1),
307-15A and B(1), 311-43J(2)(d)[1], 321-4H, 321-5A(2) and E, 334-6,
334-15C, 334-16A, 360-38, 360-39, 360-40A, 360-41C, 360-69B,
370-83A, 370-86G(1) and 370-90A(5)(e).
D. Nomenclature changes. The following nomenclature changes have been
made throughout the Code.
(1) Department of Planning to Department of Development and
Planning.
§ 1-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 1-14
1:6
(2) Magistrate to Judge.
(3) City Attorney to City Solicitor.
(4) Department of Housing and Inspections to Division of Housing and
Code Enforcement.
(5) Director of Police and Fire to Director of Public Safety
(6) Department (Director) of Parks and Recreation to Department
(Director) of the Department of Recreation and Public Affairs
(7) Superintendent of Public Works to Director of Public Works
E. Statutory references. Throughout the Code, wherever references to the
New Jersey Revised Statutes or New Jersey Statutes Annotated appear,
they have been updated to the current citation and/or revised to include
both the unconsolidated and consolidated reference. References have
been standardized to refer to "N.J.S.A."
F. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth below
are made herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance. (Chapter and section number references are to the
ordinances as they have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. In accordance with § 1-14, the articles and sections which were amended, added or
deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a footnote referring to
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I, During routine supplementation, footnotes
indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be replaced with the following history:
"Amended (added, deleted) 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5." A complete description of all
changes is on file in the City offices.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
Definitions; Construction
[Adopted 11-4-1970 as Ch. I of the 1970 Code]
§ 1-15. Definitions.2
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application
of all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the
context may otherwise require, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Bridgeton in the County of Cumberland and State of
New Jersey.
CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL — The governing body of the City.
CLERK or MUNICIPAL CLERK — The municipal clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
DEPARTMENT — An organizational unit of the City government established
or designated by ordinance or this Code as a department, together with
any agency or instrumentality of the City government assigned to such
organizational unit by the City Council.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it shall have been adopted by the
procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it shall
remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint ventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Includes a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-16. Construction.
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
2. Editor's Note: Original 1-1, Short title, which immediately preceded this section, was
deleted 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
A. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future,
the present.
B. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
C. The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
D. "Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
E. The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by
excluding the first and including the last day and if the last day be a
Sunday, a legal holiday, or a day on which the offices of the City are
closed, that day shall be excluded.
F. "Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any
other mode of communication using paper or similar material which is
in general use, as well as legible handwriting.
G. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
§ 1-16 BRIDGETON CODE § 1-16
1:10
ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Adopted 3-7-1989 by Ord. No. 88-19]
§ 1-17. Maximum penalty. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5;
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-13; 4-1-2008 by Ord. No. 07-36]
A. Penalties for violations other than violations of Housing and Zoning
Codes. For violation of any provision of this chapter, any other chapter
of this Code, or any other ordinance of the City of Bridgeton, with the
exception of violations of the Housing or Zoning Codes, and where no
specific penalty is provided regarding the section violated, the penalty
shall upon the conviction of a violation, be a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90
days, or both.
B. Penalties for violations of Housing or Zoning Codes.
(1) For violations of the Housing or Zoning Codes of the City of
Bridgeton, where no specific penalty is provided regarding the
section violated, the penalty shall, upon a conviction of a violation,
be a fine not less than $100 nor more than $1,250 or imprisonment
for a not exceeding 90 days, or both.
(2) Wherever the City seeks imposition of a fine in excess of $1,250 for
violations of the housing or zoning codes, the owner or person
responsible shall be afforded a thirty-five-day period of opportunity
from the date of the notice to cure or abate the condition.
Subsequent to the thirty-five-day period, a fine greater than $1,250
and not more than $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or both, shall be imposed if the Court finds the
abatement or cure has not been substantially completed.
C. Further, in addition to the aforesaid penalty, whether or not a specific
penalty is provided in this chapter, any other chapter, or any other
ordinance of the City, the Court may additionally impose a penalty
requiring a convicted person to perform community service for a period
not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11
Chapter 2
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 1-17 BRIDGETON CODE § 1-17
1:12
ARTICLE I
RCA Administrator
[Adopted 6-17-2008 by Ord. No. 07-42]
§ 2-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of City of Bridgeton's responsibility to assist in the
provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985.
§ 2-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the City of Bridgeton to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
RCA ADMINISTRATOR — The employee charged by the governing body
with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the affordable
housing program for the City of Bridgeton.
§ 2-3. Establishment of position; compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of RCA Administrator. There is hereby
established the position of RCA Administrator for the City of Bridgeton.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the RCA Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor or Business
Administrator and may be a full- or part-time employee.
C. The RCA Administrator shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the RCA and the RCA Affordable Housing Program for
City of Bridgeton, including the following responsibilities which may
not be contracted out:
(1) Serving as City of Bridgeton's primary point of contact for all RCA
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
(2) Establishing an escrow account for the RCA funds and submitting
to COAH a signed escrow agreement between the City of
Bridgeton, the bank and COAH for each RCA;
(3) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the City of
Bridgeton's Project Plan;
(4) Compiling, verifying, and submitting semiannual reports as
required by COAH;
§ 2-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3
1:13
(5) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(6) Attending continuing education opportunities as offered or
approved by COAH;
(7) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the RCA project(s) in the City of Bridgeton as
described in Subsection F below.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the City of Bridgeton may contract with
or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged
by the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the City of Bridgeton,
except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out
pursuant to Subsection C above. If the City of Bridgeton contracts with
another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable housing
program, including the affordability controls and affirmative marketing
plan, the RCA Administrator shall supervise the contracting
administrative agent.
E. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at the time of the
appointment of the RCA Administrator.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the RCA Administrator.
(1) Affirmative marketing:
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Bridgeton and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
§ 2-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 2-3
1:14
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Bridgeton when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or re-rental.
(5) Processing request from unit owners:
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
§ 2-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3
1:15
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement:
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent,
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(g) Providing reports to COAH as required
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 2-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 2-3
1:16
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 40.
§ 2-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-3
1:17

ARTICLE I
Title; Definitions
§ 3-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
(1998)" and is herein referred to as "the code" (1998 Code). This Code
replaces the "Administrative Code (1970)."3
§ 3-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — The Business Administrator duly appointed pursuant
to the Charter and Administrative Code or any Acting Administrator
temporarily serving in place of the Business Administrator pursuant to the
Charter or ordinance.
CHARTER or CITY CHARTER — Mayor-Council Plan A of Chapter 210
of New Jersey Laws of 1950, as amended and supplemented (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-31 et seq.); and any and all statutory provisions of the State of New
Jersey as may be lawfully applicable to the City.
COUNCIL — The local legislative body of the City, constituted and elected
pursuant to the Charter.
DIRECTOR — The administrative head of a department.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council as constituted under the Charter.
3. Editor's Note: The form of government in the City of Bridgeton is Mayor-Council Plan A of
the Optional Municipal Charter Law of 1950, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-31 et seq. Power to award
contracts and rules concerning competitive bidding are contained in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
seq. Other enabling statutes pertaining to this administrative chapter are set forth, if
necessary, within the applicable sections or subsections.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:19

ARTICLE II
Mayor and Council
§ 3-3. The Mayor.
A. Power and duties. The executive and administrative functions of City
government shall be exercised by the Mayor, subject to the Optional
Municipal Charter Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-31 et seq. The Mayor shall:
(1) Enforce the Charter and ordinances of the City and all general laws
applicable thereto;
(2) Report annually to the Council and to the public on the state of the
City, and the work of the previous year; the Mayor shall also
recommend to the Council whatever action or programs are
deemed necessary for the improvement of the City and the welfare
of its residents. The Mayor may recommend any action or programs
which are deemed necessary or desirable for the City to undertake;
(3) Appoint department heads with advice and consent of Council and
may remove any department head as provided by the Charter,
ordinance or general law. The Mayor shall supervise, direct and
control all departments of the City government and shall require
each department to make an annual and such other reports on its
work as is deemed desirable;
(4) Require such reports and examine such accounts, records and
operations of any board, commission or other agency of City
government, as are deemed necessary;
(5) Prepare and submit to the Council for its consideration and
adoption an annual operating budget and a capital budget,
establish the schedules and procedures to be followed by all
departments, offices and agencies in connection therewith, and
supervise and administer all phases of the budgetary process;
(6) Supervise the care and custody of all City property, institutions and
agencies, and make recommendations concerning the nature and
location of municipal improvements and execute improvements
determined by the Council;
(7) Sign all contracts, bonds or other instruments requiring the
consent of the municipality;
(8) Review, analyze and forecast trends of municipal services and
finances and programs of all boards, commissions, agencies and
other municipal bodies, and report and recommend thereon to the
Council;
(9) Supervise the development, installation and maintenance of
centralized budgeting, personnel and purchasing procedures as
may be authorized by ordinance;
§ 3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:21
(10) Negotiate contracts for the City subject to Council approval;
(11) Assure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or
its inhabitants in any statute, franchise or other contract are
faithfully kept and performed;
(12) Appoint the members of any board, authority or commission with
the advice and consent of Council, whenever the governing body is
authorized by any provision of general law to exercise this power
and unless the terms of the general law clearly require a different
appointment procedure or appointment by resolution, in which
case the appointment shall be by Council (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43);
(13) Appoint all officers and employees for whose election or
appointment no other provision is made by the Charter or
ordinance;
(14) Serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member of all appointive bodies in
municipal government of which the Mayor is not an official voting
member. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-32, 40:69A-39, 40:69A-40)
B. Allocation of functions, etc. All of the administrative functions, powers
and duties of the City shall be allocated and assigned among and within
departments established or constituted by the Code or any amendments
and supplements thereto.
C. Department heads and subordinates. The head of each department
shall be a "department head" appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the Council and as provided by the code and
amendments thereto.
D. Interim appointments. Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required
by the Charter or Administrative Code to be filled by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council and there is no holdover incumbent,
the Mayor may temporarily fill such vacancy in the absence of any
contrary provision in the Charter or ordinance by appointing an acting
officer from among the existing officers and employees of the
department affected. Such appointee shall have all the functions,
powers and duties of the office until it shall terminate not later than 90
days after the date of the appointment, unless the Council shall by
resolution authorize one or more extensions of such period.
E. Acting Mayor. The Mayor shall designate the Business Administrator,
any other department head, or the Municipal Clerk to act as Mayor
whenever the Mayor shall be prevented by absence from the City,
disability or other cause from attending to the duties of his office.
During such time the person so designated by the Mayor shall possess
all the rights, powers and duties of Mayor. Whenever the Mayor shall
have been unable to attend to the duties of his office for a period of 60
consecutive days for any of the above stated reasons, an Acting Mayor
shall be appointed by the Council who shall succeed to all the rights,
§ 3-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-3
1:22
§ 3-3.1. Special Assistant to the Mayor. [Added 7-7-2015 by Ord. No.
15-19]
There is hereby created a position of Special Assistant to the Mayor within
the City of Bridgeton.
powers and duties of the Mayor or the then Acting Mayor. (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-42) [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
F. Mayor to serve as Acting Business Administrator. Whenever so long as
there is a vacancy in the office of Business Administrator, the Mayor
may serve as Acting Business Administrator without additional
compensation and shall for the time being have all the functions,
powers and duties of the Administrator. Any such service by the Mayor
shall terminate not later than 90 days after the date that such service
begins unless the Council shall by resolution authorize one or more
extensions of such period.
G. Statutory and nondepartmental agencies. The administrative functions,
powers and duties of statutory and other agencies of the City
government not allocated and assigned by this code shall be subject to
the supervision of the Mayor except as otherwise specifically provided
by law, and for this purpose such statutory and other agencies are
allocated and assigned to the office of the Mayor.
(1) Public library. The trustees of the Free Public Library, as heretofore
established and empowered pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq.
(2) Planning Board. The Planning Board, as heretofore established and
empowered pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.4 et seq., which has been
repealed; see now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq.
(3) Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment as heretofore
established and empowered pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55-36 et seq.
which has been repealed; see now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.
(4) Human Relations Commission. The Human Relations Commission,
as heretofore established and empowered pursuant to N.J.S.A.
18:25-10 et seq., now N.J.S.A. 10:5-10.4
(5) Municipal Alliance Committee (Resolution 186-89).
(6) Bridgeton/Cumberland Tourist Center.
(7) Officers and employees. The Mayor shall appoint and may remove
such technical, professional and clerical personnel as may be
required for the administration of any office, board or commission
referred to in this subsection in accordance with the Charter.
Insofar as practicable staff services for any such office, board or
commission shall be provided by full-time City employees.
4. Editor's Note: Original Subsection e, Program Award Committee, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5.
§ 3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3.1
1:23
§ 3-4. City Council.
A. Duties. The duties of the Special Assistant to the Mayor shall include
but not be limited to:
(1) Assist the Mayor with development of policies, programs, and
procedures in the operation of the municipal government.
(2) Collect and analyze requested data.
(3) Prepare correspondence, reports, and recommendations for the
review of the Mayor.
(4) Act as a liaison between the Mayor and public as requested by the
Mayor.
(5) Act as the Mayor's representative and/or liaison with other units of
government as assigned.
(6) Represent the Mayor at speaking engagements, hearings, and
conferences as requested.
(7) Assemble statistical and other materials required for reports,
memoranda, speeches, and other written materials.
(8) Conduct research as requested by the Mayor.
(9) Other duties not specifically addressed as assigned by the Mayor.
B. Assignment. The Special Assistant to the Mayor shall be assigned to the
position at the pleasure of the Mayor.
A. Powers and duties general. The Council shall consist of five members
who shall serve for a term of four years (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-34). It is the
intent of this section to confer on the Council all general legislative
powers, and such investigative powers as are germane to the exercise
of its legislative powers, but to retain for the Mayor full control over the
administration of City services. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37.1)
B. Legislative powers. The legislative power shall be exercised by the City
Council, subject to procedures set forth in the Optional Municipal
Charter Law (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-3 et seq.) and shall be exercised by
ordinance as allowed by law, except for the exercise of those powers
that under this plan of government or general law do not require action
by the Mayor as a condition of approval for the exercise thereof and
may, therefore, be exercised by resolution, including but not limited to:
[Note: Source for Subsection B(1) through (16) is N.J.S.A. 40:69A-36.]
(1) The override of a veto of the Mayor;
(2) The exercise of advice and consent to actions of the Mayor;
(3) The conduct of a legislative inquiry or investigation;
§ 3-3.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-4
1:24
(4) The expression of disapproval of the removal by the Mayor of
officers or employees;
(5) The removal of any municipal officer for cause;
(6) The adoption of rules for the Council;
(7) The establishment of times and places for Council meetings;
(8) The establishment of the Council as a committee of the whole or the
delegation of two of its members to standing committees or to a
special committee, for a specific purpose as an ad hoc committee;
(9) The declaration of emergencies respecting the passage of
ordinances;
(10) The election, appointment, setting of salaries and removal of
officers and employees of council, subject to any pertinent
contractual obligations, and within the general limits of the
municipal budget;
(11) Designation of official newspapers;
(12) Approval of contracts presented by the Mayor;
(13) Actions specified as resolutions in the Local Budget Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:4-1 et seq.) and the Local Fiscal Affairs Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1
et seq.);
(14) The expression of Council policies or opinions which require no
formal action by the Mayor.
(15) Appointment of members of any board, authority or commission
only when clearly required by either specific terms of the general
law or appointment by resolution; otherwise, appointment vests
with the Mayor with advice and consent of Council. (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-43)
(16) Establishment by ordinance of departments as allowed by law.
C. Other powers. The Council, in addition to such other powers and duties
as may be conferred upon it by the Charter or Code or otherwise by
general law:
(1) May remove any City officer in its discretion to prepare and submit
sworn statements regarding his official duties in the performance
thereof, and otherwise to investigate the conduct of any
department, office or agency of the City government. (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-37)
(2) May remove, by at least two-thirds-vote of the whole number of the
Council, any municipal officer, other than the Mayor or a member
of Council, for cause, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard.
(N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37)
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:25
(3) Shall act in all matters as a body, unless otherwise specifically
provided by the Charter.
(4) Shall deal with administrative services and employees solely
through the Mayor or the Mayor's designee, except as otherwise
provided by law or the Charter, and shall not give orders to any
subordinates of the Mayor, either publicly or privately.
(5) May appoint committees or commissions of its own members or of
citizens to conduct investigations into the conduct of any officer or
department, or any matter relating to the welfare of the City and
delegating to such committees or commission such powers of
inquiry as the City Council may deem necessary.
(6) May make a written request to the Mayor and require a report on
any aspect of the government of the City. An individual Council
member may make a written request. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37.1)
(7) May, by a majority vote of the whole number if its members, require
the Mayor or Mayor's designee to appear before Council sitting as
a committee of the whole, and to bring before the Council those
records and reports, and officials and employees of the City as the
Council may determine necessary to ensure clarification of the
matter under study. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37.1)
(8) May, by a majority vote of the whole number of its members,
designate any number of its members as an ad hoc committee to
consult with the Mayor or the Mayor's designee to study any matter
and to report to the Council thereon. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-37.1)
D. Financial control.
(1) The Council shall exercise financial control as set forth and in
accordance with the Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq. and
the Local Fiscal Affairs Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq. [Note: Said
exercise to include the employment by Council of a registered
municipal accountant to prepare the City's annual audit of its
books, accounts and financial transactions (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-4) and
the adoption of a cash management plan with deposits of the City's
funds pursuant to that Plan. N.J.S.A. 40A:5-14] The Council shall, by
resolution, annually act on the budget as required by law, after it
has been submitted by the Mayor.
(2) The Council shall approve or disprove all bills, claims or vouchers
which shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council meetings by
attaching to said minutes a list of all bills, claims or vouchers
approved at each meeting, as well as the vote of each Council
member on the motion to approve. Bills, claims or vouchers may be
approved in a group or groups. Council members may vote on bills,
claims or vouchers in which they have a direct financial interest,
such as the fixing of wages, salaries or compensation, to extent
allowed by law. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-165)
§ 3-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-4
1:26
E. Organization of Council.
(1) President of Council. At its annual reorganization meeting, the
Council will elect a President of the City Council from among its
members. In the absence of the President, the Council may elect a
President pro tempore. The President of the Council shall:
(a) Preside at all meetings of the Council;
(b) Appoint members of standing committees;
(c) Appoint members to such special committees of the Council as
may be authorized by motion or resolution;
(d) State the questions and announce the result on all matters on
which the Council may vote;
(e) Rule on all questions or order subject to approval by the
Council;
(f) Sign all ordinances and resolutions adopted in the President's
presence, and in the President's absence the President pro
tempore shall sign ordinances and resolutions adopted in the
President pro tempore's presence;
(g) Have other such functions, powers and duties as the Council
may prescribe.
(2) Clerk of the Council. The Council shall appoint a Municipal Clerk
for the term prescribed by law and an Assistant Municipal Clerk.
The Municipal Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council and have
such other functions, powers and duties as are provided by § 3-12
of this chapter. In the absence of the Clerk or the Assistant
Municipal Clerk, the President shall appoint a Clerk pro tempore.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(3) Committees. Council shall have the following standing committees:
Finance, Public Safety and Personnel. The Council may also act as
committee of the whole, and rules of Council shall govern the
meetings of the committee of the whole, By motion or resolution,
special committees may be established for a specific purpose
including an ad hoc committee to consult with the Mayor or the
Mayor's designee or department heads to study any matter and
report to the Council thereon.
F. Meetings of Council. Regular, special meetings or emergency meetings
shall be open to the public and shall be held at such times as are
provided by the Charter and the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq.). The Mayor may attend meetings of Council and may
take part in discussions of Council, but shall have no vote, unless
otherwise provided by law (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-41) Within seven days of its
annual reorganization, Council shall establish, post and maintain a
schedule of meetings to be held during the year (N.J.S.A. 10:4-18).
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:27
(1) Annual reorganization meetings. The Council shall meet annually
to reorganize on the first Tuesday following January 1, except in the
years in which municipal officers are elected at a regular municipal
election when it shall meet to reorganize on January 1. [Amended
6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 11-26]
(2) Regular meetings. Subsequent to its annual meeting, Council shall
meet regularly thereafter at a time fixed by resolution. When the
time for any regular meeting of the Council falls on a legal holiday
such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the preceding or
next succeeding day which is not a legal holiday. The City Solicitor,
Municipal Clerk, Business Administrator and any such other
municipal officers and employees as may be required shall attend
regular meetings of Council. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No.
17-20]
(3) Special meetings. The Mayor or the President of the Council may at
any time, and upon request of a majority of the Council members
shall, call a special meeting of Council. The request and call for a
special meeting shall specify the agenda for the meeting to the
extent known and whether formal action may or may not be taken.
The call for a special meeting shall be filed with the Clerk and
served upon each Council member as hereinafter provided at least
48 hours prior to the time for which the meeting is called. Upon the
filing of any call for a special meeting, the Clerk shall post the
announcement in the public place reserved for such
announcements and shall mail, telephone or hand deliver the notice
to at least two newspapers, which newspapers shall have the
greatest likelihood of informing the public within the City, one of
which shall be the official newspaper,and the Clerk shall give notice
by telephone or telefacsimile to each Council member, at such
place as the member shall have previously designated for that
purpose and shall also serve or cause to be served a written copy of
the call upon each Council member by a delivery of a copy to the
member personally or by the leaving of a copy in the member's
usual place of abode. The Police Department shall cooperate with
the Clerk in effectuating such service of notice.
(4) Emergency meetings. Notwithstanding its failure to provide
adequate public notice, the Council may hold an emergency
meeting upon the affirmative vote of 3/4 of the members present if:
(a) Such meeting is required in order to deal with matters of such
emergency and importance that a delay for the purpose of
providing adequate notice would be likely to result in
substantial harm to the public interest; and
(b) The meeting is limited to discussion of, and acting with respect
to, such matters of urgency and importance; and
§ 3-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-4
1:28
(c) Notice of such meeting is provided as soon as possible
following the calling of such meeting by posting written notice
of the same in the public place reserved for such
announcements and also notifying the two newspapers most
likely to affect notice within the City, including the official
newspaper, by telephoning or by delivering a written notice to
said newspapers; and
(d) Either the City Council could not reasonably have foreseen the
need for such a meeting at a time when adequate notice could
have been provided; or although City Council could reasonably
have foreseen the need for such a meeting at a time when
adequate notice could have been provided, it nevertheless
failed to do so.
(5) Meetings and conferences. The Council may meet in informal
conference for such purpose as may be deemed appropriate,
including preparing for meetings, studying matters before it and
consulting with professional advisers. Such informal conferences
shall be designated "work sessions" and shall be open to the public.
The work session will not include public participation or a public
portion, unless Council permits. The Council reserves the right to
take formal action at work sessions. Work sessions shall be
scheduled by resolution.
(6) Place of meetings. All regular or special meetings shall be held in
the Council Chambers in the City of Bridgeton Police and Municipal
Court Complex, except when, in the opinion of a majority of the
Council, it is desirable to meet at some other location of public
nature. Work sessions shall be held in the caucus room in the City
of Bridgeton Police and Municipal Court Complex. [Amended
4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 12-38]
(7) Open Public Meetings Act.
(a) All meetings and notices shall be governed and subject to the
Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
(b) Where it is anticipated that a meeting on a given subject will
not be concluded in the time allotted and might be resumed,
the advance notice should explicitly recognize the possibility of
such a postponement.
(8) Closed or executive session.
(a) Council may close a portion of its meetings to the public for
purposes as set forth in the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A.
10:4-12) and only upon adoption of a resolution at a meeting to
which the public was admitted, said resolution stating the
general nature of the subject to be discussed; and stating as
precisely as possible, the time when and circumstances under
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:29
which the discussion conducted in closed session can be
disclosed to the public. (N.J.S.A. 10:4-13)
(b) Minutes of closed sessions shall be approved in open sessions
of Council within one month of the closed session; however, the
release of the minutes to the public shall only occur after
review by the City Solicitor and when there is no further need
for confidentiality.
(9) Agenda.
(a) The agenda for each meeting shall be prepared by the Clerk,
under the direction of the President of Council.
(b) Except for emergency matters, the agenda for each regular
meeting of the Council shall include only such matters of
Council business as have been presented or delivered to the
Clerk by the Mayor, a department head with the approval of the
Mayor, Council members, Business Administrator or City
Solicitor not later than 12:00 noon on the Friday preceding the
meeting.
(c) As soon as the agenda has been prepared, the Clerk shall
deliver a copy to each Council member, the Mayor, Business
Administrator, City Solicitor, department heads and
newspapers.
(d) Emergency matters, including the request for a closed session,
may be added to the agenda at any time, with the approval of
the President of Council.5
G. Nominations and appointments.
(1) Nominations submitted by the Mayor shall be considered by the
Council at its next regular meeting. Any member of the Council
may move a nomination. Confirmation or rejection of said
nomination shall not be postponed or delayed beyond one regular
meeting. Within two days after confirmation or rejection of said
nomination, the Clerk shall serve written notice to the office of the
Mayor.
(2) With respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any
member of the Council may nominate as many candidates as there
are offices to be filled. Where there is a single office to be filled, the
nominee on receiving a majority shall be deemed appointed such as
on a board, commission or authority; the same procedure shall be
followed with respect to each office separately until the total
number of appointments to be made has been completed. In the
discretion of the Chair a group of nominations may be considered
5. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-4.7, Rules of Procedure, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5. See § 3-4B(6) of this chapter.
§ 3-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-4
1:30
at once when there is no apparent division in the Council as to the
nominees included in the group.
H. Filing of reports and resolutions. All reports to Council and all
resolutions, ordinances, petitions, correspondence and other papers
considered by or presented to Council shall be filed with the Clerk.
I. Vacancies. Should a vacancy occur in the position of a member of City
Council, it shall be filled in accordance with state law. (State Municipal
Vacancy Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:16-1 et seq.)
J. Hearings. In any matter in which a hearing is permitted or allowed
before the City Council of the City of Bridgeton, with the exception of
disciplinary hearings regarding employment, disciplinary matters with
respect to liquor licenses or license renewals, such hearing may be
delegated to a hearing officer to be selected on motion by the City
Council of the City of Bridgeton. Designated hearing officers may
include, but not in limitation, where allowed, the Mayor or Business
Administrator, or a department head may be designated. In the
alternative, Council may designate a retired judge or an attorney
licensed to practice law within the State of New Jersey. The hearing
officer shall present a report and recommendation to City Council,
which may adopt and confirm said report and recommendation as its
determination and findings, or, in the alternative, Council may reject
any such report and recommendation and conduct a hearing de novo.
Council shall consider the report and recommendation, together with
any written submissions by the City and any other interested party, in
making its determination to adopt or reject a report and
recommendation from a hearing officer. [Added 2-6-2008 by Ord. No.
07-26]
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:31

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Ordinances and Resolutions
§ 3-5. General procedures.
§ 3-6. Ordinance procedures.
A. Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced and sponsored by a
member of Council except that the Mayor, Clerk or City Solicitor may
present ordinances and resolutions to Council and any Council member
may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinance or
resolution be adopted; otherwise they shall not be considered.
B. Ordinances shall be prepared by the City Solicitor upon request by a
member of Council, the Mayor, or the Business Administrator or upon
the City Solicitor's own recommendation. Resolutions may be prepared
by the Mayor, Clerk or City Solicitor.
C. Each ordinance and resolution shall be limited to a single object which
shall be expressed in the title or easily ascertainable by its context.
D. Prior to introduction, each proposed ordinance or resolution requiring
or permitting administrative action may be submitted to the Business
Administrator and the department head concerned, each of whom shall
submit to Council an opinion in writing as to the administrative
implications of the proposed ordinance or resolution.
E. Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced and read by title.
A. Enactment. All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted
in the manner provided by general law.
B. Signatures. Each ordinance passed by the Council shall be forthwith
delivered by the Clerk to the Mayor. Each ordinance shall be returned
by the Mayor to the Clerk, after the Mayor has affixed his signature
thereto or after expiration of 10 days from the date of delivery to the
Mayor in any event.
C. Effective date. No ordinance other than the Local Budget Ordinance
shall take effect less than 20 days after its final passage by the Council
and approval by the Mayor where such approval is required unless the
Council shall adopt a resolution declaring an emergency and at least 2/
3 of all the members of the Council vote in favor of such resolution.
(N.J.S.A. 40:69A-181)
D. Passage over veto. The Council will reconsider any ordinance returned
by the Mayor within the time permitted by the Charter together with a
statement setting forth the Mayor's objections thereto or to any item or
part thereof. Such reconsideration of the ordinance or any item or part
thereof from which the Mayor is constrained to withhold approval shall
be at the next meeting of Council which occurs not less than three days
following the return of the ordinance by the Mayor. Whenever an
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-6
1:33
ordinance has been reconsidered by the Council following a veto by
the Mayor, the Clerk shall append to such ordinance a certification of
the action of the Council upon such reconsideration in substantially the
following form: [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
"I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance adopted by the Council
of the City of Bridgeton on the _____ day of _______________, 20_____,
was delivered to me on the _____ day of _______________, 20_____,
together with the Mayor's statement of the reasons for which the
Mayor was constrained to withhold approval of such ordinance, item
or part thereof. On reconsideration thereof, on the _____ day of
_______________, 20_____, (the Council duly resolved by the affirmative
vote of 2/3 of its members to enact such ordinance, item or part
thereof, notwithstanding the Mayor's veto) or (the Mayor's veto was
sustained).
Dated:
Municipal Clerk
E. Ordinances not returned by Mayor. Whenever an ordinance shall take
effect without the Mayor's signature by reason of the Mayor's failure to
return it to the Council by filing it with the Clerk within 10 days after it
has been presented to the Mayor, the Clerk shall append to such
ordinance a certificate in substantially the following form: [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
"I HEREBY CERTIFY that the above ordinance was adopted by the City
Council on the _____ day of _______________, 20_____, and was presented
to the Mayor duly certified on the _____ day of _______________, 20_____,
and upon the Mayor's failure to sign it or to return and file it with
the Clerk within 10 days thereafter, the ordinance took effect in like
manner, as if the Mayor had signed it.
Dated:
Municipal Clerk
§ 3-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-6
1:34
ARTICLE IV
Departments and Officers and Employees
§ 3-7. Departments.
A. Departments generally. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43(a)]
(1) Number. The City shall have a Department of Administration and
such other departments, not less than two and not exceeding nine
in number, as Council may establish by ordinance.
(2) Administrative allocation. All of the administrative functions,
powers and duties of the municipality, other than those vested in
the offices of the Municipal Clerk and the City Tax Assessor, shall
be allocated and assigned within such departments. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(3) Departments specifically. There shall be the following departments:
Department of Administration, Department of Law, Department of
Financial Administration, Department of Police, Department of
Fire, Department of Recreation and Public Affairs, Department of
Development and Planning, Department of Public Works.
[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 1-6-2009 by Ord.
No. 08-18; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
B. Officers and employees not assigned to a department.
(1) The Municipal Clerk and City Tax Assessor shall not be assigned to
a specific department, but shall be subject to general
administrative procedures and requirements as are departments of
the City government, including but not limited to, the preparation
and submission of an annual budget and of such periodic budget
reports as are generally required of departments and such
accounting controls, central purchasing practices, personnel
procedures and regulations, and central data procession services
as are generally required of departments. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43)
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(2) The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the Council,
appoint the City Tax Assessor and all other City officers not
assigned within a City department, subject to the terms of any
general law providing for these officers, unless a different
appointment procedure is clearly required by the Charter or by
general law. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43)
C. Department head appointment; term; residency.
(1) Each department shall be headed by a department head.
(2) The department head shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43(b)]
§ 3-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:35
(3) Each department head shall serve during the term of the office of
the Mayor appointing said department head, and until the
appointment and qualification of any successor. [N.J.S.A.
40:69A-43(b)]
(4) At the time of the appointment, the department head need not be a
resident of the City or state, but during tenure of office, the
department head may reside outside the City only with the
approval of Council.
D. Department head powers and duties. The head of each department,
under the supervision of the Mayor and subject to the Charter and code
shall:
(1) Appoint subordinate officers and employees within the department
with the consent of the Mayor and may remove or suspend such
officers and employees, subject to the provisions of Title 11A of the
New Jersey Statutes, or other general law.
(2) Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the
duties of subordinate officers and employees within the
department, subject to the provisions of Title 11A of the New Jersey
Statutes, and with the consent of the Mayor.
(3) Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within the department, and modify such assignments as
need appears.
(4) Supervise the work of the department and supervise and direct the
work of the employees of the department.
(5) Delegate to division heads such of his powers as he may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
(6) Report at least annually to the Mayor and Council in such form as
shall be approved by the Business Administrator on the work of the
department during the preceding year.
E. Removal of department heads and others.
(1) Mayor. The Mayor may in the Mayor's discretion remove any
department head and, subject to any general provisions of law
concerning the term of office or tenure, any other executive officer,
who is not a subordinate departmental officer or employee, after
notice and on opportunity to be heard. Prior to removal, the Mayor
shall first file a written notice of this intention with the Council, and
such removal shall become effective on the 20th day after the filing
of said notice unless the Council shall prior thereto have adopted a
resolution by a two-thirds vote of the whole number of the Council
disapproving the removal.
(2) Council.
§ 3-7 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-7
1:36
(a) The Council may remove any City officer other than the Mayor
or a member of Council for cause, after notice and opportunity
to be heard.
(b) The Council shall consider notices under Subsection E(2)(a)
above and motions under this subsection only after notice and
opportunity to be heard to the affected officer. The Clerk shall
forthwith cause a copy of the notice or motion as the case may
be, together with a statement of the charges involved and
notice of the time and place fixed for hearing, to be served
personally or by registered mail upon the officer affected.
Hearing shall be held not less than 10 days nor more than 15
days after date of such service. Such hearing shall be open to
the public pursuant to the Charter, Council may veto a removal
under Subsection E(2)(a) above by a two-thirds vote of Council
members and may adopt or defeat a motion under Subsection
E(2)(b) above by a majority vote of the Council.
(3) Department head. Each department head, with the approval of the
Mayor, shall have the power, except as specifically provided by law,
to appoint, remove and suspend subordinate officers and
employees within the department, subject to applicable civil
service rules and regulations.
F. Dual appointments. A department head may serve as a division head or
supervisor and a division head or supervisor may serve as a bureau
head without additional compensation. Any person may be appointed to
serve as head of two or more divisions or bureaus, unless otherwise
provided by the Code, charter or state law.
G. Interim appointments. Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required
by the Charter or Administrative Code to be filled by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council, including the office of department
head, the Mayor may temporarily fill such a vacancy in the absence of
any contrary provision in the Charter or statute by appointing an acting
officer from among the existing officers and employees of the
department affected. Such appointee shall have all the functions,
powers and duties of the office until it shall be filled permanently. Any
such appointment shall terminate not later than 90 days after the date
of the appointment, unless the Council by resolution authorizes one or
more extensions of such period. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1)
H. Vacancies in divisions. Whenever a vacancy exists in the office of any
departmental division by resignation, removal, disability or otherwise,
the director of the department with the Mayor's consent may fill such
vacancy temporarily by appointing an acting head of such division who
shall have and perform all the functions, powers and duties of such
division until the office shall be filled permanently. Any such temporary
appointment shall terminate not later than 90 days after the date of the
appointment unless the Council shall, by resolution, authorize one or
more extensions of such period.
§ 3-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-7
1:37
§ 3-8. Conflict of interest by officer or employee.
For purposes of this section, "immediate family" means the spouse or
dependent child of an officer or employee residing in the same household.
I. Official surety bonds.
(1) Every officer or employee of the City who by virtue of the office or
position is entrusted with the receipts, custody or expenditure of
public moneys or funds and any other officer or employee who may
be required to do so by the Council shall, before entering upon the
duties of the office or position, qualify for and be covered by a
surety bond in an amount as may be fixed by resolution of the
Council, binding the officer or employee to the City in its corporate
name and conditioned upon the true and faithful performance of
the duty to the office or position.
(2) If any officer or employee shall not qualify or is unable to be
covered by a surety bond as herein required within 30 days after
due notification of the officer's or employee's election or
appointment, that office may be declared vacant by the Council.
(3) ln every case in which any person is required by the laws of the
state or by any ordinance of the City to give as bond for the faithful
performance of the duties of the office, such bond shall be secured
by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this state, and
the premium therefor shall be paid by the City. Each such bond
shall be approved as to form and sufficiency by the City Solicitor
and nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the use of
one or more blanket bonds when so approved.
A. No officer or employee or member of his or her immediate family shall
have an interest in a business organization or engage in any business,
transaction, or professional activity, which is in substantial conflict with
the proper discharge of the officer's or employee's duties in the public
interest;
B. No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use the officer's or
employee's official position to secure unwarranted privileges or
advantages for himself or herself or others;
C. No officer or employee shall act in his or her official capacity in any
matter where the officer or employee, a member of his or her
immediate family, or a business organization in which the officer or
employee has an interest, has a direct or indirect financial or personal
involvement that might reasonably be expected to impair his or her
objectivity or independence of judgment;
D. No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service,
whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to
prejudice the officer's or employee's independence of judgment in the
exercise of official duties;
§ 3-7 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-8
1:38
E. No officer or employee, member of his or her immediate family, or
business organization in which the officer or employee has an interest,
shall solicit or accept any gift, favor, loan, political contribution, service,
promise of future employment or other thing of value based upon an
understanding that the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise
or other thing of value was given or offered for the purpose of
influencing the officer or employee, directly or indirectly, in the
discharge of official duties. This provision shall not apply to the
solicitation or acceptance of contributions to the campaign of an
announced candidate for elective public office, if the officer has no
knowledge or reason to believe that the campaign contribution, if
accepted, was given with the intent to influence the local government
officer in the discharge of official duties;
F. No officer or employee shall use, or allow to be used, his or her public
office or employment, or any information, not generally available to the
members of the public, which the officer or employee receives or
acquires in the course of and by reason of office or employment, for the
purpose of securing financial gain for the officer or employee, any
member of his or her immediate family, or any business organization
with which the officer or employee is associated;
G. No officer or employee or business organization in which he or she has
an interest shall represent any person or party other than the local
government in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or
other matter pending before any agency in the local government in
which the officer or employee serves. This provision shall not be
deemed to prohibit one employee from representing another employee
where the City is the employer and the representation is within the
context of official labor union or similar representational
responsibilities;
H. No officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by reason
of his or her participation in the enactment of any ordinance, resolution
or other matter required to be voted upon or which is subject to
executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him
or her as a member of any business, profession, occupation or group, to
any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to
accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation or
group;
I. No elected officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for
information on behalf of a constituent, if no fee, reward or other thing of
value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or a member of
his or her immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in return
therefor; and
J. Nothing shall prohibit any officer or employee, or members of his or her
immediate family, from representing himself, herself or themselves, in
negotiations or proceedings concerning his, her or their own interests.
(N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.5)
§ 3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-9
1:39
§ 3-9. Administrative regulations. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No.
17-20]
No rule or regulation made by any department shall, except upon written
approval of the Mayor, take effect until at least 10 days after it is filed with
the Municipal Clerk as required by the Charter. The Municipal Clerk shall
maintain a docket of all orders, rules and regulations filed in the Clerk's
office which docket shall show the name of the issuing department, a brief
description of the subject matter, and the date of filing. At the close of each
year the Clerk shall, with the advice and assistance of the City Solicitor,
compile and codify all of the orders, rules and regulations which then
remain in force and effect. The Municipal Clerk may arrange for the printing
and sale of such compilation within the limits of available appropriations.
§ 3-10. Public office hours.
The public, administrative and executive business offices of the City shall
be open for the transaction of public business daily except Saturdays and
Sundays and legal holidays, between such hours as the Business
Administrator may prescribe with the approval of Council, except as
otherwise provided by law. The Division of Police Administration, Division of
Fire and Fire Safety, and the Streets and Roads Division of the Department
of Public Works shall provide City services for 24 hours a day heretofore. All
other departments shall provide City services for 24 hours a day in times of
emergency. The Business Administrator or a department head may require
any officer or employee to be in attendance for work on any day or days
whenever he or she determines that a public exigency or emergency so
requires.
§ 3-11. Preservation, inspection and copying of public records.
A. Preservation. All the books, maps, papers, accounts, statements,
vouchers and other documents whatsoever acquired or produced in any
City department shall be carefully and conveniently filed, kept and
preserved and be and remain the sole property of the City, and shall not
at any time be removed from the offices of such department except
when required for use in the official business of the City and shall then
be returned to such office without delay. Each department head or City
officer shall be responsible for assuring that the requirements of this
section are complied with in respect to the particular office. This
section shall be subject to the provision of Destruction of Public
Records Law (1953) [N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq.]. Upon the termination of
the term of office or the employment of any officer or employee, the
officer or employee shall forthwith deliver to the successor or if there is
no successor to the Clerk or other person who may be designated by
Council to receive the same, all moneys, papers, books, memoranda,
accounts or data of any nature whatsoever pertaining to the officers or
employee's office.
§ 3-9 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-11
1:40
§ 3-12. Municipal Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
B. Inspection. All such documents and records of the City shall during
office hours be open to public search, inspection, examination and
photocopying subject to and within the limitations prescribed by law,
including N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5 et seq., provided that such search, inspection
and examination shall not extend to work papers of any department, nor
to materials prepared for the prosecution or defense by the City of any
legal action or right, nor to any investigatory reports, and provided that
such search, inspection, examination and copying be made under such
regulations as the officer, in whose custody such records, books and
documents may be, shall establish for the safety and preservation
thereof. [Amended 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 10-25]
C. Copying. A member of the public shall have the right during regular
business hours and under the supervision of a representative of the
custodian to copy public records by hand or to purchase copies of such
records. Request for copies of such records shall be made on a form
designed for the purpose. Except as otherwise provided by law or
regulation, copies for the duplication of a government record embodied
in the form of printed matter shall be made available upon the payment
of $0.05 per letter-size page or smaller, and $0.07 per legal-size page or
larger (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5b, as amended). [Amended 3-15-2011 by Ord.
No. 10-25]
D. Exceptions: [Amended 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 10-25]
(1) If it can demonstrated that the actual costs for duplication of a
government record exceed the foregoing rates, the City shall be
permitted to charge the actual cost of duplicating the record.
(2) Access to electronic records and nonprinted materials shall be
provided free of charge, but the actual costs of any needed supplies
such as computer discs may be charged.
(3) Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation, or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined, or copied pursuant to this section is such that
the record cannot be reproduced by ordinary document copying
equipment in ordinary business size or involves an extraordinary
expenditure of time and effort to accommodate the request, the
City may charge, in addition to the actual cost of duplicating the
record, a special service charge that shall be reasonable and shall
be based upon the actual direct cost of providing the copy or
copies; provided, however, that in the case of a municipality, rates
for the duplication of particular records when the actual cost of
copying exceeds the foregoing rates shall be established in advance
by ordinance. The requestor shall have the opportunity to review
and object to the charge prior to it being incurred.
A. Powers and duties. The Municipal Clerk shall:
§ 3-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12
1:41
(1) Act as secretary of the municipal corporation and custodian of the
City seal and of all minutes, books, deeds, bonds, contracts, and
archival records of the City. The governing body may, however,
provide by ordinance that any other specific officer shall have
custody of any specific other class of record.
(2) Act as secretary to the governing body, prepare meeting agendas,
be present at all meetings of the governing body, keep a journal of
the proceedings of every meeting, retain the original copies of all
ordinance and resolutions, and record the minutes of every
meeting.
(3) Serve as the chief administrative officer in all elections held in the
City, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes.
(4) Serve as chief registrar of voters in the City, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the Revised Statutes.
(5) Serve as the administrative officer responsible for the acceptance
of applications for licenses and permits and the issuance of licenses
and permits, except where statute or City ordinance has delegated
that responsibility to some other City officer.
(6) Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the Revised Statutes. (N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133)
(7) Cause the Corporate Seal of the City to be affixed to instruments
and writings pursuant to law, to exemplify any documents on
record in the Clerk's office or to certify any act or paper from which
the records of the Clerk's office shall appear to have been a public
act of the City of public documents, and shall charge a fee as
allowed by ordinance.
(8) Perform such other duties as are now or hereafter imposed by
statute, regulation or by City ordinance or regulation. (N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133)
B. Minutes; recordings of ordinances and resolutions. The Clerk shall keep
the minutes and records of the proceedings of the Council, and upon
request of the Chairman, of any Council committee meeting. The Clerk
shall preserve and compile all ordinances and resolutions. At the close
of each year, with the advice and assistance of the City Solicitor, the
Clerk shall update the codification of all the ordinances and resolutions
or true copies thereof of the City which then remain in force and effect.
The Clerk shall also properly index the record books compilation or
codification of ordinances and resolutions. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-182)
C. References of matters of the Council. Whenever the Council has taken
any action requiring any act or forbearance by any officer or employee
of the City or affecting the administration of the functions, duties or
§ 3-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-12
1:42
powers of any such officer or employee, it shall be the duty of the
Municipal Clerk to communicate officially the action of the Council
to the person affected and to retain the matter on the agenda of the
Council for such further disposition as may be required. Each officer
and employee shall, unless otherwise directed, direct his response to
the action of the City Council to the attention of the Municipal Clerk for
the presentation to and information of the Council.
D. Appointment and qualification.
(1) The Council shall appoint the Municipal Clerk. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133)
(2) No person shall be appointed as Municipal Clerk unless that person
shall have a registered Municipal Clerk Certificate issued pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et seq.
E. Term; vacancy; temporary appointment; tenure; removal.
(1) The Municipal Clerk shall be appointed for a three-year term.
(2) For purposes of tenure, the term of the Municipal Clerk shall be
deemed to have begun as of the actual date upon which a person
serving as Municipal Clerk is appointed.
(3) In the event of a vacancy in the office, an appointment shall be
made for a new term and not for an unexpired term.
(4) The reappointment of an incumbent Municipal Clerk made within
60 days following the expiration of the prior term shall not be
considered to be a new appointment, and the effective date of the
reappointment shall date back to the date of expiration of the initial
term of appointment.
(5) The City Council shall appoint a person to a three-year term as
Municipal Clerk within six months after the previous Municipal
Clerk has resigned or the office has otherwise become vacant.
(6) The City Council may appoint a person to serve as acting Municipal
Clerk for a period of not more than six months should the office of
Municipal Clerk become vacant.
(7) No Municipal Clerk shall attain tenure in office unless that person
holds a Registered Municipal Clerk Certification. (N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133 et seq.)
(8) Any person who shall have been reappointed to the office of
Municipal Clerk and having served as Municipal Clerk or
performed the duties of the Municipal Clerk or not less than three
consecutive years immediately prior to such reappointment shall
acquire tenure.
(9) Upon receiving tenure, the Municipal Clerk shall continue to hold
office during good behavior and efficiency notwithstanding the
§ 3-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-12
1:43
§ 3-13. Tax Assessor.
appointment was for a final fixed period of years and shall not
be removed for political reasons but only for good cause shown
and after a hearing before the Director of the Division of Local
Government and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.7.
F. Assistant Municipal Clerk. Council may appoint an Assistant Municipal
Clerk to assist in the duties of the office of the Municipal Clerk and who
shall perform the duties of the Municipal Clerk in the absence of the
Municipal Clerk.
G. Clerk Pro Tempore. The President of City Council may appoint a Clerk
Pro Tempore who shall keep the records and minutes whenever the
Municipal Clerk or Assistant Municipal Clerk is unavailable.
A. Appointment and qualifications. The Tax Assessor and such Deputy Tax
Assessors as necessary shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of Council. No person shall be appointed or reappointed as
Tax Assessor or Deputy Tax Assessor unless that person holds a Tax
Assessor Certificate.
B. Term. The Tax Assessor shall hold the office for a term of four years
from the first day of July next following the appointment. Vacancies
other than due to expiration of term shall be filled by appointment for
the unexpired term.
C. Tenure; removal.
(1) Any person who shall have been reappointed to said office and
having served as Tax Assessor for not less than four consecutive
years immediately prior to such reappointment shall hold the
position during good behavior and efficiency notwithstanding such
reappointment was for a fixed term of years, and the Tax Assessor
shall not be removed from the position for political reasons but only
for good cause shown and after a proper hearing before the
Director of the Division of Taxation or the Director's designee after
due notice.
(2) Any person serving as Tax Assessor or Deputy Tax Assessor, whose
Tax Assessor Certificate is revoked, shall be removed from office by
the Director of the Division of Taxation, and the office shall be
declared vacant.
D. Duties and powers. The Tax Assessor shall have, perform and exercise
all functions, powers and duties as are provided by general law and
ordinance, including:
(1) The assessment of property for the purpose of general taxation.
(2) The maintenance of adequate assessment records of each separate
parcel of real property assessed or exempted, and the
§ 3-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-13
1:44
§ 3-14. Purchasing Agent.
establishment and maintenance of such files, records and
procedures as may be required for the evaluation and assessment
of personal property pursuant to law.
(3) The maintenance of a current tax map of the City as a public
record, and cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership
or character of the real property assessed, employing for that
purpose the facilities of other departments as provided by the
Administrative Code. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146 et seq.; N.J.S.A.
40A:9-148; N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq.)
A. Title. This section shall be cited as the Purchasing Agent Ordinance of
the City of Bridgeton.
B. Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to prescribe the
manner in which the Purchasing Agent of the City shall implement
procedures and supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies,
equipment, work, and contractual services of the City.
C. Office of Purchasing Agent. There is hereby established by the City
Council an Office of Purchasing Agent which shall be constituted within
the Department of Administration. The Office of Purchasing Agent shall
be under the general supervision of the Mayor and under the specific
direction of the Business Administrator. The Office of Purchasing Agent
shall be headed by the Purchasing Agent of the City who shall be the
Business Administrator, unless a separate appointment is made by the
Mayor.
D. Powers and duties. The Purchasing Agent shall have general
supervision over and responsibility for purchases made by the City. The
Purchasing Agent shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this
section subject to the review and supervision of the Mayor. The
Purchasing Agent shall have the power, and it shall be the duty of the
Purchasing Agent to:
(1) Develop municipal purchasing goals, objectives, policies,
programs, procedures, rules and regulations for the acquisition of
materials, supplies, equipment and services consistent with state
law.
(2) To develop and prepare a purchasing procedures manual to be
promulgated by the Mayor and distributed to all municipal
departments, nonautonomous agencies and boards of the City
containing procedures and instructions for initiating purchases by
or on behalf of the City.
(3) To stimulate both bid and quotation competition in order to obtain
the highest quality goods and services at the least expense to the
City.
§ 3-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-14
1:45
§ 3-15. Local Historian.
(4) To discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and
open competition as possible on all purchases.
(5) To explore the possibilities of buying "in bulk" so as to take
advantage of discounts.
(6) To prescribe and maintain such forms as may be necessary for the
successful operation of the purchasing function.
(7) To consolidate requisitions of the like or common items to obtain
the maximum economic benefit.
(8) To monitor and evaluate vendor performance.
(9) To maintain a centralized organization of qualified procurement of
personnel.
(10) To acquaint and, when necessary, train appropriate City personnel
in purchasing procedures.
(11) To establish and supervise storerooms and warehouses and
maintain current inventory records of all materials, supplies and
equipment placed in storerooms and warehouses, and to arrange
for the transfer to or between departments, offices and agencies
such supplies materials and equipment as need appears.
(12) To arrange, after governing body approval, for the disposal of
surplus materials and equipment either by transfer to other
municipal agencies or by public sale.
A. Purpose.
(1) The State of New Jersey has passed the Local Historians Enabling
Act (N.J.S.A. 40:10A-1 et seq.), which provides as a matter of public
policy that each municipality may participate to increase the
education, appreciation and communication of our heritage
through local historians.
(2) The City of Bridgeton determines that it is in its interest to appoint
a Local Historian pursuant to this Act.
B. Position created. Pursuant to the aforesaid statute, the position of Local
Historian is hereby established. The powers, duties and responsibilities
of the Local Historian shall be those powers, duties and responsibilities
set forth in the aforesaid statute.
§ 3-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-15
1:46
ARTICLE V
Departments
§ 3-16. Department of Administration.
A. Business Administrator. There shall be a Department of Administration,
the director of which shall be known and designated as the Business
Administrator. The Business Administrator shall have, exercise and
discharge the functions, powers and duties of the Department. (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-44 et seq.)
B. Appointment; qualifications; residence of Business Administrator.
(1) Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint the Business Administrator
with the advice and consent of City Council.
(2) Qualifications. The Business Administrator shall be chosen solely
on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with
special reference to the actual experience in, or the knowledge of,
accepted practice in respect to the duties of the office as set forth
herein.
(3) Residency. At the time of the appointment, the Business
Administrator need not be a resident of the City or state, but during
tenure of office, the Business Administrator may reside outside the
City only with the approval of Council.
C. Responsibilities. The Department, under the direction and supervision
of the Mayor and as performed by the Business Administrator; shall:
(1) Assist in the preparation of the budget;
(2) Administer a centralized purchasing system; as provided
elsewhere;
(3) Be responsible for the development and administration of a sound
personnel system;
(4) Perform such other duties as the Mayor and Council may prescribe;
and
(5) Supervise, subject to the direction of the Mayor, the administration
of each of the departments established by ordinance. For this
purpose, the Business Administrator shall have the power to
investigate the organization and operation of any and all
departments, to prescribe standards and rules of administrative
practice and procedure, and to consult with the heads of the
departments under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Administration, provided that with respect to any Department of
Law and Department of Financial Administration, the authority of
the Business Administrator under this subsection shall extend only
to matters of budgeting, personnel and purchasing. (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-44)
§ 3-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-16
1:47
D. Duties of the Business Administrator. The duties of Business
Administrator shall be as follows:
(1) Attend all City Council meetings.
(2) Perform as Purchasing Agent of the City, in absence of separate
appointment by the Mayor.
(3) Coordinate and supervise the administration of each department as
allowed by statute and code.
(4) Administer the City's insurance program.
(5) Assist in the preparation and implementation of the budget.
(6) Control and manage the lease, sale and rental of City-owned real
property, subject to the requirements of the New Jersey statutes,
governing lease, rental or sale of City-owned property.
(7) Develop and administer a personnel program.
(8) Perform any other duties as required by the Mayor and Council.
E. Office of Purchasing Agent. Within the Department of Administration
shall be an Office of Purchasing Agent as provided in 3-14.
F. Budget preparation.
(1) The City budget shall be prepared by the Mayor with the assistance
of the Business Administrator. During the month of May, the Mayor
shall require all department heads to submit requests for
appropriations for the ensuing budget year and to meet with the
Mayor and Business Administrator at public hearings which shall
be held during that month.
(2) Budget requests shall be in such form and detail as the Business
Administrator shall prescribe.
(3) The Mayor and the Business Administrator shall consult with the
Department of Financial Administration and the City Auditor to
ensure compliance with state law, including a budget document
with a capital section, showing a budget of capital projects
proposed or continued, together with a projection of projects for
the next six years and the costs and financing anticipated for the
capital improvements.
(4) The budget shall include a proposed current expense budget, a
proposed capital budget and such explanatory comments, exhibits
and schedules as the Mayor deems necessary or desirable to
explain the budget plan and shall be submitted to Council in the
form required by law.
§ 3-16 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-16
1:48
G. Council action. The Council shall consider and act upon the Mayor's
proposed budget and may adopt a temporary budget in accordance with
the requirements of Local Budget Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.).
H. Budget administration.
(1) The Business Administrator shall supervise the administration of
each annual budget. Budget appropriations shall be controlled by
an encumbrance system. Each department head shall plan and
administer the department's program within its budget.
(2) If at any time during the budget year the Business Administrator
shall ascertain that the City government is faced with the
probability of incurring a cash deficit for the current year, the
Business Administrator shall reconsider the work programs and
allotments of the several departments. Upon such reconsideration
and with the approval of the Mayor, the Business Administrator
may reduce budget allotments to forestall as far as possible the
making of commitments and expenditures in excess of the revenues
to be realized during the fiscal year. The Business Administrator
shall file with the Chief Financial Officer a copy of such reduced
allotment, and the Chief Financial Officer shall control all
expenditures within the limits thereof.
(3) The Business Administrator shall recommend transfers from one
line item or budget category to another as allowed by Local Budget
Law.
I. Purchasing generally.
(1) A purchase of any supply, material or equipment or contractual
services for a department shall be made by the Department of
Administration, pursuant to a written requisition from the
department head whose department will be charged and only after
said purchase amount has been encumbered by the Chief Financial
Officer.
(2) All such purchases or purchase contracts shall conform to
applicable requirements of state statutes for competitive bidding.
When purchases are made without competitive bidding as allowed
by state statute, the Purchasing Agent shall obtain, whenever
possible, at least three price quotations from the items purchased
and shall record and maintain such quotations in his office for at
least two years from the time they are furnished.
(3) No department shall have a petty cash fund except the following:
the Department of Police in the amount of $800, the Department of
Administration in the amount of $100, and the Department of
Recreation and Public Affairs in the amount of $300. Upon
submission of vouchers to the Business Administrator showing the
use of moneys expended from the petty cash fund, the Business
Administrator may request payment from the Chief Financial
§ 3-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-16
1:49
Officer to maintain the balance in the petty cash fund as set forth
above. [Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-04]
(4) Each department head shall designate, by writing filed with the
Business Administrator, the name of employees in the department
authorized to receive supplies, materials and equipment. The
person so designated shall accept deliveries and sign for them only
where the goods are in exact conformity with the order. Should
there be any doubt as to the quantity or quality, the receiving
employee shall immediately notify the department head for
appropriate action. If any supplies, materials or equipment are
rejected, the department head shall immediately notify the
Business Administrator.
(5) Emergency purchases. The Business Administrator shall establish,
upon approval of the Mayor, a procedure for the purchase of any
item or items required for the immediate protection of the public
health, safety, morals or welfare, which will permit such emergency
purchases to be made for specific purposes in the manner as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6.
J. Contracts generally. Within the limits of available appropriations, the
Mayor is authorized to negotiate and execute contracts and other
legally binding obligations of the City upon the approval of Council. Any
such document shall be signed by the Mayor, attested by the Municipal
Clerk and approved by the City Solicitor for legal form and sufficiency.
Purchase orders, for which a formal contract is not required by the
Charter, may be executed by the Mayor or Business Administrator
within limits of available funds without further approval. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
K. Award of contracts. Upon contracts let by public competitive bidding,
the Council may, upon recommendation of the Business Administrator
with respect to all contracts other than public works contracts, and
upon recommendation of the Director of Public Works with respect to
public works contracts, let the contract in the manner prescribed by the
provisions of the laws of the State of New Jersey, City Charter and
ordinances, including, when required, the certification of the Chief
Financial Officer.
L. Personnel management.
(1) All appointments and promotions in the civil service of the City as
defined by state statutes shall be made according to merit and
fitness in accordance with the requirements of the Constitution,
statutes and applicable regulations of the State of New Jersey.
(2) The Business Administrator shall prepare a system of personnel
rules and policies for consideration by the Council, subject to the
requirements of the State Civil Service System. Such rules and
§ 3-16 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-16
1:50
policies may be adopted by the Council by resolution, shall be
compiled in a Personnel Manual and shall include provision for:
(a) The classification of all City position based on the duties,
authority and responsibility of each position with adequate
provision for reclassification of any position whenever
warranted by changed circumstances;
(b) A pay plan for all City positions;
(c) The policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and
removal of employees;
(d) The hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for
sick and vacation leave;
(e) The policies and procedures governing persons holding
provisional appointments;
(f) The policies and procedures governing relationships with
employee organizations;
(g) Policies regarding in-service training programs;
(h) Grievance procedures as set out in state statute and New
Jersey Administrative Code; and
(i) Other practices and procedures necessary or desirable to the
administration of a sound personnel system.
M. Local Registrar.
(1) Establishment. There shall be within the Department of
Administration an Office of the Local Registrar, which shall contain
a Local Registrar who, under the supervision and direction of the
State Registrar, shall be responsible for the vital statistics within
the City. Council may also appoint a Deputy Registrar.
(2) Qualification. No physician, midwife or funeral director shall be
appointed as Local Registrar. The Municipal Clerk may serve as
Local Registrar. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(3) Appointment and certification. The Local Registrar shall be
appointed by City Council and pursuant to provisions of Title 11A
and any other provisions set forth by the Department of State.
(4) Vacancy. If for any reason, the office is vacant or deemed vacant,
the Municipal Clerk shall act as Local Registrar until the
appointment and certification of a successor. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(5) Duties and responsibilities. The Local Registrar shall strictly
enforce the statutes relative to the registration of vital statistics,
which shall include the making of a complete and accurate copy of
§ 3-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-16
1:51
each birth, marriage and death certificate registered in his office,
to be preserved in his office as the local record and the
transmission to the State Registrar of all original certificates. The
Local Registrar shall enforce all rules and regulations for the
registration of vital statistics as directed by the State Registrar.
(N.J.S.A. 26:8-1 et seq.)6
N. Division of Collections.
(1) Head. There shall be within the Department of Administration a
Division of Collections, the head of which shall be the Tax Collector.
(2) Appointment and qualification of Tax Collector. The Tax Collector
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
Council. No person shall serve as Tax Collector if that person
serves as a member of City Council. No person shall be appointed
or reappointed unless that person holds a valid Tax Collector's
Certificate issued pursuant to state statute.
(3) Term. The Tax Collector shall hold the office for a term of four years
from January 1 next following the appointment. Vacancies, other
than due to the expiration of the term, shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term.
(4) Tenure; removal.
(a) Any person who shall have been reappointed to said office
upon completion of one full term of four years shall have
tenure.
(b) Removal of any Tax Collector shall be governed by applicable
state law including N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.8 and shall include, as a
definition of good cause, the failure to meet state continuing
education requirements.
(5) Review. City Council or the Mayor may request a review by the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services of the
behavior and practices of a Certified Tax Collector, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.5.
(6) Duties and powers. The Tax Collector shall have, perform and
exercise all functions, powers and duties as are provided by
general law and ordinance, including without limitation thereto:
(a) The preparation and mailing of tax bills, enforcement of tax
collections by tax sales and otherwise, and the maintenance of
tax accounting records in such manner as may be prescribed or
approved pursuant to law; and in furtherance thereof.
6. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-24.16, Office of Economic Development, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9.
§ 3-16 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-16
1:52
(b) The receipt and collection of all current and delinquent real
and personal property taxes, with penalties and interest
pursuant to law.
(c) The making or causing to be made and certifying of searches
for tax, water and other liens on real property as may be
authorized by law and the charging and collection for the use
of the City the fee required pursuant to law for any such
search, and the Division may appoint or designate one of its
employees as Official Tax Searcher to perform these functions
within the Division.
(d) The billing, receipt and collection of water, sewer and solid
waste accounts as determined by and pursuant to ordinance.
(7) Dog licenses. The Tax Collector shall collect any license or
registration fees or other charges for the keeping of animals as
provided by City ordinance.7
(8) Central cashier. Within the Division of Collections shall be a central
cashier's office. All cash receipts and payments to the City, except
fines imposed for traffic violations or otherwise in the Municipal
Court, shall be received and accounted for by the Tax Collector who
shall, by the next ensuing bank day after their receipt, deposit them
to the credit of the proper account. This shall include, without
limitation thereto, all tax payments, sewer and water charges and
rents, license, permit and inspection fees, filing fees and all other
revenue receipts of any department.
O. Division of the Treasury.
(1) Within the Department of Administration shall be a Division of the
Treasury, whose head shall be the City Treasurer.
(2) The City Treasurer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of City Council for a term of four years.
(3) The City Treasurer shall:
(a) Be the certifying agent for the various retirement systems for
officers and employees;
(b) Perform bank reconciliation; and
(c) Sign checks as provided by ordinance.
(4) City Council may grant tenure whenever a person shall have held
the office for 10 consecutive years. If City Council fails to grant
tenure, a petition may be filed for a referendum vote on tenure
(N.J.S.A. 40A:9-152). If tenure is granted, removal shall be
governed by applicable state law, including N.J.S.A. 40A:9-152.8
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Animals.
§ 3-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-16
1:53
P. (Reserved)9
Q. Affirmative Action Officer. The City's Affirmative Action Plan shall be
implemented by the Affirmative Action Officer, appointed by the Mayor.
The Business Administrator may serve in this capacity.
R. Division of Housing and Code Enforcement.
(1) Division of Housing and Code Enforcement generally. There shall
be a Division of Housing and Code Enforcement, the head of which
shall be the Supervisor, who shall be appointed by the Business
Administrator, with the consent of the Mayor and pursuant to the
provisions of Title 11A of the state statutes.
(2) Responsibilities. The Division of Housing and Code Enforcement
shall be responsible generally for the enforcement of regulations,
ordinances or codes addressing residential premises or dwellings,
dwelling units or rooming units within the City and for the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code10 or any other
codes affecting property or structures or dwellings in the City.
(3) Employees; qualifications.
(a) The Division shall consist of the Housing Officers, the State
Uniform Construction Code Official, the Plumbing Subcode
Official, Electrical Subcode Official, the Elevator Subcode
Official, the Fire Protection Subcode Official and any other
subcode officials or employees as may be necessary to conduct
the work of the Division.
(b) Each position within the Division of Housing and Code
Enforcement shall be filled by a person qualified for such
position; each official position created in enforcing the State
Uniform Construction Code shall be qualified for such position
as required by the State Uniform Construction Code, as
amended. More than one position may be held by the same
person, provided that person is qualified to hold such position.
(4) Duties. The Division shall:
(a) Administer all building and construction codes as they pertain
to the City.
(b) Conduct and perform all inspection duties, as required by the
State Uniform Construction Code, any subcodes, the BOCA
National Property Maintenance Code, or any other ordinances
addressing buildings and structures and their use and
8. Editor's Note: Original Section 2-24.19, Office of Community Development, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9.
9. Editor's Note: Former Subsection P, regarding the Office of Public Assistance, was deleted
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 126, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 3-16 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-16
1:54
§ 3-17. Department of Financial Administration.
occupancy, other than those inspections allocated to the
Division of Fire and Fire Safety by this code.
(c) Enforce all laws and ordinances establishing occupancy
standards to protect the health and safety of persons using or
occupying buildings or other structures.
(d) Maintain the Registry of Premises recording the owners of
buildings within the City containing two or more dwelling
units;
(e) Enforce the ordinances and regulations addressing flood
hazards and flood hazard areas within the City.
(f) Enforce all ordinances addressing abandoned motor vehicles,
other than those ordinances and laws allocated to the Division
of Police.
(g) Consolidate and coordinate all regulatory inspections relating
to building and structures and real property which are not
vested in any other department or division by the
Administrative Code and, as to the latter, provide for
cooperative inspection and enforcement so far as practicable.
(h) Ensure collection of all fees payable for inspections made by
the Division which shall be paid in advance of the inspection to
the central cashier.
A. Department of Financial Administration generally. There shall be a
Department of Financial Administration responsible for the financial
administration of the City.
B. Chief Financial Officer. The director of the Department of Financial
Administration shall be the Chief Financial Officer, responsible for the
proper financial administration of the City under the Local Government
Supervision Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-1 et seq.); the Local Bond Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq.); the Local Budget Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et
seq.); the Local Fiscal Affairs Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq.); the Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.); and such other
statutes, and such rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of
the Division of Local Government Services, the Local Finance Board, or
any other state agency, as may pertain to the financial administration of
the City.
C. Qualifications and appointment of Chief Financial Officer or Temporary
Chief Financial Officer.
(1) Qualifications. The qualifications for the position of Chief Financial
Officer shall be those established and set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.2 et seq. and no person shall be appointed or
§ 3-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-17
1:55
reappointed as Chief Financial Officer unless he or she holds a
Municipal Finance Officer Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.13) No person who serves
as a member of the governing body of the City shall serve as Chief
Financial Officer of the City. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.6)
(2) Appointment. City Council shall appoint the Chief Financial Officer
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10.
(3) Temporary Chief Financial Officer. When a vacancy occurs in the
office of Chief Financial Officer, the Mayor, with approval of City
Council, may appoint a person who does not hold a Municipal
Finance Officer Certificate to serve as temporary Chief Financial
Officer for a period not to exceed one year and commencing on the
date of the vacancy. However, a person so appointed may, with the
approval of the Director of the Division of Local Services, be
reappointed as Chief Financial Officer following the termination of
the temporary appointment for one additional year. The City shall
not have a Temporary Chief Financial Officer for more than two
consecutive years. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.13.f)
D. Term of office; tenure.
(1) Term of office. The term of office shall be for four years, which shall
run from January 1 in the year in which the Chief Financial Officer
is appointed. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10)
(2) Tenure. Any person who has served in the position of Chief
Financial Officer for a period of four consecutive years and who is
reappointed as the City's Chief Financial Officer and who holds a
Municipal Finance Officer Certificate issued in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq. shall be granted tenure of office upon
filing with the Clerk of the City and with the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs a
notification evidencing his compliance with this section. N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.8. Thereafter, that person shall continue to hold office
during good behavior and efficiency, and shall not be removed
therefrom except for just cause, and then only as set forth in the
code or state statutes.
E. Removal from office. A Chief Financial Officer having tenure shall not
be removed from office except for just cause.
(1) Removal from office upon written complaint.
(a) The written complaint setting forth the charge or charges
against the Chief Financial Officer shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk and the Director of the Division of Local
Government Services ("Director"), and a certified copy thereof
shall be served upon the person so charged. The Director shall
thereafter designate a hearing date before the Director or his
designee, which shall be not less than 30 days nor later than 60
§ 3-17 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-17
1:56
days from the date of service of the complaint. The hearing
date may be extended by the Superior Court for good cause
shown upon the application of either parry. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(b) The person so charged and the complainant shall have the
right to be represented by counsel and the power to subpoena
witness and documentary evidence, together with discovery
proceedings.
(c) The Superior Court shall have the jurisdiction to review the
determination of the Director, which Court shall hear the cause
de novo on the record below and affirm, modify or set aside
such determination. Either party may supplement the record
with additional testimony subject to the rules of evidence.
(N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.9)
(2) Removal from office by revocation or suspension of certificate. Any
Municipal Finance Officer Certificate may be revoked or suspended
by the Director for dishonest practices or willful or intentional
failure, neglect or refusal to comply with the Constitution of the
State of New Jersey or laws relating to municipal finances or other
good cause. The City Council together with the Mayor may request
a review by the Director of the behavior or practices of a certified
Municipal Finance Officer. The Director may also initiate a review
of the behavior or practices of a certified Municipal Finance Officer
if the Director finds it advisable to do so through the normal
exercise of his statutory duties and responsibilities. No certificate
shall be revoked or suspended except under a proper hearing
before the Director or his designee after due notice. If the
Municipal Finance Officer Certificate of a person serving as a Chief
Financial Officer or Municipal Finance Officer shall be revoked,
such person shall be removed from his office or position by the
Director, the office or position shall be declared vacant, and the
person shall not be eligible to hold that office or position or to make
application for a recertification for a period of five years from the
date of revocation. (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.12)
F. Duties of the Chief Financial Officer. The Chief Financial Officer shall:
(1) Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the City or in
possession of the City in a fiduciary capacity except as otherwise
provided by law and keep such funds, and all moneys of the City not
required for current operations, safely invested or deposited in
interest-bearing accounts.
(2) Supervise the administration of the City debt and the receipt and
delivery of City bonds and notes for transfer, registration or
exchange subject to provisions of the Local Bond Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:2-1 et seq.) or other law.
§ 3-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-17
1:57
(3) Develop, maintain and enforce a uniform system of accounts,
including forms, standards and procedures for all departments.
(4) Establish and maintain the City's central bookkeeping and
accounting records according to generally accepted accounting
principles and in accordance with the requirements of the Director
of the State Division of Local Government Services.
(5) Maintain accounts of all cash receipts and disbursements and make
reports in accordance with the system of accounts approved or
prescribed by the Director of the State Division of Local
Government Services and prepare a monthly statement of all
moneys received and expended and of the unexpended and
unencumbered balance in each account for the information of the
City Council, the Mayor, the Business Administrator and the
general public.
(6) Review each proposed expenditure and commitment to be made on
behalf of any department for conformity with state law, the Charter
and City ordinances and authorize only such expenditures and
commitments, including claims, bills and demands so as to conform
to all requirements of the Administrative Code. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-48)
(7) Audit all receipts and disbursements of City government, including
each department and preaudit all bills, claims and demands
including payroll upon the City.
(8) Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are
not exceeded and maintain such books and records as may be
required for the exercise of budget control, including an
encumbrance system of budget operations and expenditures only
upon written requisition. (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-48)
(9) Provide specific notification to the Business Administrator, Mayor
and Council when conditions arise which may reveal insufficient
funds in any account balance or which may lead to or result in audit
discrepancies or comments.
(10) Make disbursements of City funds with every warrant check made
payable to the order of the person entitled to receive the same and
shall specify the purpose for which it is drawn and the account or
appropriation to which it is chargeable and shall bear such
signatures as are required by the Administrative Code. (N.J.S.A.
40:69A-48)
(11) Prepare any records, reports, studies or schedules requested by
the Mayor, Business Administrator or City Council, including
reports for the preparation of the budget or the determination of
the cost of performance of each program or activity, measured in
such work units as may be appropriate thereto.
§ 3-17 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-17
1:58
§ 3-18. Department of Law.
(12) Perform such other duties and responsibilities as required for
proper administration of the City's finances in accordance with the
statutes and code.
G. Payment of claims; presentation to City Council. [Amended 9-17-2017
by Ord. No. 17-20; 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-25]
(1) The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare for each regular meeting
of City Council a list of all bills, claims and vouchers which have
been received through the close of business on the Wednesday next
preceding the meeting and since the last preceding list was
compiled. Such list shall be prepared in sufficient copy for each
member of Council, and for the Mayor and Business Administrator,
and at least one copy shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk as a
public record open to examination in the Clerk's office. No bills
shall be paid except for the payroll until the listing of bills has been
approved by resolution of the Council.
(2) In the event a regularly scheduled City Council meeting is not held
as scheduled due to cancellation or lack of a quorum, the Chief
Financial Officer is hereby authorized to issue payments on any
recurring account as deemed necessary and appropriate with such
payments being submitted for subsequent approval by City Council
at its next meeting.
H. (Reserved)11
I. Independent annual audit. The Council shall cause to be made an
annual audit of the City's accounts and financial transactions as
required by law. Such annual audit shall be made by a registered
municipal accountant of New Jersey selected by the Council. (N.J.S.A.
40A:5-4)
A. City Solicitor; appointment. There shall be a Department of Law, the
head of which shall be the City Solicitor. The City Solicitor shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of City Council and
shall serve during the term of the Mayor, who makes the appointment,
and until the appointment and qualification of a successor. The City
Solicitor shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by
separate ordinance. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43(a) and (b)] Reference to "City
Attorney" shall mean "City Solicitor."12
B. Powers and duties generally. The powers and duties of the City Solicitor
shall be as follows:
11.Editor's Note: Former Subsection H, Payment of claims; Self-Insurance Claims Committee,
was repealed 12-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-25.
12.Editor's Note: Reference to "City Attorney" have been changed to "City Solicitor" in this
chapter and the rest of the Code of the City of Bridgeton.
§ 3-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-18
1:59
(1) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency of all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the City.
(2) Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the City as the City Solicitor or Assistants may
determine to be necessary or desirable, or as directed by the Mayor
or City Council.
(3) Subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council, have the
power to enter into any agreement, compromise or settlement of
any litigation in which the City is involved.
(4) Render opinions in writing upon any question of law submitted to
the Department of Law by the Mayor, the City Council, the Business
Administrator or the head of any department, with respect to their
official powers and duties.
(5) Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters
which relate to the City's interest, and report thereon as the Mayor
or City Council may require.
(6) Have such other and different functions, powers and duties as may
be provided by Charter or ordinance.
(7) Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorneys and
technical and professional assistants as the City Council may
authorize for special or regular employment in or for the City.
C. Assistant City Solicitors.
(1) Appointment. The City Solicitor, with the approval of the Mayor,
shall appoint Assistant City Solicitors to serve during the term of
office of the City Solicitor appointing them.
(2) Powers and duties. An Assistant City Solicitor shall render services
and provide legal representation of and to the City as the City
Solicitor assigns. The City Solicitor may assign an Assistant City
Solicitor to act in the place of the City Solicitor in the event of the
absence or disqualification of the City Solicitor.
(3) Absence of the City Solicitor or vacancy in the Office. During the
absence or disability of the City Solicitor, an Assistant City Solicitor
shall possess the powers and perform all the duties of the City
Solicitor. In the event of the death or resignation of the City
Solicitor or of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office for any
other reason, an Assistant City Solicitor shall act as the City
Solicitor until the office is duly filled pursuant to the Charter.
D. City Prosecutor.
(1) Appointment. The City Prosecutor shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of Council and shall serve during the
§ 3-18 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-18
1:60
§ 3-19. Department of Development and Planning [Added
12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9]
term of the Mayor who makes the appointment. The City Solicitor
or an Assistant City Solicitor may also serve as the City Prosecutor.
One or more Assistant City Prosecutors shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of Council and shall serve
during the term of the Mayor who makes the appointment.
[Amended 8-21-2007 by Ord. No. 07-10]
(2) Duties. The City Prosecutor shall conduct prosecutions and trials
for violations heard in the Municipal Court, including violations of
City ordinances, complaints of any department and violations of
rules and regulations duly promulgated by any department. The
City Prosecutor, the City Solicitor or the Assistant City Solicitors
may prosecute appeals in the Superior Court from convictions in
the Municipal Court.
E. Special counsel. Whenever the City Solicitor deems the interests of the
City so require, the City Solicitor may, with the approval of the Mayor
and Council and within the limits of available appropriations, appoint
special counsel to assist the City Solicitor in the preparation, trial or
argument of such legal matters or proceedings as the City Solicitor may
determine. If the City Solicitor should be disqualified with respect to
any matter, the Mayor shall appoint special counsel with the approval of
City Council to represent the City for and with respect to such matter.
F. Records and papers. All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and
other materials relating to the administration of the Department of Law
shall be and remain the property of the City. Upon the termination of
services with the City, the City Solicitor shall forthwith surrender to any
successor all such property together with a written consent to
substitution of the successor in all legal actions and proceedings then
pending to which the City is a party. The Assistant City Solicitor or
special counsel shall have a like duty and obligation upon the
termination of service with the City.
A. Department generally. There shall be a Department of Development and
Planning, the head of which shall be the Director of Development and
Planning. Within the Department, there shall be the following offices:
(1) Office Community Development.
(2) Office of Economic Development.
(3) Office of Planning.
B. Responsibilities. The Department, under the direction and supervision
of the Director and the Mayor shall:
(1) Prepare, create, and develop an economic development strategy
for the City.
§ 3-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-19
1:61
(2) Prepare an Economic Development Marketing Plan.
(3) Insure that the City gets its fair share of grants and other funding
sources to carry out its development activities.
(4) Report to the Mayor on the development and progress of all
economic development projects within the City.
(5) Consult and coordinate with all City departments any Economic
and Community Development activities within the City.
(6) Supervise all employees within the Department to insure efficiency
and maximize productivity.
C. Office of Community Development.
(1) There shall be within the Department of Development and Planning
an Office of Community Development.
(2) The Office of Community Development shall preserve, promote and
develop the City's interests in the areas of housing, public facilities,
neighborhood improvements and community services.
(3) The Office shall be responsible for research, application and
administration of state, federal and private grant funding for the
programs sponsored by the City.
(4) The Office shall work with other City departments, offices or
agencies in securing funding for their operations and programs.
(5) The Office shall create and maintain a data bank of all existing
businesses and commercial establishments within the City of
Bridgeton, and the Office of Community Development and Office of
Economic Development shall work together to disseminate and
coordinate the use of such information to promote business and
economic development within the City. [Added 7-15-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-2]
D. Office of Economic Development.
(1) There shall be within the Department of Development and Planning
an Office of Economic Development.
(2) The Office shall promote the industrial, commercial and other
economic development of the City in accordance with the directives
of the Department of Development and Planning and the Mayor.
(3) The Office shall work with the various departments, agencies,
boards or commissions, in promoting the City's economic
development.
(4) The Office shall administer all economic or business loans or
assistance programs involving the City.
§ 3-19 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-19
1:62
§ 3-20. Department of Public Works. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-5]
(5) The Office shall create and maintain a data bank of all existing
businesses and commercial establishments within the City of
Bridgeton, and the Office of Community Development and Office of
Economic Development shall work together to disseminate and
coordinate the use of such information to promote business and
economic development within the City. [Added 7-15-2008 by Ord.
No. 08-2]
E. Office of Planning.
(1) There shall be an Office of Planning the head of which shall be the
City Planner. Within the office there shall be the following officers:
(a) City Planner.
(b) Zoning Officer.
(2) Powers and duties. The officer shall:
(a) Make master plan studies and analyses and report thereon to
the Mayor, Council and Planning Board.
(b) Study the operation and effect of land use controls and their
administration within the City and report thereon to the Mayor,
Council and Planning Board.
(c) Review and report on all Planning Board applications.
(d) Consult and coordinate with various city officials on planning,
economic development or housing issues.
(e) Provide such expert, technical and other staff services to the
Planning Board, City Council, special committees or other City
departments and agencies as may be requested from time to
time and within the limits of available appropriations.
(f) Administer Chapter 370, Zoning, and perform the duties of the
Zoning Officer.
(3) Attendance at meetings. The City Planner shall attend all regular
meetings of the Planning Board.
A. Department of Public Works generally. There shall be a Department of
Public Works, the head of which shall be the Director of Public Works,
who may be the City Engineer. Within the Department, there shall be
the following Divisions:
(1) Division of Engineering.
(2) 13Division of Water and Sewer. [Added 12-1-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
§ 3-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-20
1:63
(3) Division of Streets and Roads.
(4) Division of Public Buildings and Grounds.
(5) Division of Solid Waste.
B. Principal Public Works Manager. Within the Department of Public
Works, there shall be named a Principal Public Works Manager, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with advice and consent of Council.
The person appointed shall hold a Public Works Manager Certificate
and shall not be a member of City Council; the person shall comply with
all other requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.6.
C. Each Division shall be headed by a Supervisor. A Supervisor may head
more than one Division.
D. Department functions generally.
(1) The Department of Public Works shall provide for the proper and
efficient conduct of all public works functions of the City
government, and shall provide technical and engineering advice
and assistance to other City departments as needed.
(2) Subject to the Charter and ordinances, it shall administer and
control the following functions, and the construction, operation and
maintenance of public works, improvements, facilities and services
relating thereto:
(a) 14Water supply and distribution. [Added 12-1-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-04]
(b) 15Sanitary and storm sewers and drains. [Added 12-1-2009
by Ord. No. 09-04]
(c) Streets, roads, bridges.
(d) Parks, rivers, streams, waterfronts and flood damage control
and reduction.
(e) Traffic engineering and street lighting.
(f) Public buildings and grounds.
(g) Solid waste and recycling.
E. Division of Engineering. There shall be within the Department of Public
Works, a Division of Engineering, the head of which shall be the City
Engineer.
13.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), Division of Water and Sewer was repealed
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12. See § 3-20.1 for current provisions.
14.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2)(a), Water supply and distribution, was repealed
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12. See § 3-20.1 for current provisions.
15.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(2)(b), Sanitary and storm sewers and drains, was
repealed 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12. See § 3-20.1 for current provisions.
§ 3-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-20
1:64
(1) City Engineer. The City Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of City Council and shall serve during
the term of the Mayor appointing the City Engineer and until the
appointment and qualification of a successor. The City Engineer
shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by separate
ordinance. [N.J.S.A. 40:69A-43(a) and (b)]. The City Engineer, prior
to his appointment, shall hold a professional degree in civil
engineering from a recognized school or college of engineering and
shall be a licensed professional engineer recognized by the State of
New Jersey. The City Engineer shall attend all regular meetings of
the Planning Board and, when requested, City Council meetings.
(2) The Division of Engineering, under the direction and supervision of
the Director of Public Works, shall:
(a) Be responsible for the preparation of all plans and
specifications for public works and improvements undertaken
by the City either on force account or by public contract;
(b) Supervise the performance of all contracts for public works,
and certify the amounts due and payable;
(c) Provide and maintain surveys, maps, specifications and
operating records with respect to all public property, works
and facilities owned or operated by the City government;
(d) Supervise and direct the installation and administration of
departmental records, payroll and inventory controls and cost
analysis;
(e) Establish standards and procedures for the control, use and
care of all City-owned equipment, materials and supplies in the
custody of the Department;
(f) Exercise general supervision over and coordinate engineering
and technical activities and services of all departments;
(g) Maintain, in conjunction with the City Tax Assessor, the City
Tax Map on a current basis.
F. 16Division of Water and Sewer; duties, functions and responsibilities.
The Division shall: [Added 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(1) Operate and maintain the water supply and distribution system of
the City;
(2) Maintain, repair, test and set water meters; maintain service maps
and records; install and repair water mains, service connections,
valves and appurtenances;
16.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Division of Water and Sewer, was repealed 11-21-2006
by Ord. No. 06-12. See § 3-20.1 for current provisions.
§ 3-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-20
1:65
(3) Install, maintain and service all fire hydrants in the City subject to
the approval of the Fire Department;
(4) Operate and maintain the City's intercepting sewers, sewage
pumping stations and all other sanitary and storm sewer
installations, and install and repair sewer mains, lines and
appurtenances;
(5) Work with the Division of Collections in the Department of
Administration to facilitate billing and collecting of water and
sewer accounts;
(6) Perform any other duties as set forth in the ordinances regulating
the City's water and sewer services or as directed by the Mayor.
G. Division of Streets and Roads. Within the Department of Public Works
there shall be a Division of Streets Roads, the head of which shall be the
Supervisor, who shall be appointed by the Director, with the consent of
the Mayor and pursuant to the provisions of Title 11A of the state
statutes. Under the direction and supervision of the Director of Public
Works, the Division shall:
(1) Maintain and repair all public streets, City bridges, culverts and
drains within the City;
(2) Undertake new road construction projects, which are to be
performed by the Department on a force account;
(3) Maintain all City streets in a clean and safe condition, free of
obstructions and hazards and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required;
(4) Install, operate, repair and maintain street traffic signs, lines and
markers and paint control signals;
(5) Provide for the storage, servicing, repair and maintenance of Cityowned
motor vehicles other than fire engines and police vehicles,
supervise such work as may be done with respect thereto pursuant
to contract; and control the use and maintenance of motor vehicles
owned by the City, through vehicle operating records, cost studies
and replacement schedules;
(6) Operate, maintain and repair City-owned public parking areas and
facilities;
(7) Regulate the construction, alteration and repair of sidewalks, curbs
and gutters, and encroachments by objects and structures above
and below public streets and sidewalks, to prevent interference
with the public use thereof and to maintain reasonable standards of
maintenance and repair;
(8) Supervise the administration of streetlighting studies and prepare
recommendations, plans and programs with respect thereto.
§ 3-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-20
1:66
§ 3-20.1. Division of Water and Sewer. [Added 11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-12; amended 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
H. Division of Public Buildings and Grounds. Within the Department of
Public Works there shall be a Division of Public Buildings and Grounds,
the head of which shall be the Supervisor, who shall be appointed by the
Director, with the consent of the Mayor and pursuant to the provisions
of Title 11A of the state statutes. Under the direction and supervision of
the Director of Public Works, the Director shall:
(1) Provide custodial and janitorial services for the City Hall and City
Hall Annex;
(2) Operate, maintain, repair and manage City property, including City
Hall, City Hall Annex and other office quarters except that each
department of the City shall be responsible for the operation and
management of all property owned by the City and used by the
department for its sole and exclusive purposes;
(3) Maintain and repair City public grounds, including the City's parks.
I. Division of Solid Waste. Within the Department of Public Works there
shall be a Division of Solid Waste, the head of which shall be the
Supervisor, who shall be appointed by the Director, with the consent of
the Mayor and pursuant to the provisions of Title 11A of the state
statutes. The Director, with the consent of the Mayor, may appoint a
person to coordinate and facilitate the recycling activities within the
City. The Division of Solid Waste shall supervise the collection, removal
and disposal of garbage and refuse and recyclables as set forth in the
City's ordinances.
A. Division of Water and Sewer generally. There shall be a Division of
Water and Sewer, the head of which shall be the Director of the Division
of Water and Sewer.
B. The Division shall:
(1) Operate and maintain the water supply and distribution system of
the City.
(2) Maintain, repair, test and set water meters; maintain service maps
and records; install and repair water mains, service connections,
valves and appurtenances.
(3) Install, maintain and service all fire hydrants in the City subject to
the approval of the Fire Department.
(4) Operate and maintain the City's intercepting sewers, sewage
pumping stations and all other sanitary and storm sewer
installations, and install and repair sewer mains, lines and
appurtenances.
§ 3-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-20.1
1:67
§ 3-21. Department of Police. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
98-15; 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 01-11; 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5;
7-3-2007 by Ord. No. 07-1; 12-4-2007 by Ord. No. 07-18; 12-4-2007
by Ord. No. 07-19; 1-6-2009 by Ord. No. 08-18]
(5) Work with the Division of Collections in the Department of
Administration to facilitate billing and collecting of water and
sewer accounts.
(6) Perform any other duties as set forth in the ordinances regulating
the City's water and sewer services or as directed by the Mayor.
A. Appropriate authority. The Business Administrator, or in his absence or
inability to act, the Mayor, shall act as the other appropriate authority
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 to determine policies for the
Police Department of the City of Bridgeton and act as hearing officer for
same.
B. Organization and duties. The Department of Police shall consist of a
Chief of Police and such members and officers as Council shall deem
necessary. The Department shall:
(1) Preserve the public peace; protect life and property; prevent crime;
detect, arrest and prosecute offenders against the penal laws and
ordinances effective within the City; and preserve order at all
elections and public meetings and assemblages.
(2) Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct,
control and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, and the use of the streets by vehicles and persons, to
protect the safety and facilitate the convenience of motorists and
pedestrians and to make and enforce rules and regulations not
inconsistent with the Charter and ordinances for such purposes.
(3) Remove or cause to be removed all nuisances in the public streets,
parks and other public places, inspect and observe all places of
public amusement or assemblage and all places of business
requiring any state or municipal license or permit and report
thereon to the appropriate department.
(4) Provide for the attendance of its members in court as necessary for
the prosecution and trial of persons charged with crimes and
offenses, and cooperate fully with the law enforcement and
prosecuting authorities of federal, state and county government.
(5) Operate a training program to maintain and improve the police
efficiency of the members of the Department.
(6) Make, administer and enforce rules and regulations for the
deposition, conduct and discipline of the Department.
§ 3-20.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-21
1:68
(7) Provide such police assistance as may be necessary to any other
department for its proper functioning.
(8) Provide such reports to the Mayor or City Council as is requested
by the Mayor or Council in addition to monthly and yearly reports
of police matters.
(9) Enforce parking ordinances of the City and enforce all parking
ordinances.
(10) Supervise the Animal Control Officer and the canvas of dogs and
enforce the Animal Control Ordinance.17
C. Organization and personnel of the Department of Police.
(1) Chief of Police. The head of the Police Administration shall be the
Chief of Police, who shall report to the Mayor through the Business
Administrator and shall be responsible for the efficiency and
routine day-to-day operations of the Department and for the
preparation of reports as required herein.
(2) Chief of Police duties. The Chief of Police shall administer and
enforce rules and regulations and special emergency directives for
the disposition and discipline of the force and its officers and
personnel; have, exercise and discharge the duties of the
Department of Police; prescribe the duties and assignments of all
subordinates and other personnel, including special law
enforcement officers; delegate such of his authority as he may
deem necessary for the efficient operation of the force; operate a
training program to maintain and improve the police efficiency of
the members of the Division (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118).
(3) Chief of Police additional duties. The Chief of Police shall also
establish and maintain the efficient operation of the Department
organize, control and maintain all property and resources of the
Department; maintain a constructive and informative relationship
with the public, community organizations, media and other law
enforcement agencies; and advise the Business Administrator, in
writing, of any difficulties or problems in the enforcement of any
ordinance.
(4) Organization. The Department shall be organized according to
such table of organization as established by the appropriate
authority and prescribed by separate Salary Ordinance.
D. Control of stolen or abandoned property. The retention and disposal of
all property coming into possession and custody of the Police
Department and alleged to be found and recovered or unclaimed or
abandoned shall be governed by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157, as amended, with
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 83, Animals, Art. I, Licensing and Control.
§ 3-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21
1:69
the exception of motor vehicles, which shall be governed by N.J.S.A.
39:10A-1 et seq.
E. Special law enforcement officers.
(1) Appointment. Special law enforcement officers may be appointed
by the Business Administrator for terms not to exceed one year, and
the appointments may be revoked by the Business Administrator
for cause after adequate hearing on charges filed by the Chief of
Police unless the appointment is for four months or less, in which
case the appointment may be revoked by the Business
Administrator without cause or hearing, upon recommendation by
the Chief of Police. Nothing hereby shall be construed to require
reappointment upon the expiration of the term.
(2) Qualifications. No person shall be appointed as a special law
enforcement officer unless such a person meets the qualification
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.10.
(3) Certification. No person shall commence serving as special
enforcement officer unless he has been certified by the Police
Training Commission as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11.
(4) Classification. [Amended 4-23-2013 by Ord. No. 12-40]
(a) Designation. Persons appointed special law enforcement
officers shall, upon appointment, be designated as either a
Class 1 or Class 2 special law enforcement officer as more fully
defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11 and shall upon such
designation be authorized to perform all the duties set forth in
the respective classifications unless the Chief of Police limits
the duties of the law enforcement officer.
(b) Class 1 officers shall have the power to issue summonses for
disorderly persons and petty disorderly persons offenses,
violations of municipal ordinances and violations of Title 39 of
the Revised Statutes and any other duties permitted by statute.
(c) Number. No more than 15 persons shall be designated as Class
1 special law enforcement officers. The number of persons
designated as Class 2 special law enforcement officers shall
not exceed 25% of the total number of regular police officers.
(5) Firearms. The carrying of firearms by special law enforcement
officers shall be strictly governed by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14b.
(6) Hours. The City may designate one special law enforcement officer
who is not governed by limitations on hours employed as set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.16a. All other special law enforcement
officers may work no more than 20 hours per week except as
follows:
(a) Without limitation as to hours during period of emergency;
§ 3-21 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-21
1:70
(b) A special law enforcement officer may be assigned for no more
than 20 hours per week to provide public safety and law
enforcement services to a public entity, in addition to not more
than 20 hours per week performing the duties pursuant to this
section; and
(c) For hours to be determined by the Chief of Police while
assigned to public safety duties for a private entity, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14b.
(d) For hours to be determined by the Chief of Police, not to exceed
48 hours per week, during the seasonal period from June, July,
August and September, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.a(1).
(7) Regulation. All duly appointed special law enforcement officers
shall be subject to ordinances and rules and regulations governing
the Department of Police of the City of Bridgeton and the Special
Law Enforcement Officers Act (N.J.S.A. 40A14-146.8 et seq.).
(8) Fee. The City has the right, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.13, to
charge a reasonable fee to be hereinafter fixed by the Business
Administrator for equipment and uniforms supplied.
F. Police Chaplain. [Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 13-16]
(1) Position created. The position of Police Chaplain for the City of
Bridgeton Police Department is hereby created in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-141. The position will be a volunteer position. The
position of Chaplain shall be under the appropriate authority and
subject to the control of the Chief of Police.
(2) Appointment. The Chief of Police may recommend to the Mayor
persons that he/she believes meet the qualifications of N.J.S.A.
40A:14-141 as well as the rules and regulations of the City of
Bridgeton Police Department with reference to Chaplains, if any. All
applicants for the position of Chaplain shall be reviewed by the
Chief of Police, Senior Police Chaplain and Chaplain liaison to
determine his/her qualifications in accordance with this Subsection
F and shall make recommendations to the Mayor regarding the
appointment as Chaplain. The Mayor shall appoint Chaplains in
accordance with this Subsection F with the advice and consent of
City Council.
(3) Qualifications. Any person appointed as Chaplain shall be an
ordained clergyman in good standing in the religious body from
which he/she is selected. The Chaplain shall have basic training
and shall be a certified Police Chaplain credentialed in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the City of Bridgeton Police
Department and shall be qualified in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-141.
§ 3-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21
1:71
§ 3-21.1. Department of Fire. [Added 1-6-2009 by Ord. No. 08-18]
(4) Duties of Police Chaplain. The duties of Police Chaplain shall
include but not be limited to assisting the City of Bridgeton Police
Department in death notifications, station house adjustments and
any other duties that may be assigned by the Chief of Police.
(5) Rank and salary. Any person appointed as Chaplain shall serve in
that capacity without rank or salary.
(6) Term of office. A person appointed as Chaplain shall serve for a
period of one (1) year from date of appointment and shall continue
to serve in that capacity until he/she is either terminated or
reappointed with the recommendation of the Chief of Police.
A. Appropriate authority. The Business Administrator, or in his absence or
inability to act, the Mayor, shall act as the other appropriate authority
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7 to determine policies for the Fire
Department of the City of Bridgeton and act as hearing officer for same.
B. Department of Fire. The Department of Fire shall have exclusive
jurisdiction over the control, lighting and extinguishment of any
conflagration which occurs within the City limits. The Department shall:
(1) Make, administer and enforce rules and regulations for the control,
disposition and discipline of the Department and its officers and
employees and within the limits of available appropriations for the
establishment and maintenance of fire stations and the disposition,
use and care of its equipment and apparatus.
(2) Provide fire-fighting service for the extinguishment of fires and the
necessary and incidental protection of life and property throughout
the City and upon vessels in any waters within the City or upon any
dock, wharf, pier, warehouse, or other structure bordering upon or
adjacent to such waters.
(3) Direct or cause any vessel moored to or anchored near any dock or
pier or in any waters within the City to be removed to and secured
at such place as shall be designated by the Fire Chief whenever any
such vessel shall be afire or in danger of igniting, or may be, by
reason of its condition or the nature of its cargo, a menace to life or
property.
(4) Designate and fix the location of fire signal stations in the City and
operate, repair and maintain a City fire alarm and signal system.
(5) Investigate the cause, circumstances and origin of fires and report
to the Department of Police and to the County Prosecutor every
case of suspicion of arson.
(6) Have power to inspect and test any automatic or other fire alarm
system or fire-extinguishing equipment.
§ 3-21 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-21.1
1:72
(7) Be authorized to enter upon, without fee or hindrance, all premises,
grounds, structures, buildings, vessels and passages whenever
necessary in the performance of its duties.
(8) Operate a training program to maintain and improve the firefighting
efficiency of the members of the Department.
(9) Investigate and oversee or plan the disposal of fire hazards and
violations.
(10) Enforce observation of fire prevention regulations and rules at
places of public gatherings.
(11) Provide fire assistance as may be necessary to other departments
or divisions and other jurisdictions.
C. Organization and personnel of the Department of Fire.
(1) Fire Chief. The head of the Department shall be the Fire Chief, who
shall report directly to the Mayor through the Business
Administrator. In the absence of the Fire Chief, the Battalion Chief
shall be in command of the Fire Department.
(2) Duties.
(a) The Fire Chief shall:
[1] Within the limits of available appropriations, provide for
the establishment and maintenance of fire stations and for
the procurement, disposition, use and care of equipment,
apparatus and supplies.
[2] Operate a training program to maintain and improve the
fire-fighting efficiency of the members of the Department.
[3] Maintain fire and personnel records and files.
[4] Establish and maintain cooperative relations with the
public, civic and business organizations and other
jurisdictions.
(b) Battalion Chief. The Battalion Chief of the Fire Department
shall:
[1] Under the direction of the Fire Chief, be responsible for
the maintenance of all equipment and apparatus in order
to assure its proper and safe functioning, and shall report
any deficiencies to the Fire Chief.
[2] Perform other duties as requested by the Fire Chief.
D. Bureau of Fire Prevention. Within the Department of Fire there shall be
a Bureau of Fire Prevention, which shall be known as the local
§ 3-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21.1
1:73
enforcing agency of the Uniform Fire Code pursuant to the Uniform
Fire Safety Act, P.L. 1983, c.383 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.).
(1) The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall:
(a) Enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all buildings, structures, and
premises within the City other than one- and two-unit owneroccupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and
buildings, structures, and premises owned or operated by the
federal government, interstate agencies or the State of New
Jersey.
(b) Comply with all pertinent requirements of the Uniform Fire
Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.).
(c) Carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required
by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
(d) Manage the enforcement, permits, fees, violations and
penalties associated with the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the
Uniform Fire Code and all other laws of the State of New Jersey
and as set forth in Chapter 162, Fire Prevention.
(2) The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be under the direct supervision
and control of a Fire Official who shall report to the Chief of the
Fire Department.
(3) Appointments, qualifications, term of office, removal of personnel
in the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(a) Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be certified by the State of
New Jersey and shall be hired by the Business Administrator
with the approval of the Mayor.
(b) Inspectors and other employees. The Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall have at least one paid inspector. Inspectors and other
employees of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be hired by
the Business Administrator with the approval of the Mayor
upon recommendation of the Fire Official. All life hazard use
inspectors shall be certified by the State of New Jersey.
(c) Legal counsel. The City Council shall specifically appoint legal
counsel to assist the Bureau in enforcing the Uniform Fire
Code.
(d) Term of office. The Fire Official shall save for a term of three
years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
(e) Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other
employees of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be subject to
removal by the Business Administrator for just cause. Before
removal, all persons shall be afforded an opportunity to be
§ 3-21.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-21.1
1:74
heard by the City Council or a hearing officer designated by
the same.
(4) Fire Investigation Unit. There is hereby created a Fire
Investigation Unit within the City of Bridgeton Fire Department,
Bureau of Fire Prevention. Members of the unit shall be assigned
by the Chief of Fire, from the full-time paid firefighters within the
Fire Department and Chief of Police from police officers who are
qualified in arson investigation. [Added 6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
15-15]
(a) Duties. The Fire Investigation Unit shall be responsible for
investigating all fires and explosions within the jurisdiction of
the City of Bridgeton, as well as any outside jurisdictions that
may be established through shared service agreements.
(b) Regulation and control. The regulation and control of the Fire
Investigation Unit shall be pursuant of guidelines and training
criteria as directed jointly by the Chief of Police and Chief of
Fire.
(c) Joint Arson Task Force. Within the Fire Investigation Unit there
is hereby established a Joint Arson Task Force. This shall be
comprised of full-time police and fire investigators of the City
of Bridgeton Police and Fire Departments assigned by their
respective Chiefs. The purpose of the task force is to provide
for the cooperative investigation of arson, suspicious fires or
explosions within the City of Bridgeton.
E. Office of Emergency Management There shall be an Office of
Emergency Management, the head of which shall be the Emergency
Management Coordinator. The office shall be responsible for the
preparation and implementation of emergency management operations
within the City (App. A:9-40.1 et seq.).
(1) Emergency Management Coordinator.
(a) Appointment and term. The Mayor shall appoint the
Emergency Management Coordinator (EMC) from among the
residents of the City. The EMC shall serve a term of three
years, with a condition of the appointment and right to
continue for a full term that the EMC shall have successfully
completed at the time of his appointment or within one year
immediately following the appointment the current approved
home study course and the basic emergency management
workshop.
(b) Vacancy or removal.
[1] The failure of an EMC to fulfill the requirements of his
appointment within the prescribed period shall disqualify
the EMC from continuing in the office and thereupon a
§ 3-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-21.1
1:75
vacancy in said office shall be deemed to have been
created.
[2] The Governor of the State of New Jersey may remove the
EMC at any time for cause. In such event, the Mayor shall
appoint a new EMC with the approval of the Governor. If
the Mayor shall not appoint an EMC within 10 days after
such office shall become vacant, the Governor may appoint
a temporary EMC, who shall serve and perform all the
duties of that office until such time as a new EMC shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Governor.
(c) Function. The EMC shall be responsible for the planning,
activating, coordinating the conduct of emergency
management operations within the City. The EMC shall be a
member of the local Emergency Management Council and shall
serve as its Chair.
(d) Emergency operations plan. The EMC shall prepare a written
emergency operations plan (EOP), with appropriate annexes
necessary to implement the plan, which shall conform to all
relevant federal statutes, rules or regulations and shall identify
significant hazards affecting the City. The EOP shall be based
upon criteria, objectives, requirements, responsibilities and
concepts of operation to implement all appropriate protective
remedial measures to be taken in response to a potential or
actual emergency as determined by the State Director of
Emergency Management. The EOP shall be reviewed and
updated at least every two years.
(e) Local disaster emergency. The EMC may proclaim a state of
local disaster emergency within the City whenever, in the
EMC's opinion, a disaster has occurred or is imminent. The
EMC, in accordance with regulations promulgated by the State
Director of Emergency Management, shall be empowered to
issue and enforce such orders as may be necessary to
implement and carry out emergency management operations
and to protect the health, safety, and resources of the residents
of the City.
(2) Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator. The EMC shall
appoint a Deputy Emergency Management Coordinator with the
approval of the Mayor. The Deputy EMC shall serve for a three-year
term running simultaneously with that of the EMC. The Deputy
EMC, whenever possible, shall be appointed from among the
salaried officers and employees of the City.
F. Division of Emergency Medical Services. There shall be a Division of
Emergency Medical Services, which shall fall under the Fire
Department and be supervised by the Fire Chief.
§ 3-21.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-22
1:76
§ 3-22. Department of Recreation and Public Affairs.
A. Department, generally. There shall be a Department of Recreation and
of Public Affairs, the head of which shall be the Director of Recreation
and Public Affairs. The Director may appoint a Deputy Director of the
Department with the approval of the Mayor. Within the Department,
there shall be a Division of Tourism and Division of the Zoo.
B. Department functions generally. The Department of Recreation and
Public Affairs shall:
(1) Administer and operate playgrounds, facilities for indoor and
outdoor sports, and athletic and recreational programs and
activities for children and adults;
(2) Administer and operate facilities, functions and activities relating
to recreation, public relations, public affairs, and special events;
(3) Use public school property by agreement with the Board of
Education, to the extent that such property may be adaptable and
available for recreational programs and purposes of the
Department;
(4) Plan and develop additional public recreational area and facilities;
(5) Plan, develop and administer the City's public relations program,
including planning, developing and disseminating publicity about
the City and, if asked or directed, working with other departments
to develop and release public information about the City;
(6) Oversee, direct and promote the City Zoo;
(7) Develop and encourage tourism to and within the City.
C. City Zoo. Within the Department, there shall be the City Zoo whose
activities and services shall be directed by the Zoo Curator, who reports
directly to the Director of Recreation and Public Affairs.
D. Recreation Committee. Within the Department there shall be a
Recreation Committee to consist of 11 members to be appointed by the
Mayor to serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. The Committee shall
provide for its own organization and shall consult and advise with the
Mayor, Council and Director with respect to recreation policies,
programs and activities within the City and shall conduct recreation
programs and activities in the City under the supervision of the
Director.
E. Charges and fees.
(1) The Department may sponsor, arrange and provide for the giving of
indoor and outdoor exhibitions, concerns, games and contests and
may use and employ public property for such purposes. The
Department may charge and collect for the use of the Department a
§ 3-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-22
1:77
reasonable admission fee for each person entering or using
facilities, exhibits, concerts, games or contests provided under this
section when authorized by the Director, and such proceeds shall
be used to further the programs of the Department generally.
(2) The Department may provide for parking near activities conducts
by the Department and may use and employ public property for
such purposes. The Department may charge and collect for the use
of the parking facilities and the proceeds from the parking facilities
shall be used to further the programs of the Department generally.
F. Rules and regulations.
(1) The Department may adopt reasonable rules, regulations and
bylaws for the conduct of all persons while on or using such public
property devoted to recreational uses. Any person who shall violate
any such rules, regulations or bylaws shall be adjudged to be a
disorderly person.
(2) The custodians, supervisors and assistants appointed for the
Department shall, while on duty and for the purpose of preserving
order and the observance of the rules, regulations and bylaws of
the Department have the power and authority of special police
officers of the City.18
18.Editor's Note: Original Section 2-33, Department of Planning, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 12-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-9. See § 3-19, Department of
Development and Planning.
§ 3-22 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-22
1:78
ARTICLE VI
Joint Municipal Court
[Amended 4-7-2015 by Ord. No. 15-05]
§ 3-23. Joint Municipal Court established.
There is hereby established in the City of Bridgeton, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2B:12-1, as amended and supplemented, a Joint Municipal Court which shall
be entitled the "Bridgeton Joint Municipal Court."
§ 3-24. Seal of the Court.
The Joint Municipal Court of the City of Bridgeton shall have a seal which
shall bear the impress of the name of the Court.
§ 3-25. Judge of the Joint Municipal Court.
The Judge of the Joint Municipal Court shall be a gubernatorial appointment
with the advice and consent of the Senate of the State of New Jersey
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-4b. If for any reason the appointed judge is
unable to serve or if a judge is not appointed as provided in N.J.S.A.
2B:12-4b, an acting judge shall be appointed by the assignment judge as
provided in N.J.S.A. 2B:12-6.
§ 3-26. Functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction.
The Joint Municipal Court shall have, process and exercise all the functions,
powers, duties and jurisdiction, both territorial and subject matter, in such
matters as conferred upon the court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq., as
amended and supplemented, and by any other acts of the State Legislature.
§ 3-27. Compensation of Judge.
The salary of the Joint Municipal Court Judge shall be an annual salary as
established by the City of Bridgeton Salary Ordinance.
§ 3-28. Joint Municipal Court Administrator and personnel.
The Joint Municipal Court Administrator and Deputy Court Administrator
shall be appointed pursuant to New Jersey Court Rules 1:34-2. Any other
necessary clerical and other assistance as may be required for the Joint
Municipal Court shall be provided by the City of Bridgeton. Compensation
for the Joint Municipal Court Administrator, Deputy Court Administrator
and other Court personnel shall be established by the City Salary
Ordinance.
§ 3-29. Prosecutor of the Joint Municipal Court.
The Joint Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be appointed as set forth under
provisions of § 3-18, Department of Law.
§ 3-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-30
1:79
§ 3-30. Public Defender.
A. Office established. There shall be an Office of the Public Defender
operating and providing services in accordance with and consistent
with P.L. 1997, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.).
B. Application fee. An indigent defendant who was charged with an
offense of consequence or an offense which could result in
incarceration shall be entitled to apply to the Joint Municipal Court for
representation by the Public Defender and shall pay a fee to the City in
the amount of $200.
C. Other court-appointed counsel.
(1) In the event that the Public Defender is unable to represent an
indigent defendant assigned to him by the Joint Municipal Court of
the City for representation, the Joint Municipal Court shall appoint
other approved counsel to represent such indigent defendant.
(2) Upon completion of representation of an assigned indigent
defendant, a court-appointed counsel other than the Public
Defender shall be entitled to payment by the City of Bridgeton in
the amount not to exceed $200, which amount shall be
substantiated by no less than the expenditure of two hours of courtapproved
counsel's time and upon submission of a voucher in
itemized billing detailing expenditures and time expended.
(3) In the event that court-approved counsel other than the Public
Defender has expended or bills the City less than $200, and in the
event that an application fee in the amount of $200 has been paid,
then the difference shall be remitted to the indigent defendant by
the City.
D. Dedicated fund. Funds collected pursuant to this section shall be
deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial
Officer of the City. Such funds shall be used exclusively to meet the cost
incurred in providing the services of a Public Defender including, when
required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
§ 3-30 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-30
1:80
ARTICLE VII
Boards, Commissions, Authorities, Corporations
§ 3-31. Establishment. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
The following boards, commissions, authorities and corporations shall be
constituted pursuant to the separate ordinances indicated which have been
adopted by the City Council establishing and governing said board,
commission, authority or corporation:
A. The Industrial Commission pursuant to Chapter 32, Industrial
Commission.
B. The Historical District Commission pursuant to Chapter 370, Zoning,
Article VI, Historic District.
C. The Bridgeton Municipal Port Authority pursuant to Chapter 48, Port
Authority.
D. The Bridgeton Development Corporation pursuant to Chapter 64,
Urban Development, Article II, Development Corporation.
§ 3-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-31
1:81
Chapter 10
CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 14.
§ 3-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 3-31
10:82
ARTICLE I
Supplemental Tort Claim Interrogatories
[Adopted 5-15-2007 by Ord. No. 06-31]
§ 10-1. Provision of forms; answer required.
In any instance in which a notice of claim is filed against the City of
Bridgeton, the Clerk or any other authorized representative of the City
of Bridgeton shall send to the claimant or the claimant's attorney the
supplemental Tort Claim Act interrogatory form, a copy of which is attached
hereto, and made a part hereof,19 and require that the same be answered in
order to file a claim against the City of Bridgeton.
§ 10-2. Failure of claimant to provide interrogatories; defenses
available to City.
In any instance where a claimant refuses or fails to provide such
supplemental information, the City shall be entitled to avail itself of any and
all defenses available under the New Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A 59:1-1
et seq. arising from the failure or refusal to provide such supplemental
information.
19.Editor's Note: A copy of said form is on file in the City Clerk's office.
§ 10-1 CLAIMS § 10-2
10:83
Chapter 12
CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3.
§ 10-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 10-2
10:84
ARTICLE I
Awarding of Public Contracts
[Adopted 6-8-2011 by Ord. No. 10-40]
§ 12-1. Definitions.
As used in this article:
BUSINESS ENTITY — Whose contributions are regulated by this article:
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE — Every candidate for City of Bridgeton elective
municipal office; every candidate committee established by or for the
benefit of a candidate for City of Bridgeton elective municipal office; every
joint candidate committee established in whole or in part by or for the
benefit of a candidate of City of Bridgeton elective municipal office; every
political party committee of the City of Bridgeton; every political party
committee of the County of Cumberland; and every political committee,
continuing political committee, or other form of association or organization
that regularly engages in the support of candidates for the City of Bridgeton
municipal or Cumberland County elective offices or City of Bridgeton
municipal or Cumberland political parties or political party committees. The
terms in the foregoing definition have the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C.
19:25-1.7.
A. An individual including the individual's spouse, and any child/children;
A firm; corporation; professional corporation; partnership; limited
liability company; organization ; association; and any other manner and
kind of business entity;
B.
Any person who owns 10% or more of the equity or ownership or
income interest in a person or entity as defined in Subsections A and B
of this definition above and their spouses and child/children;
C.
All partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and their
spouses and child/children;
D.
Any person, subcontractor, subsidiary, corporation, firm, partnership,
limited liability company, organization or association who has received
or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive, from a person described
in Subsection A of this definition above, more than $100,000 in
compensation or income of any kind (including, by way of illustration
and not limitation, wages, salaries, sums paid to independent
contractors, benefits, dividends, profit-sharing, pension contributions,
deferred contributions, stock, stock options or gifts, in any twelvemonth
period prior to the award of or during the term of a contract
subject to this article; and
E.
All persons who are an "affiliate" of a business entity as defined in
Subsections A, B and E of this definition above, as such term is used in
11 U.S.C. § 101(2).
F.
§ 12-1 CLAIMS § 12-1
10:85
CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL OR EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES —
All contracts for "professional services" and "extraordinary unspecifiable
services" as such term is used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5.
CONTRIBUTION — Has the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. By
way of illustration, and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans
and in-kind contributions.
§ 12-2. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
A. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, the City
of Bridgeton and any of its departments, instrumentalities or
purchasing agents shall not enter in to any agreement or otherwise
contract to procure "professional services" as such term is defined at
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(6) and is used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and/or
banking, insurance or other consulting service (hereinafter
"professional services"), nor "extraordinary unspecified services" as
such term is defined at N.J.S.A.11-2(7) and used at N.J.S.A.
40A:5(1)(a)(ii) and/or media, public relations, lobbying, parking garage
management or other consulting and/or management service
(hereinafter "extraordinary unspecified services") from any business
entity if such business entity has solicited or made any contributions to
i) a candidate, candidate committee or joint candidates committee of
any candidates for elective municipal office in Bridgeton or a holder of
public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract,
or ii) to any City of Bridgeton or County of Cumberland political
committee or political party committee, or iii) to any continuing
political committee or political action committee that regularly engages
in the support of Bridgeton municipal or Cumberland County elections
and/or Bridgeton municipal or Cumberland County candidates,
candidate committees, joint candidate committees, political
committees, political parties, political party committees, hereinafter
("PAC"), in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection C within one
calendar year immediately preceding the date of the contract or
agreement.
B. No business entity who submits a proposal for, enters into negotiations
for, or agrees to any contract or agreement with the City of Bridgeton or
any of its departments or instrumentalities, for the rendition of
professional services or extraordinary unspecified services shall
knowingly solicit or make any contribution to i) a candidate, candidate
committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for elective
municipal office in Bridgeton, or a holder of public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or ii) to any
Bridgeton or Cumberland County political committee or political party
committee, or iii) any PAC between the time of first communication
between that business entity and the municipality regarding a specific
agreement for professional services or extraordinary unspecified
services, and the later of the termination of negotiations or rejection of
§ 12-1 BRIDGETON CODE § 12-2
10:86
any proposal, or the completion of the performance or specified time
period of that contract or agreement.
C. Monetary thresholds.
(1) The monetary thresholds of this article are:
(a) A maximum of $300 per calendar year each for any purpose to
any candidate or candidate committee for Mayor or governing
body, or $500 per calendar year to any joint candidates
committee for Mayor or governing body, or $300 per calendar
year to any political committee or political party committee in
the City of Bridgeton;
(b) Five hundred dollars maximum per calendar year to a
Cumberland County political committee or political party
committee; and
(c) Five hundred dollars maximum per calendar year to any PAC.
(2) However, for each business entity party to a contract for
professional or extraordinary unspecified services as defined in
Subsection A, or engaged in negotiations for a contract defined in
Subsection A, when such business entity's contribution is
aggregated with "all persons" defined in the definition of "business
entity" of § 12-1, Definitions, above, by virtue of their affiliation to
that business entity party, a maximum of $2,500 to all City of
Bridgeton candidates, candidate committees, joint candidate
committees, and holders of public office having ultimate
responsibility of the award of a contract, all City of Bridgeton or
Cumberland County political committees and political party
committees as described herein combined, without violating
Subsection A of this section.
D. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The City of Bridgeton Mayor or governing body, if the contract
requires approval or appropriation from the Mayor or governing
body; or
(2) The Mayor of the City of Bridgeton, if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for
the award of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
E. Rules regarding subcontractors. No person may be awarded a
subcontract to perform under a contract subject to this article, if the
subcontractor would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract at the time that the subcontract is awarded. Nor may any
person who would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract perform substantially all of obligations described in a contract
for professional or extraordinary services that is subject to this article.
§ 12-2 CLAIMS § 12-3
10:87
§ 12-3. Contributions prior to effective date.
No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective
date of this article shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of this article.
§ 12-4. Contract renewal.
No contract subject to this article may be renewed, extended, or materially
modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or modification would be
allowable under the provisions of this article if it were an initial contract.
§ 12-5. Contribution statement by business entity.
§ 12-6. Return of excess contributions.
A business entity that is a party to a contract for professional services or
extraordinary unspecified services may cure a violation of § 12-2 of this
article, if, within 30 days after the date on which the applicable ELEC report
is published, said business entity notifies the municipality in writing and
seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the recipient of
such contribution.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services or "extraordinary unspecified services" from any business
entity, the City of Bridgeton or its purchasing agents and departments,
as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from said business
entity which is the intended recipient of said contract that he/she/it has
not made a contribution in violation of § 12-2 of this article. The City of
Bridgeton, its purchasing agents and departments shall be responsible
for informing the City Council that the aforementioned sworn statement
has been received and that the business entity is not in violation of this
article, prior to awarding the contract or agreement.
B. A business entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the City of
Bridgeton any contributions that constitute a violation of this article
that are made during the negotiation, proposal process or the duration
of a contract. The City of Bridgeton, its purchasing agents and
departments shall be responsible for informing the governing body
within 10 business days after receipt of said report from the business
entity, or at the next City Council meeting following receipt of said
report from the business entity, or whichever comes first.
C. The certification required under this section shall be made prior to
entry into the contract or agreement with the City of Bridgeton, or prior
to the provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall be in
addition to any other certifications that may be required by any other
provision of law.
§ 12-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 12-7
10:88
§ 12-7. Exemptions.
The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in § 12-2A do
not apply to contracts which are awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor within the meaning of
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4, or are awarded in the case of emergency under N.J.S.A.
40A:11-6. There is no exemption for contracts awarded pursuant to a "fair
and open process" under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20 et seq.
§ 12-8. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a City of Bridgeton
agreement or contract for professional services or extraordinary
unspecified services when a business entity that is a party to such
agreement or contract has:
(1) Made or solicited a contribution in violation of this article;
(2) Knowingly concealed or misrepresented a contribution given or
received;
(3) Made or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Made or solicited any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be recontributed to a candidate, candidate
committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for
elective municipal office in Bridgeton, or a holder of public office
having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or any
Bridgeton or Cumberland County political committee or political
party committee, or any PAC;
(5) Engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution, which if made or solicited by the
professional business entity itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this article;
(6) Funded contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engaged in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this article; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means,
done any act which if done directly would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this article.
B. Furthermore, any business entity that violates § 12-8A(1) to (8) shall be
disqualified from eligibility for future City of Bridgeton contracts for a
period of four calendar years from the date of the violation.
§ 12-7 CLAIMS § 12-8
10:89
§ 12-9. Private right of action.
In addition to any rights that were heretofore available, or which may
hereafter be available, to citizens, taxpayers, or associations, to challenge
violations of this article, every person aggrieved by a violation of the article,
or any taxpayer or resident of the City of Bridgeton has the right, consistent
with the Rules of Court, to file charges in a court of competent jurisdiction,
and/or to pursue a civil action for a violation of this article in a court of
competent jurisdiction, and to seek and obtain declaratory, injunctive, or
other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to attorney fees and
costs, arising from or related to a violation of this article.
C. Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any
provision of this article, or who conspires with another person to violate
any provision of this article, or who, with the purpose of promoting or
facilitating a violation of this article, solicits another person to commit
it, or aids or agrees, or attempts to aid another person in planning or
committing it, shall be subject to punishment including fines and/or
imprisonment as fixed by law for violations of the ordinances of the City
of Bridgeton.
§ 12-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 12-9
10:90
Chapter 14
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 14-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — Includes any officer or employee whether or not
compensated or part-time who is authorized to perform any act or service
for the City of Bridgeton; provided, however, that the term shall specifically
exclude any independent contractor, but is intended to include any
professional staff of the City of Bridgeton, who, for purposes of this chapter
shall not be regarded as an independent contractor.
OFFICIAL or MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — A present or former municipal
appointee, official, elected official or member of the various boards,
agencies and commissions of the City of Bridgeton.
§ 14-2. Civil actions.
Subject to the limitations set forth in the subsequent sections of this
chapter, whenever any civil action has been or shall be brought against
any employee or official holding or formerly holding any office, position or
employment with the City of Bridgeton, for any action or commission arising
out of or in the course of the performance of the duties of such office,
position or employment, the City shall defray all costs of defending such
action, including reasonable counsel fees and expenses, together with costs
of appeal, if any, and shall save harmless and protect such persons from
any financial loss resulting from the litigation. The City Solicitor, or another
attorney selected by the Mayor, shall represent the employee or official.
§ 14-3. Criminal action.
The City shall not defray the costs of defending any criminal action against
any employee or official as may be authorized by state statute or other
municipal ordinance or resolution of the City of Bridgeton, and, in those
circumstances, the responsibility for defraying the costs of defending such
employee or official shall be applicable only when such criminal
proceedings shall have been dismissed or result in a final disposition in
favor of the employee. However, should the City determine that there is
good cause to discipline the employee or official arising out of the incident
or related incidents of the criminal prosecutions, the City will not reimburse
the employee or official for legal defense and costs of defending the suit,
even though criminal proceedings against the employee or official may be
dismissed or the employee or official found not guilty.
§ 14-4. Exceptions.
§ 12-9 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 14-4
14:91
§ 14-5. City control over litigation.
Whenever the City provides any defense required of it under this chapter,
the City, through counsel, may assume exclusive control over the
representation of the public employee, and such employee or official shall
cooperate fully with the defense.
A. The obligation of the City of Bridgeton to defend and indemnify its
employees or officials for acts or omissions arising out of or in the
course of the performance of the duties of that person shall be limited
to those circumstances under which the City itself would be liable for
the acts of its employees or officials under the doctrine of respondeat
superior, except that the City shall defend any such official or employee
sued under the Federal Civil Rights Act, provided that the Mayor and/or
City Council shall not have concluded that such act or omission was
outside the scope of the responsibilities of said official or employee.
B. Furthermore, the City shall not defend and save harmless any employee
or official committing an intentional or willful act or willful omission
arising out of or in the course of the performance of the duties of such
office, position or employment.
C. Also specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter are any
municipal employee or official providing any form of professional
medical services, such as doctors and nurses, insofar as said civil action
arises out of or concerns those professional medical services.
D. The City shall not be responsible for the defense or indemnification of
any official or employee of the City when the City Council has
determined that:
(1) The act or omission was not within the scope of employment.
(2) The act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice.
(3) The defense of the action or proceedings would create a conflict of
interest between the City and the public employee.
(4) The defense of the action or proceeding is provided for by an
insurance policy or policies, whether obtained by the City or by any
other person.
(5) The public employee failed to deliver to the City Administrator,
within 10 calendar days after the time he is served with any
summons, complaint, process, notice, demand or pleading, the
original or a copy of the same.
(6) The public employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
§ 14-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 14-6
14:92
§ 14-6. Methods of providing defense.
The defense shall be at the option of the City. The City of Bridgeton may
provide any defense required of it under this chapter through an attorney
from the staff of the Department of Law or by employing other counsel at
the option of the Mayor and City Council.
§ 14-7. Indemnification.
§ 14-8. Limitation on indemnification.
Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the City to pay for punitive or
exemplary damages or damages resulting from the commission of a crime.
Chapter 19
ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 3. Officers and employees — See Ch. 40.
§ 19-1. Regular elections.
A. In any case where the City is required to provide a defense under this
chapter, the City shall pay or shall reimburse the employee or official
for:
(1) Any bona fide settlement.
(2) Any judgments entered against the employee or official.
B. In addition, in any case where the City would be required to provide a
defense under this chapter except for the fact that such defense is
provided for by insurance, the City shall provide indemnification as
aforesaid, but only to the extent not covered by insurance.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:45-5 et seq., the "Uniform Nonpartisan
Election Law," after January 1, 2011, election of municipal officers will
be held at regular general elections to be held on the Tuesday after the
first Monday in November.
B. The term of any person in office on the date of the adoption of this
chapter shall be extended until the beginning of the term of the person
elected to that office on the day of the general election in November.
C. Except as may otherwise be provided by law, persons who are elected to
hold local government office on the Tuesday after the first Monday in
November will commence office on January 1 of the following year.
§ 14-6 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 19-1
14:93
Chapter 26
FLAG, OFFICIAL
§ 26-1. Adoption and description.
A flag for the City of Bridgeton, County of Cumberland and State of New
Jersey be and the same is hereby adopted and accepted as the Official Flag
of the City of Bridgeton and the said flag is described as follows: the City
Seal in gold with a royal blue border around the edge of said Seal, centered
on a white background with royal blue stripes along the edge of the flag on
either side of said Seal.
Chapter 32
INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION
§ 32-1. Reestablishment of Commission.
The Industrial Commission of the City of Bridgeton is hereby reestablished
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55B-1 et seq.
Chapter 40
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel management responsibilities of
Business Administrator — See Ch. 3, § 3-16L.
Division of Police Administration — See Ch. 3,
§ 3-20.
Smoking by employees outside
buildings — See Ch. 294, Art. I.
D. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:45A-1 effective January 1, 2015, the date and time of the
annual reorganization meeting shall be established at 12:00 noon on
January 1, or, by resolution, at some other hour on any day during the
first week in January.
§ 19-1 BRIDGETON CODE § 32-1
26:94
ARTICLE I
Hiring Preferences and Residency Requirements
[Adopted 5-3-1977 by Ord. No. 76-32]
§ 40-1. Residency as condition of hiring and continued employment.
§ 40-2. Exceptions.
The Mayor, with the advice of the Business Administrator and the
employee's department head, is hereby authorized in his discretion, for
good cause shown, to permit any officer or employee of the City in his
respective department or office to remain in the employ of the City without
complying with the provisions hereof, where:
A. All persons who shall hereafter become employees of the City are
required as a condition of their continued employment to have their
place of abode in the City and to be bona fide residents therein, except
as otherwise provided by the New Jersey Statutes. A bona fide resident,
for the purpose of this section, is a person having a permanent
residence within the City and one which has not been adopted with the
intention of again taking up or claiming a previous residence acquired
outside of the City limits. [Amended 10-18-2011 by Ord. No.
11-1320]
B. Any employee of the City of Bridgeton who is hired after the effective
date of this article as a permanent employee under New Jersey
Department of Personnel Regulations shall be required, as a condition
of continued employment with the City of Bridgeton, to establish a
place of abode within the City of Bridgeton and to be a bona fide
resident therein within one year from the date of permanent
appointment except as otherwise provided by the New Jersey Statutes
or this article. [Amended 5-3-1977 by Ord. No. 76-33; 6-21-1994
by Ord. No. 93-27]
C. All applicants will be given preference for appointment for positions in
the following order: [Amended 10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13]
(1) Residents of the City of Bridgeton;
(2) Residents of Cumberland County;
(3) Residents of contiguous counties;
(4) Residents of the State of New Jersey; and
(5) Residents of the United States.21
20.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also changed the title of Article I from "Residency
Requirements" to "Hiring Preferences and Residency Requirements."
21.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D, regarding Cumberland County residents being given
first preference for employment with the City, added 6-21-1999 by Ord. No. 98-18, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13.
§ 40-1 INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION § 40-2
32:95
§ 40-3. Effect of conflicting statute.
If any statute of the State of New Jersey shall be contrary to this article,
said statute shall apply and this article shall be void and of no effect in those
circumstances.
§ 40-4. Removal for failure to comply.
Failure of any officer or employee to comply with this article shall be cause
for his removal or discharge from the City service.
A. The health of any officer or employee necessitates residency outside of
the City limits.
B. The nature of the employment is such as to require residence outside of
the City limits.
C. Special talent or technique which is necessary for the operation of
government not found among Bridgeton residents exists justifying
residence outside of the City limits.
§ 40-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 40-4
32:96
ARTICLE II
Drug Testing in Police Department
[Adopted 7-2-2001 by Ord. No. 01-1]
§ 40-5. Approval of policy.
The policy as proposed by the Chief of Police of the City of Bridgeton for
random drug testing is here approved and shall have the full force and
effect of a rule and regulation of employment as a police officer in the City
of Bridgeton.
§ 40-6. Availability of copies of policy.
A copy of this policy for random drug testing shall be on file in the City
Clerk's office and made available to the public for its review.
§ 40-7. When effective; binding nature of policy.
Said policy shall be effective as of July 1, 2001, and binding on the Bridgeton
Police Department as a rule, regulation, and condition of employment.
§ 40-5 INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION § 40-7
32:97

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)22
§ 40-8. through § 40-9. (Reserved)
22.Editor's Note: Former Article III, Police Department Hiring Preferences, adopted 2-2-2004
by Ord. No. 03-13, was repealed 10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 11-13.
§ 40-8 INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION § 40-8
32:99

ARTICLE IV
Table of Organization for Police Department
[Adopted 10-3-2006 by Ord. No. 06-0823]
§ 40-10. Creation; number of positions.
§ 40-11. Construal of provisions.
The establishment of a Table of Organization for the City of Bridgeton Police
Department shall not be deemed to require that all positions be filled, but
rather the number of sworn officers in each rank and/or position shall not
exceed those set forth in this article unless the Table of Organization is
amended by the City Council of the City of Bridgeton and such positions are
subject to available funding of such positions by the adoption of a budget
and salary ordinance by the City Council of the City of Bridgeton. Any
municipal salary ordinance and appointment of persons in accordance with
this Table of Organization shall be consistent with the foregoing and shall
serve to fill the positions allowed pursuant to this section.
A. There is hereby created in and for the City of Bridgeton a Police
Department which shall not exceed the following Table of Organization:
[Amended 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 10-16; 1-8-2013 by Ord. No.
12-14; 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-11]
Rank Number of Positions
Chief of Police 1
Captains 1
Lieutenants Up to 6
Sergeants Up to 10
Patrol officers Up to 50
B. In addition civilian employees including but not limited to laborers,
telephone operators, clerks, computer personnel, telecommunications
officers, Class II officers, school traffic guards, and other special police
officers may be hired subject to the recommendation of the Chief of
Police and Director of Public Safety of the City of Bridgeton. Further,
the Chief of Police shall have discretion to assign police officers to such
duties, assignments, and responsibilities as he may determine from
time to time in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Article III, but was redesignated
as Article IV because the Code already contained an Article III. In addition, Ord. No. 06-08
provided that all current and previous appointments and promotions of the Police
Department made by the City Council of the City of Bridgeton, as well as all previous
appointments made by the Chief of Police and Director of Public Safety of the City of
Bridgeton, are ratified and approved. Any officer who holds a position or rank in a number
that is in excess of that allowed under the Table of Organization, that rank or position is
created until such time as the numbers in the rank are reduced to the number designated
in the Table of Organization set forth in § 40-10.
§ 40-10 INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION § 40-11
32:101

ARTICLE V
Table of Organization for Fire Department
[Adopted 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 07-3324; amended 3-20-2012 by
Ord. No. 11-20]
§ 40-12. Creation; number of positions.
§ 40-13. Construal of provisions.
The establishment of a Table of Organization for the City of Bridgeton Fire
Department shall not be deemed to require that all positions be filled, but
rather the number of sworn personnel in each rank and/or position shall
not exceed those set forth in this article unless the Table of Organization is
amended by the City Council of the City of Bridgeton and such positions are
subject to available funding of such positions by the adoption of a budget
A. There is hereby created in and for the City of Bridgeton Fire Division
which shall not exceed the following Table of Organization: [Amended
12-2-2014 by Ord. No. 14-10; 8-4-2015 by Ord. No. 15-23;
9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-19]
Rank Number of Positions
Fire Chief 1
Battalion Chief 4
Fire Captains 3
Fire Lieutenants 0
Firefighters 23
B. In addition, civilian employees, including but not limited to emergency
medical service personnel (EMS), clerks, computer personnel and
account clerks may be hired subject to the recommendation of the Fire
Chief and appropriate authority of the City of Bridgeton. Further, the
Fire Chief shall have discretion to assign firefighters and EMS to such
duties, assignments, and responsibilities as he/she may determine from
time to time in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7.
C. For the purpose of command and control and efficient resource
management, EMS personnel shall be subordinate to the Fire Chief
and/or his/her designee(s) through an established and recognized chair
of command and will be subject to all rules, regulations policies,
standard operating procedures directives and orders as promulgated by
the Office of the Fire Chief of and appropriate authority.
24.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Article III, but was redesignated
as Article V because this chapter already contained an Article III. In addition, Ord. No.
07-33 provided that all current and previous appointments and promotions of the Fire
Division made by the City Council, as well as all previous appointments made by the Fire
Chief and Director of Public Safety, be ratified and approved. If officer holds a position or
rank in a number that is in excess of that allowed under the Table of Organization, that
rank or position is created until such time as the numbers in the rank are reduced to the
number designated in the Table of Organization set forth in § 40-12.
§ 40-12 INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION § 40-13
32:103
and salary ordinance by the City Council of the City of Bridgeton. Any
municipal salary ordinance and appointment of persons in accordance with
this Table of Organization shall be consistent with the foregoing and shall
serve to fill the positions allowed pursuant to this section.
§ 40-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 40-13
32:104
ARTICLE VI
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 10-19]
§ 40-14. Eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the defined contribution retirement
program:
§ 40-15. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from defined
contribution retirement program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 40-16. Effect on other laws.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
A. Business Administrator;
B. Director of Recreation;
C. Director of Development and Planning;
D. Director of Public Safety;
E. Municipal Court Judge;
F. Gubernatorial appointees who serve in municipal government for a
fixed term.
A. Tax Collector.
B. Chief Financial Officer.
C. Construction Code Official.
D. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
E. Tax Assessor.
F. Municipal Planner.
G. Registered Municipal Clerk.
H. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
I. Certified Public Works Manager.
§ 40-14 INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION § 40-17
32:105
§ 40-17. Filing of article.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
§ 40-17 BRIDGETON CODE § 40-17
32:106
Chapter 48
PORT AUTHORITY
§ 48-1. Establishment; purpose.
§ 48-2. Powers.
The Bridgeton Municipal Port Authority, an instrument exercising public
and essential governmental functions and having perpetual succession,
shall have the following powers, conferred upon such bodies by the
Legislature by provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:68A-40, and also to have such other
powers as should hereafter be granted by the Legislature:
A. There is established the Bridgeton Municipal Port Authority, in and for
the City as a public body corporate and politic, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:68A-29 et seq., said Port Authority to be an agency and
instrumentality of the City of Bridgeton.
B. The purpose of said Port Authority shall be the establishment,
development and improvement of a port district for port purposes, by
exercise of the powers set forth herein, or established by the New
Jersey Municipal Port Authorities Law, N.J.S.A. 40:68A-29 et seq., which
shall include but not be limited to acquisition, construction,
improvement, maintenance, operation or leasing of port facilities, to
have responsibility for the establishment collection and enforcement of
charges for the use of said port, as well as to arrange for financing for
said port, by issuance of bonds or otherwise.
A. To adopt and have a common seal and to alter the same at pleasure.
B. To sue and be sued.
C. In its own name to acquire, hold, use and dispose of its charges and
other personal property for the purposes of the Municipal Port
Authority, and to acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation or otherwise,
or lease as lessee, real property and easements therein, necessary or
useful and convenient for the purposes of the Municipal Port Authority
whether subject to mortgages, deeds of trust or other liens, or
otherwise, and to hold and to use the same, and to dispose of property
so acquired no longer necessary for the purposes of the Municipal Port
Authority.
D. To grant by franchise, lease or otherwise, the use of any project,
facilities or property owned and controlled by it to any person for such
consideration and for such period or periods of time and upon such
other terms and conditions as it may fix and agree upon. Any such grant
may be upon condition that the user shall or may construct or provide
any buildings or structures or improvements on such project, facilities
or property, or portions thereof, all upon such terms and conditions as
may be agreed upon.
§ 40-17 PORT AUTHORITY § 48-2
48:107
§ 48-3. Membership; term of office; vacancies.
The Bridgeton Municipal Port Authority shall consist of five members to
be appointed by the City Council of the City of Bridgeton, by resolution
adopted at its regular or special meeting. Members shall serve for a fiveyear
term, the members first appointed to be designated to serve for terms
respectively expiring on the first day of February of the first, second, third,
fourth and fifth years after their appointment. Vacancies shall be filled by
resolution by the City Council of the City of Bridgeton for the unexpired
term.
§ 48-4. Officers; quorum.
E. To provide for and secure the payment of any bonds and the rights of
the holders thereof, to purchase, hold and dispose of any bonds.
F. To apply for and to accept gifts or grants of real personal property,
money, material, labor or supplies for the purposes of the Municipal
Port Authority from any person, county or municipality, including the
United States any agency thereof, and to make and perform such
agreements and contracts and to do any and all things necessary or
desirable in connection with the procuring, acceptance or disposition of
such gifts or grants.
G. To determine the exact location, type and character of and all matters in
connection with all or any part of the port system which it is authorized
to own, construct, establish, effectuate or control and to enter on any
lands, waters, or premises for the purposes of making such surveys,
diagrams, maps or plans or for the purpose of making such soundings
or borings as it deems necessary or convenient.
H. To make and enforce bylaws or rules and regulations for the
management and regulation of its business and affairs and for the use,
maintenance and operation of the port system and any other of its
properties, and to amend the same.
I. To do and perform any acts and things authorized by this Act under,
through or by means of its own officers, agents and employees, or by
contracts with any person.
J. To acquire, purchase, construct, lease, operate, maintain and undertake
any project and to make service charges for the use thereof.
K. To enter into any and all contracts, execute any and all instruments, and
do and perform any and all acts or things necessary, convenient or
desirable for the purposes of the Municipal Port Authority or to carry
out any power expressly given to the act subject to P.L. 1979, c. 198,
Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
A. The Bridgeton Municipal Port Authority shall, upon the first
appointment of its members and thereafter on or after February 1 in
each year, annually elect from among its members a Chairman and a
§ 48-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 48-4
48:108
Chapter 64
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT
Vice Chairman, who shall hold office until February 1 of the year next
ensuing and until their respective successors have been appointed. The
Bridgeton Municipal Port Authority may also appoint and employ a
secretary, treasurer and such other agents and employees as it may
require, and determine their term of office, duties and compensation.
B. Three members shall constitute a quorum and action may be taken and
motions and resolutions adopted by vote of three of the members
unless, in any specific case, the bylaws of the Authority require a larger
number.
§ 48-4 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT § 48-4
64:109

ARTICLE I
Urban Enterprise Zones
[Adopted 4-2-1985 by Ord. No. 84-11]
§ 64-1. Acceptance of designation of zones. [Amended 10-6-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-5]
The governing body of the City of Bridgeton does hereby accept the
designation of certain areas contained in its resolution seeking to have
certain areas designated as Urban Enterprise Zones by the Urban
Enterprise Zone Authority of the State of New Jersey. The City Council
accepts this designation from the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority and
accepts the designation of the zone development plan as formulated and
approved in the aforesaid resolution.
§ 64-1 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT § 64-1
64:111

ARTICLE II
Development Corporation
[Adopted 9-2-1997 by Ord. No. 97-4]
§ 64-2. Creation.
The City Council of the City of Bridgeton does hereby create the Bridgeton
Development Corporation, said organization to be organized pursuant to
Title 15 of the Statutes of the State of New Jersey and to have all of
the powers, duties, and responsibilities as provided for therein and in
accordance with the powers, duties, and responsibilities as set forth in the
New Jersey Urban Redevelopment Act (N.J.S.A. 55:19-20 et seq.) and New
Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.).
§ 64-3. Filing of documents effectuating creation of agency.
The Mayor, Clerk, and City Solicitor be and are hereby authorized to do
all things and file such documents as may be reasonably necessary to
effectuate the foregoing.
§ 64-2 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT § 64-3
64:113

ARTICLE III
Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act
[Adopted 3-15-2004 by Ord. No. 03-16]
§ 64-4. Adoption of Act's provisions.
The provisions of the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 through N.J.S.A. 55:19-105, are hereby adopted to be applicable to
properties in the City of Bridgeton, and those statutory sections are hereby
incorporated by reference in this article as if fully set forth.
§ 64-5. Designation of public officers.
The City Administrator and the Construction Code Official are hereby
designated as the Public Officers of the Municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.5 and N.J.S.A. 55:19-90.
§ 64-6. Abandoned properties list.
The Public Officer is hereby directed to establish an abandoned properties
list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55, and N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 through N.J.S.A.
55:19-59 are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.
§ 64-4 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT § 64-6
64:115
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 76
ALARMS
§ 64-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 64-6
64:116
ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 2-6-2008 by Ord. No. 07-28]
§ 76-1. Limit on number of false alarms.
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity who owns or controls
a fire, burglary or other similar alarm device within the City of Bridgeton,
which said device causes more than three false alarms in any given calendar
year, shall be deemed in violation of the provisions of this article for the
fourth alarm or any subsequent false alarms in such calendar year.
§ 76-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FALSE ALARM — An alarm signal necessitating response by the City of
Bridgeton Police Department where an emergency situation does not exist.
An alarm that has been activated by an external source that is beyond the
reasonable control of the subscriber shall not be considered false.
§ 76-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-02]
Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity who violates the
provisions of this article with respect to the occurrence of a false alarm shall
be subject to the following penalty:
§ 76-4. Responsibility of alarm company. [Amended 7-19-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-02]
For any violation of this article which results from the failure of an alarm
company or service in fulfilling its service obligations to its customers,
including the cancellation of any unintended alarm, the summons shall be
against the alarm service or company.
§ 76-5. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm devices on property
owned by public entities or agencies, or state, local, county or federal
governments.25
A. First and subsequent offenses (over three false alarms in a calendar
year) shall be liable to pay a fine of $25 for each offense. Such amounts
may be paid without appearance in court unless the summons
otherwise indicates that a court appearance is necessary before the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of Bridgeton. If a court
appearance is required, the Court shall impose the general penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, Article III, for an offense/violation.
§ 76-1 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT § 76-5
64:117
25.Editor's Note: Former § 76-6, Violations and penalties, was repealed 7-19-2011 by Ord. No.
11-02; see now § 76-3.
§ 76-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 76-5
64:118
Chapter 77
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Liquor license fees — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Alcoholic beverages in parks — See Ch. 247,
Art. II.
Drinking in public and public
drunkenness — See Ch. 251.
§ 77-1. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the City of Bridgeton in accordance with the provisions of
an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
to 33:1-96, and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Director
of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 77-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as they have in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96, and the rules and
regulations of the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 77-3. Licenses.
A. Laws applicable. All applications for licenses, all licenses issued, and all
proceedings under this chapter shall be in accordance with the Act,
rules and regulations referred to in the previous section and all other
applicable laws of the State of New Jersey or of the United States.
B. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by
the governing body which shall also administer the provisions of this
chapter.
C. License fees; maximum number of licenses.
(1) The annual license fees shall be as provided in Chapter 149, Fees,
Article II, Schedule of Fees.
(2) The maximum number of licenses for the sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages in the City shall be as follows:
(a) Plenary retail consumption license: 12.
(b) Plenary retail distribution license: 5.
(c) Club license: 10.
§ 76-5 URBAN REDEVELOPMENT § 77-3
64:119
§ 77-4. Hours of sale for retail plenary consumption, retail plenary
distribution and club licensees. [Last amended 3-6-2012 by Ord. No.
11-19]
§ 77-5. Consumption regulations. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No.
03-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person:
§ 77-6. Revocation of licenses.
(3) The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on
the number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of
licenses presently issued.
A. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold to, served to, or consumed by a
consumer on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
except on Sundays as hereinafter provided. No alcoholic beverages
shall be sold to, served to, or consumed by any consumer at any time on
Sunday except from 12:00 midnight until 2:00 a.m. and from 12:00
noon until 10:00 p.m. [Amended 8-21-2012 by Ord. No. 12-05]
B. Hours of sale for club licenses shall be the same as the hours of sale,
service, or consumption for a retail plenary consumption licensee.
C. Hours of sale for retail plenary distribution licenses shall be the same
as the hours of sale, service or consumption for a retail plenary
consumption license.
A. To consume alcoholic beverages while in or on a public street, lane,
sidewalk, public parking lot, public or quasi-public place or in any
public conveyance.
B. To consume alcoholic beverages in a private motor vehicle while the
same is in motion or parked in any public street, lane or public parking
lot.
C. To consume alcoholic beverages while upon any private property not his
own without the express permission of the owner or other person
having authority to grant such permission.
D. To discard alcoholic beverage containers upon any public street, lane,
sidewalk, public parking lot, public or quasi-public place or upon any
private property not his own without the express permission of the
owner.
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 77-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 77-6
64:120
§ 77-7. Misstatement on application. [Added 6-5-1990 by Ord. No.
89-37]
If the applicant purposely misstates the facts on the application, in addition
to the ability of the Council to deny the application or suspend or revoke the
license, if previously applied for or granted, the applicant shall be deemed
to have violated this chapter and be subject to the maximum penalties as
set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, of Code of the City of
Bridgeton. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any misstatement
on the application is purposeful.
Chapter 80
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Amusement device fees — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Licensing — See Ch. 200.
Pool halls and billiard parlors — See Ch. 260.
§ 80-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Other machines which may be operated by the
public for entertainment or amusement, whether the machine is coinoperated
or not, which provides a ride, sensation, electronic reading or
wave, photograph, lamination, or item of merchandise provided at random,
among other items of merchandise for use by and to the amusement of
the public and further includes those machines commonly known as
jukeboxes.26
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine which may be
operated by the public for entertainment or amusement, whether the
machine is coin-operated or not, and whether or not it registers, scores or
tallies. Examples of mechanical amusement devices are pinball machines,
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 to 33:1-96 by service of a five-day
notice of charges preferred against the licensee and affording a
reasonable opportunity for hearing. Any suspension or revocation shall
carry the penalties and prohibitions provided in the statutes referred
to.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 77-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 80-1
80:121
bowling machines, mechanical grab machines, Skee-Ball machines,
pokerino machines, video game or video tube machines and other similar
devises. This enumeration is intended to be typical and shall not be
construed as exclusive.
OPERATOR — Any person in whose place of business any amusement device
or mechanical amusement device is placed or kept for operation by the
public.
§ 80-2. License required.
No person shall operate an amusement device or a mechanical amusement
device within the City, without having first obtained a license and paid the
required license fee.
§ 80-3. Application for licenses.
Applicants for operator's license which are associations shall supply the
information required by § 200-2 for all members of the association.
Applicants which are corporations shall supply the information required
by § 200-2 for all officers and directors and for all stockholders of the
corporation who own more than 10% of its issued and outstanding capital
stock. Corporations shall also supply the name and address of their
registered agent. Applicants for licenses under this chapter shall not be
required to supply the physical description and photographs required by
§ 200-2, but shall be required to supply a description of the machine or
devices sought to be licensed.
§ 80-4. License fees.
§ 80-5. Regulations and restrictions.
A. Operators shall be charged annual fees, payable in advance of issuance
of the license, as set forth in Chapter 149, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
B. For good cause shown and on written application, City Council may
waive the fee.
A. Use of machines by persons under 16 years of age shall not be
permitted during normal school hours.
B. Where there are not over three mechanical amusement devices they are
permitted subject only to the general licensing requirements of Chapter
200 of this Code of the City of Bridgeton.
C. Where there are more than three mechanical amusement devices on
premises this shall be deemed a mechanical amusement device
complex, unless said machines are located within any establishment
holding a plenary retail consumption liquor license, provided that
persons under 21 years of age are not permitted to utilize said
machines, and thus subject to the following requirements:
§ 80-1 BRIDGETON CODE § 80-5
80:122
§ 80-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 83
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dog license fees — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Riding horses on bridle trails — See Ch. 247,
Art. II, § 247-11I.
Throwing objects at animals in the Zoo — See
Ch. 247, Art. II, § 247-9N.
(1) Submission of plans to City Council demonstrating that there is
sufficient space for such machines to prevent overcrowding of
users or interference with pedestrian circulation on the rest of the
premises; that traffic circulation and parking can be adequately
accommodated; and that there is no undue concentration of such
complexes or adverse effects on young persons utilizing schools
and churches.
(2) Mechanical amusement device complexes shall be located at least
1,000 feet from school buildings, school playgrounds and church
buildings, and at least 1,000 feet from each other.
(3) The complex shall be located in a separate room from other uses on
said premises and from pedestrian circulation to and from such
uses. The room shall be arranged so that there is a management
attendant within the room or within visual access to the room so as
to supervise the interior of the room.
(4) In each complex space shall be provided for each machine so as to
allow its use without overcrowding. A minimum of width of two feet
shall be provided per machine where the machine is designed for
use by one player and 3 1/2 feet where the machine is designated
for use by two players. The depth of the space in front of the
machine shall be a minimum aisle width beyond this five feet of an
additional three feet. Fire Underwriter's Code requirements shall
be complied with.
(5) Readily visible signs shall be installed (their location, size and text
to be shown on the plans submitted to Council) indicating that the
use of machines by persons under 16 years of age shall not be
permitted during normal school hours.
§ 80-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 80-6
80:123

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Control
[Adopted 2-17-1998 by Ord. No. 97-17]
§ 83-1. Definitions. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAT — Any domestic short- or long-haired cat.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months.[Added 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 06-21]
CAT POPULATION CONTROL FEE — The fee for licensing and registering a
cat which is not spayed or neutered.[Added 6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 06-34]
CERTIFIED ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — A person 18 years of age
or older who has satisfactorily completed a course of study approved by
the Commissioner of Health and Senior Services and the Police Training
Commission as prescribed by Paragraphs (1) through (3) of N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.16a or who has been employed in the State of New Jersey in the
capacity of, and with similar responsibilities to those required of, a certified
Animal Control Officer for a period of three years before January 17, 1987.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
DOG POPULATION CONTROL FEE — The fee imposed for licensing and
registering a dog which is not spayed or neutered.[Added 6-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 06-34]
FOWL — Any bird, including but not limited to ducks, geese or chickens.
KEEPER — Any person over 18 years of age exercising control over a dog
or permitting a dog to remain on premises under his control.
KENNEL — Any establishment where the business of boarding, selling or
breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet shop.
LIVESTOCK — Any domestic animal, including but not limited to cattle,
horses, donkeys, sheep, goats, rabbits, swine, poultry or fowl raised for
home use or profit.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who has
such dog in such person's keeping, and when applied to the proprietorship
of any other animal, including but not limited to a cat, shall include every
person having a right of property in that animal and every person who has
that animal in such person's keeping.
PET SHOP — Any place of business which is not part of a kennel, wherein
animals, including but not limited to dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles, rabbits,
hamsters or gerbils, are kept or displayed chiefly for sale to individuals
§ 83-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-1
80:125
for personal appreciation and companionship rather than for business or
research purposes.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs, or other animals
seized either under the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs, cats or other animals are
received, housed and distributed.
§ 83-2. Licensing of dogs and cats. [Amended 3-6-2007 by Ord. No.
6-21]
Any license issued under this section shall be for a dog or cat. Licensing of
vicious dogs is governed by § 83-4.
A. Licenses for dogs and cats, when required.
(1) Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat of licensing
age in the City shall be required to procure a license and official
metal registration tag for:
(a) Any dog or cat owned, kept or harbored within the City on the
first day of January of any calender year.
(b) Any dog or cat acquired by any person during the course of any
calendar year and kept within the City for more than 10 days
after acquisition.
(c) Any dog or cat attaining licensing age during the course of the
calendar year.
(d) Any unlicensed dog or cat brought into the City by any person
and kept within the City for more than 10 days.
(e) Any dog or cat licensed by another state brought into the City
by any person and kept within the City for more than 90 days.
(2) A dog or cat with a valid license and registration tag from another
municipality within the state shall be in compliance with this
section for that licensing year.
B. Application form.
(1) Each application for a license under this section shall give the
following information:
(a) A general description of the dog or cat sought to be licensed,
including breed, sex, age, color and markings, and whether
long- or short-haired and if a dog, whether it has been
surgically debarked or silenced.
(b) Name, street and post office address of the owner of, and the
person who shall keep or harbor, the dog or cat.
§ 83-1 BRIDGETON CODE § 83-2
80:126
(c) If a dog, evidence that the dog to be licensed and registered
has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved
by and administered in accordance with the recommendation
of the United States Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare or has been certified as exempt as provided by
regulations of the State Department of Health.
(2) License forms and uniform metal registration tags shall be
numbered serially and shall bear the year of issuance and the name
of the City. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3)
C. Application for license; when made. An application for a license for a
dog or a cat which is required to be licensed shall be made before the
first day of May of each calender year, with the exception of calendar
year 2007, when licenses and registrations shall be obtained before the
first day of July 2007. If obtained after July 1, 2007, a late fee of $5 shall
be charged in addition to the other fees. In all other cases, the
application for a license shall be made within 10 days of the day upon
which the dog or cat in question first becomes subject to the provisions
of this section as set forth in Subsection A.
D. License record. The information on all applications for dog and cat
licenses and the registration number issued to each licensed dog or cat
under this section shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
City Tax Collector. In addition, the City Tax Collector shall forward
similar information on dogs to the State Department of Health each
month on forms furnished by the Department.
E. Fees. Fees for the following shall be as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees,
Article II, Schedule of Fees:
(1) Dog and cat licenses.
(2) Dog and cat registration tags.
(3) The daily cost for impounding a dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-16 et
seq.
(4) The cost for the destruction of a dog, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-16 et
seq. and N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
(5) Any owner who, at the time of registration and licensing, cannot
present proof a cat or dog has been neutered or spayed shall pay a
cat population control fee or a dog population control Fee. [Added
6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 06-34]
F. Expiration date. Each dog or cat license and registration tag shall
expire on the last day of April of the calendar year following the
calendar year in which it was issued.
G. Exception for certain dogs. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and
commonly known as "Seeing-Eye dogs," dogs used to assist
handicapped persons and commonly known as "service dogs," dogs
§ 83-2 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-2
80:127
§ 83-3. Dog canvass.
A canvass of all dogs owned kept or harbored within the City limits shall
be conducted under the supervision of the Chief of Police, or his designated
agent. A report shall be prepared on or before September 1 of each year and
sent to the person designated to license dogs in the City and to the State
Department of Health.
§ 83-4. Vicious or potentially dangerous dogs. [Amended 10-6-2003
by Ord. No. 03-5]
used to assist deaf persons and commonly known as "hearing ear"
dogs and dogs used by the Police Department to assist in official law
enforcement matters and commonly known as "K-9 dogs," shall be
licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except
that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any
fee therefor.
H. No household or dwelling within the City of Bridgeton shall, from the
effective date of this section, harbor, possess, own or control more than
four dogs and/or cats; provided, however, any household harboring,
possessing, sheltering or owning more than four dogs and/or cats per
household on the effective date of this section shall be permitted to
continue for a period of 10 years from the effective date of this
section.27
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health.
DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any cat, dog, or livestock other than poultry.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared
potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to Section 7 of P.L.
1989, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-23).
VICIOUS DOG — Any dog or dog hybrid declared vicious by a municipal
court pursuant to Section 6 of P.L. 1989, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-22).
B. Seizure and impoundment of dog by Animal Control Officer.
(1) An Animal Control Officer shall seize and impound a dog when the
officer has reasonable cause to believe that the dog:
(a) Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to that person;
27.This subsection, formerly § 83-14D, added 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-5, was renumbered as
§ 83-2H 6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 06-34.
§ 83-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 83-4
80:128
(b) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a
person during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat
of harm to persons or domestic animals;
(c) Engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26; or
(d) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged
to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic
animals.
(2) The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether
the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval
of the Animal Control Officer, the dog may be impounded in a
facility or other structure agreeable to the owner.
C. Notice of seizure and impoundment.
(1) The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Court
immediately that he has seized and impounded a dog under this
section, or that he has reasonable cause to believe that a dog has
killed another domestic animal and that a hearing is required. The
Animal Control Officer shall through a reasonable effort attempt to
determine the identity of the owner of any dog seized and
impounded as set forth herein. If its owner cannot be identified
within seven days, that dog may be humanely destroyed.
(2) The Animal Control Officer shall within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant Section 3 of P.L. 1989, c. 307 (N.J.S.A.
4:19-19), notify by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt
requested, the owner concerning the seizure and impoundment
and that, if the owner wishes, a hearing will be held to determine
whether the impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous.
This notice shall also require that the owner return within seven
days, by certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement
indicating whether he wishes the hearing to be conducted or if not,
to relinquish ownership of the dog, in which case the dog may be
humanely destroyed. If the owner cannot be notified by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or refuses to sign for the certified
letter, or does not reply to the certified letter with a signed
statement within seven days of receipt, the dog may be humanely
destroyed.
D. Finding to declare dog vicious.
(1) The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear
and convincing evidence that the dog:
(a) Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
§ 83-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-4
80:129
(b) Has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26.
(2) A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious
bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the
dog was provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof
to demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
(3) If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be vicious, and no appeal
is made of this ruling, the dog shall be destroyed in a humane and
expeditious manner, except that no dog may be destroyed during
the pendency of an appeal.
E. Finding to declare dog potentially dangerous.
(1) The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially
dangerous if it finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
(a) Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a
person during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious
threat of bodily injury or death to a person; or
(b) Killed another domestic animal and poses a threat of serious
bodily injury or death to a person or poses a threat of death to
another domestic animal; or
(c) Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged
to engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic
animals.
(2) A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
(a) Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a
person if the dog was provoked; or
(b) Killing a domestic animal if the domestic animal was the
aggressor.
(3) For the purposes of Subsection E(1)(a) of this section, the
municipality shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate that the
dog was not provoked.
F. Order and schedule for potentially dangerous dog. If the Municipal
Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall issue an
order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
(1) Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
(a) To apply, at his own expense, to the Municipal Clerk or other
official designated to license dogs for a special potentially
dangerous dog license, registration number, and red
identification tag. The owner shall, at his own expense, have
the registration number tattooed upon the dog in a prominent
location. A potentially dangerous dog shall be impounded until
§ 83-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 83-4
80:130
the owner obtains a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license, municipal registration number, and red identification
tag;
(b) To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises
warning that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises.
The sign shall be visible and legible from 50 feet of the
enclosure required pursuant to Subsection F(1)(c) of this
section;
(c) To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the
potentially dangerous dog on the property where the
potentially dangerous dog will be kept and maintained which
has sound sides, top and bottom to prevent the potentially
dangerous dog from escaping by climbing, jumping or digging
and within a fence of at least six feet in height separated by at
least three feet from the confined area. The owner of a
potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the enclosure to
prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude any
release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous
dogs shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the
enclosure, securely muzzled and restrained with a tether
approved by the Animal Control Officer and having a minimum
tensile strength sufficiently in excess of that required to
restrict the potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius
of no more than three feet from the owner and under the direct
supervision of the owner;
(2) May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the Municipal Court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance,
which may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall
contain a provision requiring the municipality in which the owner
resides to be named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of
being notified by the insurance company of any cancellation,
termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
G. Procedures for appeal. The owner of the dog, or the Animal Control
Officer in the municipality in which the dog was impounded, may appeal
any final decision, order, or judgment, including any conditions
attached thereto, of a Municipal Court pursuant to P.L. 1989, c. 307
(N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.) by filing an appeal with the Superior Court
Law Division, in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts of the
State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from courts of limited
jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by conducting a
hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for appeals
from courts of limited jurisdiction.
H. Liability of owner for costs of impoundment and destruction.
§ 83-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-4
80:131
(1) If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous, and all
appeals pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the
dog shall be liable to the municipality in which the dog is
impounded for the costs and expenses of impounding and
destroying the dog. The municipality may establish by ordinance a
schedule of these costs and expenses.28 The owner shall incur the
expense of impounding the dog in a facility other than the
municipal pound, regardless of whether the dog is ultimately found
to be vicious or potentially dangerous.
(2) If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to
the time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New
Jersey State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing.
I. Right to convene hearing for subsequent actions of dog. If the
Municipal Court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain the right to convene a
hearing to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially
dangerous for any subsequent actions of the dog.
J. Duties of owner of potentially dangerous dog. The owner of a
potentially dangerous dog shall:
(1) Comply with the provisions of P.L. 1989, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et
seq.) in accordance with a schedule established by the Municipal
Court, but in no case more that 60 days subsequent to the date of
determination;
(2) Notify the licensing authority, local police department or force, and
the Animal Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large,
or has attacked a human being or killed a domestic animal;
(3) Notify the licensing authority, local police department or force, and
the Animal Control Officer within 24 hours of the death, sale or
donation of a potentially dangerous dog, and shall make available
the carcass for inspection by the Animal Control Officer or a police
officer;
(4) Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner
that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
(5) Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a
different municipality, notify the department and the licensing
authority, police department or force, and Animal Control Officer of
that municipality of the transfer of ownership and the name,
address and telephone of the new owner; and
(6) In addition to any license fee required pursuant to Section 3 of P.L.
1941, c. 151 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3), pay a potentially dangerous dog
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 149, Art. II, Schedule of Fees.
§ 83-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 83-4
80:132
license fee to the municipality as provided by Section 15 of P.L.
1989, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-31). (N.J.S.A. 4:19-28)
K. Violations by owner; penalties; enforcement; seizure and impoundment
of dog; destruction by order of court. The owner of a potentially
dangerous dog who is found by clear and convincing evidence to have
violated this section, or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, or to have failed to comply with a court's order shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $1,000 per day of the violation, and each day's
continuance of the violations shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this
section. An Animal Control Officer is authorized to seize and impound
any potentially dangerous dog whose owner fails to comply with the
provisions of P.L. 1989, c. 307 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.), or any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or a court's order. The Municipal
Court may order that the dog so seized and impounded be destroyed in
an expeditious and humane manner. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-29)
L. Potentially dangerous dog registration number, red identification tag
and license; issuance; telephone number to report violations; publicity.
Each municipality shall:
(1) Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag along with a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to
the Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the court's
orders. The last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog
registration number issued by a municipality will be the threenumber
code assigned to that municipality in the regulations
promulgated pursuant to Section 17 of P.L. 1989 c. 307 (N.J.S.A.
4:19-33) the Animal Control Officer shall verify, in writing,
compliance to the Municipal Clerk or other official designated to
license dogs in the municipality;
(2) Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of this
section. This telephone number shall be forwarded to the
Department and any changes in this number shall be reported
immediately to the Department. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-30)
M. Fee for license. The annual license fee for a potentially dangerous dog
as defined by N.J.S.A. 4:19-18 shall be in the amount of set forth in
Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees, or the maximum as
allowed by law. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-31)
N. Inspection to determine continuing compliance. The Animal Control
Officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's property at least
monthly to determine continuing compliance with Subsection F.
(N.J.S.A. 4:19-32)
O. Acts deemed exercise of government function; application of Tort
Claims Act. Any act undertaken pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall be deemed to be an exercise of a government function and
§ 83-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-4
80:133
§ 83-5. Impounding and destruction of certain dogs, cats or other
animals. [Amended 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 06-21]
shall be subject to the provisions of the New Jersey Tort Claim Act,
N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-34)
P. Deposit and use of fines and fees. All fines and fees collected or
received by the municipality pursuant to this section shall be deposited
in a special account and used by the municipality to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-35)
Q. Inapplicability of this section to dogs used for law enforcement
purposes. The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs used for
law enforcement activities. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-37)
A. Causes for impounding. The Animal Control Officer shall seize, take into
custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded
any of the following:
(1) Any unlicensed dog or cat running at large in violation of the
provisions of this article.
(2) Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or the person keeping
or harboring the dog or cat which the Animal Control Officer or his
agent has reason to believe is a stray dog or cat.
(3) Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or the person keeping
or harboring such dog or cat without a current registration tag on
its collar.
(4) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or the
person keeping or harboring such dog or cat.
(5) Any dog or cat which has been determined to be a vicious dog or
cat as provided in § 83-4, provided that these dogs may also be
seized by any police officer, and provided further that if the dogs
cannot be seized with safety, they may be killed. (N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.16)
(6) Any dog or cat or other animal on the premises of the owner
reported to, or observed by, a Certified Animal Control Officer to be
ill, injured or creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare or
otherwise interfering with the enjoyment of property.
(7) Any dog or cat or other animal which is suspected to be rabid or
bitten by a dog, cat or other animal suspected of having rabies.
B. Access to premises. Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to
perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go on any
premises to seize for impounding any dog, cat or other animal which he
may lawfully seize and impound when the officer is in immediate
pursuit of the dog, cat or other animal except on the premises of the
owner of the dog, cat or other animal if the owner is present and forbids
§ 83-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 83-5
80:134
same. No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with any officer
authorized or empowered to perform under this article.
C. Notice of seizure.
(1) If any dog or cat so impounded or seized wears a registration tag,
collar or harness showing the name and address of any person or
the owner of, or the person keeping or harboring the dog or cat is
known, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately serve on the
person whose address is given on the collar, or on the person
owning, keeping or harboring the dog or cat, a notice in writing
stating that the dog or cat has been seized and will be liable to be
offered for adoption or destroyed if not claimed within seven days
after service of the notice.
(2) A notice under this subsection may be served either by delivering it
to the person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the
person's usual or last known place of abode, or at the address given
on the collar, or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter
addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode
or to the address on the collar.
D. Disposition of unclaimed dogs, cats or animals.
(1) Adoption or destruction after seven days.
(a) Any person authorized by the governing body may cause an
animal to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as
possible and consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-19
or offered for adoption seven days after seizure, provided that:
[1] Notice is given as set forth above and the animal remains
unclaimed; or
[2] The owner or person keeping or harboring the animal has
not claimed the animal and paid all expenses incurred by
reason of its impoundment and detention, including
maintenance costs as set forth elsewhere; or
[3] The owner or person keeping or harboring a dog which
was unlicensed or untagged at the time of seizure does not
produce, and refuses to obtain or produce, a license or
registration tag for the dog or fails to pay all expenses
incurred by reason of its impoundment and detention,
including maintenance costs, as set forth elsewhere; or
[4] The owner or person keeping or harboring an unlicensed
dog which has been seized or impounded does not obtain
the release of the dog from the Animal Control Officer
upon completion of a form which provides for licensing
and registration of the dog within seven days and upon
payment of all costs of seizure and impoundment.
§ 83-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-5
80:135
§ 83-6. Control of dogs, cats and livestock. [Amended 3-6-2007 by
Ord. No. 06-21]
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog, cat, animal or livestock in
the City except in compliance with the provisions of this article and the
following regulations:
(b) Adoption shall not be allowed, if the dog is a vicious dog or
potentially dangerous dog.
(2) Right of ownership after adoption. If an animal is offered for
adoption, the right of ownership in the animal shall transfer to the
new owner at the time of adoption.
(3) No experimentation. No dog or other animal so caught and
detained or procured, obtained, sent or brought to a pound or
shelter shall be sold or otherwise made available for the purpose of
experimentation. Any person who sells or otherwise makes
available any such dog or other animal for the purpose of
experimentation shall be guilty of a disorderly persons offense.
(4) Observation for rabies. After observation, any animal seized under
this section suspected of being rabid shall be immediately reported
to the executive officer of the local board of health and to the State
Department of Health. (N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16)
A. Wearing of registration tag. All dogs or cats which are required by the
provisions of this article to be licensed shall wear a collar or harness
with the registration tag for the dog or cat securely fastened thereto.
B. Use of registration tags. No person, except an officer in the
performance of his duties, shall remove a registration tag from the
collar of any dog or cat without the consent of the owner, nor shall any
person attach a registration tag to a dog or cat for which it was not
issued.
C. Interference with official duties. No person shall hinder, molest or
interfere with anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty
under this article.
D. Disturbing the peace. No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain
any dog, cat or animal which frequently barks, howls or cries and
thereby disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or creates a
nuisance at any time of the day or night.
E. Running at large. No dog, cat, livestock or other animal shall run at
large upon the public streets or in any public park, public building or
other public place within the City.
F. Leashing of animals. No dog, cat, livestock or other animal shall be
upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the City unless
such dog, cat, livestock or other animal is securely controlled and
§ 83-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 83-6
80:136
§ 83-7. Premises maintenance requirements.
The premises on which dogs, cats, or livestock or other animals are
maintained shall at all time conform to the following requirements:
§ 83-8. Dog bites.
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten
by a dog, the individual, or his parent or guardian if he is a minor, shall
immediately notify the police. When the owner or keeper of any dog is
notified by the police that the dog has bitten any individual or individuals,
the owner or keeper of the dog must comply with the following procedures:
controlled by a leash, chain or tether which shall be not more than five
feet long and of sufficient strength to contain said dog, cat, or livestock.
G. Property damage. No dog, cat, livestock or other animal shall injure, or
do any damage to any lawn, shrubbery, flowers, grounds or property.
H. Infection and disease. No person shall willfully sell or offer to sell, use
or expose any livestock, dog, cat or other animal having an infectious or
contagious disease dangerous to the health or life of humans or
animals.
A. Dogs, cats, livestock or other animals shall be confined to such
premises or portion thereof as will preclude odors.
B. Buildings, enclosures or facilities, food storage bins, equipment, and
feed areas shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit proper
cleaning and shall be cleaned regularly and maintained in a sanitary
conditions at all times.
C. Water supply shall be adequate for the facility, building or enclosure
and for proper cleaning.
D. Disposition shall be made of animal wastes, excrement, refuse and/or
garbage upon the premises in order to prevent insect breeding or
rodent infestation or pollution or any unhealthy or unsanitary
condition.29
A. Have the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours.
B. Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel for
a period of 10 days.
C. At the end of 10 days have the dog reexamined by a veterinarian and a
written report of the dog's state of health sent to the Board of Health.
29.Editor's Note: Original Section 10, Abuse of Animals, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5.
§ 83-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-9
80:137
§ 83-9. Quarantine.
The Council may, by proclamation, require all dogs and cats to be
quarantined during any period in each year which may seem advisable to
the Council.
§ 83-10. Livestock.
No person shall own, keep or harbor livestock within the City unless the
person complies with Chapter 370, Zoning.
§ 83-11. Pet shops, kennels, shelters, and pounds.
A. License required. Any person who keeps or operates, or proposes to
establish a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall apply to the City Tax
Collector entitling him to keep or operate the establishment. Any
person holding the license shall not be required to secure individual
licenses for dogs owned by the licensee and kept at the establishment.
Licenses shall not be transferable to another owner or different
premises.
B. Application information. The application shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
(2) The street address where the establishment is located, or proposed
to be located, together with a general description of the premises.
(3) The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
(4) The maximum number of dogs, cats or other animals to be
accommodated by the establishment at any one time.
C. Approval of officers. No license shall be issued until the proposed
licensee submits a written statement from the Health Officer that the
establishment or proposed establishment complies with local
ordinances, including zoning ordinances and state statutes or rules, and
state rules governing the location of and the sanitation at the
establishment.
D. License term. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or
pound shall state the purpose for which the establishment is
maintained, and all licenses shall expire on the last day of January of
each year.
E. License fees. The annual fees for kennel and pet shop licenses shall be
as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
F. Compliance with state regulations.
(1) All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
subject to revocation by the Council on recommendation of the
§ 83-9 BRIDGETON CODE § 83-11
80:138
§ 83-12. Animal Control Officer; City shelter services.
§ 83-13. Disposition of fees.
State Department of Health or the Health Officer for failure to
comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department of
Health or the Health Officer, after the owner has been afforded a
hearing by either the State Department of Health or the Council.
(2) Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel,
pet shop, shelter or pound shall comply with all City regulations
and the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Health governing the sanitary conduct and
operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, the
preservation of sanitation and the prevention of the spread of
rabies and other disease of dogs within and from these
establishments.
G. Report to the State Health Department. The City Tax Collector shall
forward to the State Department of Health a list of all kennels, pet
shops, shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses
are issued, which list shall include the name and address of the licensee
and the kind of license issued.
H. Control of dogs off premises. No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter
or pound shall be permitted off the premises, except on leash or in a
crate or other safe control.
A. Certified Animal Control Officer. The City Council shall appoint a
Certified Animal Control Officer who shall be responsible for animal
control within the City and who shall report to the Chief of Police.
B. Shelters. The City shall provide a shelter or pound or shall contract for
provision of shelter services to include confinement and housing,
destruction or adoption of animals.
A. Special account. License fees and other monies except the registration
tag fees shall be paid to the Tax Collector after the application is filed
with the office of the Municipal Clerk, and shall be placed in a special
account separate from the other accounts of the City within five days
and shall be used for the following purposes only: [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(1) Collecting, keeping and disposing of dogs liable to seizure under
this article.
(2) Local prevention and control of rabies.
(3) Providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the Health
Officer for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies.
§ 83-11 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-13
80:139
§ 83-14. Violations and penalties.30 [Amended 7-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 00-3; 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-05]
§ 83-15. Misstatement of application.
If the applicant purposely misstates the facts on the application, in addition
to the ability of the Council to deny the application or suspend or revoke
the license, if previously applied for or granted, the applicant shall be
deemed to have violated this article and shall forfeit the fee and be subject
to the maximum penalties as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29. There shall
be a rebuttable presumption that any misstatements of the application are
purposeful.
(4) All other purposes prescribed by the statutes of New Jersey
governing the subject and for administering the provisions of this
article.
B. Unexpended balance in special account. Any unexpended balance
remaining in the special account shall be retained therein until the end
of the third fiscal year following and may be used for any of the
purposes set forth in this section. At the end of the third fiscal year
following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be
transferred from the special account to the general funds of the City
any amount then in the account which is in excess of the total amount
paid into the special account during the last two fiscal years next
preceding.
C. Dog registration tags and other dog fees collected by the City shall be
forwarded within 30 days after collection to the State of New Jersey as
required by state law. [Amended 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 06-21]
A. Any person who shall violate the provisions of §§ 83-2A or C or 83-6B
and C, 83-11A and H and/or rules and regulations promulgated by the
State Department of Health shall, for a first offense, be liable for a
penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $100, and for a second
offense a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $200, and for a
third offense not less than $200 nor more than $300 for each
subsequent offense, to be recovered in the manner provided by N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.19 et seq. [Amended 12-5-2005 by Ord. No. 05-7]
B. Any person who shall violate any other provision of the chapter shall be
liable for the first offense, and for each subsequent offense, shall be
liable, upon conviction, for the penalty stated in N.J.S.A. 40:69A-29.
Each day in which such violation continues shall be deemed to
constitute a separate offense. The court may assess court costs as an
additional penalty in addition to any cost of detention, disposition or
impoundment.
30.Editor's Note: Former § 83-14A, B, C and E through H, Regarding neutering of dogs and
cats, were repealed 6-5-2007 by Ord. No. 06-34. This ordinance also renumbered former
§ 83-14D as § 83-2H. Additionally, this ordinance renumbered former §§ 83-15 and 83-16
as §§ 83-14 and 83-15, respectively.
§ 83-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 83-15
80:140
ARTICLE II
Pet Waste
[Adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 03-26]
§ 83-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the City of Bridgeton, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 83-17. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal. Other than a disability assistance animal,
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle or other
suitable container and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 83-18. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 83-19. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 83-16 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-20
80:141
§ 83-20. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department,
the local Board of Health and Officials of the Department of Housing of the
City of Bridgeton.
§ 83-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $100, in the discretion of the Municipal
Court.
§ 83-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 83-21
80:142
ARTICLE III
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 03-26]
§ 83-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
City of Bridgeton, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 83-23. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 83-24. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the City of Bridgeton, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife,
for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers.
§ 83-25. Enforcement.
§ 83-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $100, in the discretion of the Municipal
Court.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department or other
municipal officials of the City of Bridgeton.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 83-22 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 83-26
80:143
Chapter 98
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 311.
§ 98-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to require a clear display of house
numbers from public streets, for all properties that contain principal
buildings within the City of Bridgeton in order to assist the general public or
the authorities in identifying any property in case of an emergency, as well
as for the welfare of the general public in conducting their normal affairs,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-1 et seq.
§ 98-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Includes all houses, dwellings, apartment buildings, stores
and business places, in the City of Bridgeton.
§ 98-3. Plotting of properties and assignment of numbers.
The City Engineer shall plot upon the Tax Maps of the City all of the
properties which now or shall hereinafter front upon any street and
designate and assign a number therefor in compliance with the numbering
system prescribed in § 98-4 of this chapter.
§ 98-4. Numbering system.
§ 98-5. Display of numbers. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
All buildings now or hereinafter erected within the City shall bear, in
figures, the street number assigned to said building on the Tax Map of the
A. All even numbers shall be on the southerly and westerly side of said
streets. All odd numbers shall be on the northerly and easterly side of
said streets.
B. On all streets running north and south, the numbers shall begin at the
southerly end and run north. On all streets running east and west, east
of Cohansey River, the numbers shall begin at the westerly end and run
east. On all streets running east and west, west of the Cohansey River,
the numbers shall begin at the easterly end and run west.
§ 83-26 BRIDGETON CODE § 98-5
80:144
City of Bridgeton. Such figure shall be displayed by the owner or occupant
on the front of the building or in the front yard in numbers at least three
inches in height, at or near the front entrance to the building and so located
as to be visible to persons passing by the building or premises on the
abutting street. All numbers shall be Arabic numerals.
§ 98-6. Copies of map. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
The Municipal Engineer, upon the completion of the plotting upon the Tax
Map of the City of Bridgeton, shall provide a copy of said map to the
Municipal Clerk and the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement.
§ 98-7. Application for street number.
Every owner or occupant of said land shall apply to the Division of Housing
and Code Enforcement who shall furnish them with the correct street
number assigned thereto.
§ 98-8. Lots resulting from subdivision or resubdivision of land.
Upon any subdivision or resubdivision of land in the City resulting in a lot or
lots other than those delineated on said Map, the Municipal Engineer shall
assign a number to each lot resulting from subdivision which shall be in
proper numerical sequence in relation to the number assigned to the other
lots fronting on the same street, and he shall record the same upon the said
map within 10 days of the filing of the approval given for such subdivision
or resubdivision of land.
§ 98-9. Subdivision approval contingent on assignment of numbers.
No subdivision or resubdivision of land, major or minor, requiring approval
by the Planning Board shall be approved by it unless a number shall be
assigned by the Municipal Engineer to each lot therein for the building
erected or to be erected on it.
§ 98-10. Issuance of certificates of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Division of Housing and
Code Enforcement or anyone in the Division for occupancy of any building
unless the provisions of this chapter shall have been complied with.
§ 98-11. Violations and penalties.
The occupant or owner of any house, dwelling, apartment building, store or
business place, who shall fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter
within 30 days, after written notice of the number assigned to such house,
dwelling, apartment building, store business place, shall upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. A
separate offense shall be deemed to be committed each day or days during
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 98-5 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 98-11
80:145
Chapter 103
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
Rental property — See Ch. 277.
§ 103-1. Definitions.
The definition of the terms used in this chapter shall be the same as they
appear in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, as may be amended and therefore are:
BUILDING — Any building, or structure, of part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouse, and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of Bridgeton.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality,
county or state relating to health, fire, building regulations, or to other
activities concerning buildings in the municipality.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer, officers, board or body who is authorized
by this chapter to exercise the powers prescribed herein and by N.J.S.A.
40:48-3 et seq. The public officer authorized to enforce this chapter and
exercise the powers herein is the Director of the Division of Housing and
Inspections.
§ 103-2. Complaint.
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any building
is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use or whenever it appears
to the public officer or any employee or agent of the Division of Housing
and Inspections (on his own motion) that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a notice/
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the public officer (or his designated agent)
at a place therein fixed no less than seven days nor more than 30 days
after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and parties in interest
§ 98-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 103-2
103:146
shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person, or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not
be controlling in hearings before the public officer.
§ 103-3. Order for abatement or demolition; costs to become lien.
A. If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the repair, alteration
or improvement of the said building to be made by the owner, within a
reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the order or at the
option of the owner to vacate or have said building vacated and closed
within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the said building within the time
specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to remove or
demolish said building within a reasonable time as specified in the
order of removal.
C. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or
to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on
the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use;
the use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
D. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
E. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses'
fees, search fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
municipality, and such cost of such repairs, alterations of
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, if any,
or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the
sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be
a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred.
(1) If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he
shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be credited
against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof, including the
§ 103-2 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 103-3
103:147
§ 103-4. Service of complaints and orders.
clearance and, if necessary, leveling of the site, the proceeds of any
sale of such materials or any sum derived from any contract for the
removal or demolition of the building.
(2) If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds
the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs
and the amount so due shall be filed with the custodian of the
records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith
forwarded to the owner by registered mail.
(3) If the total of the credits exceed such costs, the balance remaining
shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the public officer, shall
be secured in such manner as may be directed by such Court, and
shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment of the Court
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
judgment of such Court.
(4) Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of
the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in
the Superior Court to contest the certificate.
F. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
public officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to
make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof and the imposition of costs as a
lien on the real property.
G. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the City to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor is
anything in this chapter intended to limit the authority of the enforcing
agency or construction official under the State Uniform Construction
Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.) or any rules or
regulations adopted thereunder.
A. Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail.
B. If the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot
be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect,
then the serving of such complaint or order upon such persons may be
made by publishing the same once in a newspaper printed and
published in the municipality, or, in the absence of such newspaper, in
one printed and published in the county and circulating in the
municipality in which the buildings are located.
C. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous
place on premises affected by the complaint or order.
§ 103-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 103-4
103:148
§ 103-5. Powers of public officer.
§ 103-6. Standards.
D. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for
record with the county recording officer of the county in which the
building is located.
A. The public officer shall have the right to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes
and provisions of this chapter including the following powers in
addition to the others granted herein:
(1) To investigate the building conditions in the City in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use;
(2) To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
(3) To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession;
(4) To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees
as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the this
chapter;
(5) To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he may designate.
B. Any action taken using revenues derived from the local property tax
shall be taken only after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor,
pursuant to the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law, P.L. 1971,
c. 198, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., unless the action is necessary to
prevent imminent danger to life, limb or property.
A. A public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such a building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or
other residents of the City. Such conditions shall be deemed to include
the standards of habitability of N.J.A.C. 5:28-1.1 et seq. and the
following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing):31
(1) Defects herein increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other
calamities.
(2) Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 103-4 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 103-6
103:149
§ 103-7. Remedies.
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by a public officer under this
chapter may, within 30 days after the posting and service of such order,
bring an action for injunctive relief to restrain the public officer from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief.
The court may proceed in the action in a summary manner or otherwise.
The remedy herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by
an order of the public officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for
action taken pursuant thereto, or because of noncompliance by any person
with any order of the public officer.
§ 103-8. Assessment and collection of demolition costs.
Whenever the City undertakes the removal or demolition of any building or
structure which is dangerous to human life or the public welfare or which
constitutes a fire hazard, the City may, in addition to assessing the cost
of such removal or demolition as a municipal lien against the premises,
authorize the institution of an action at law for the collection thereof in the
Superior Court.
§ 103-9. Emergency Demolition Fund.
(3) Dilapidation.
(4) Disrepair.
(5) Structural defects.
(6) Uncleanliness.
(7) Failure to comply with the requirements of the Building Code or the
certificate of occupancy.
B. A vacant structure, which is not in danger of structural collapse, may be
deemed a public nuisance and an unsafe structure, inimical to the
welfare of the occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents of
the City, and the public officer may cause the boarding of the structure
or the abatement of the unsafe condition pursuant to the procedures
within this chapter.
C. A building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have been damaged to
such an extent that nothing remains but the walls, or parts of the walls
and other supports, shall, regardless of the safety and sturdiness of
those remaining walls or parts thereof, be deemed inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the City, and the public officer may cause the
repair or the demolition of the building, buildings or parts thereof
pursuant to the procedures within this chapter.
D. The public officer may use any additional standards in any building or
structures code adopted by the City of Bridgeton.
§ 103-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 103-9
103:150
§ 103-10. Administrative process and procedure.32
Process and procedures for the administration of this chapter shall be
governed by the sections herein and the N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 and 40:48-2.12a
et seq., as amended.
Chapter 107
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Burning in junkyards — See Ch. 189,
§ 189-8B.
Fires in parks — See Ch. 247, Art. II, § 247-9E.
Fires in public places — See Ch. 251.
§ 107-1. Burning restricted.33
No person or persons shall make or cause to be made any open fire or
bonfire of any kind or burn any type of combustible materials whatsoever
in the City of Bridgeton except for cooking purposes or indoor fireplaces,
incinerators or furnaces, unless approved by the Fire Official or his
designee or otherwise permitted by regulations promulgated by the State of
New Jersey.
A. Any building or buildings, or parts thereof, which have come into a state
of disrepair through neglect, lack of maintenance or use, fire, accident
or other calamities, or through any other act rendering the building or
buildings, or parts thereof, in a state of disrepair, to the extent that the
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use, shall be
deemed inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City of Bridgeton,
and the public officer may exercise his powers to repair, demolish, or
cause the repairing or demolition of the building or buildings, or parts
thereof, pursuant to Subsections B and C of this section.
B. The public officer, to finance the costs of accomplishing the purpose of
Subsection A shall have the power to accept gifts or grants from private
or public agencies.
C. All funds received pursuant to Subsection B shall be placed in separate
municipal fund designated as the "Emergency Demolition Fund" to be
used for demolition-related activities. The public officer shall have the
sole discretion in determining which funds will be accepted and the
time and manner of all expenditures necessary to carry out the
purposes of this section.
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 103-9 BURNING, OPEN § 107-2
107:151
§ 107-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction before the
Municipal Judge, be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article
III, General Penalty.
Chapter 112
CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Circus license fee — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Use of litter receptacles at circuses and
carnivals — See Ch. 203, Art. II.
§ 112-1. License required.
No person shall conduct a circus, fair, carnival, traveling carnival, rodeo or
similar public exhibition within the City of Bridgeton without having first
obtained a license and paid the required license fee.
§ 112-2. Fee; exceptions.
§ 112-3. Additional application information.
In addition to the application information required by § 200-2 of this Code,
an application for a license under this chapter shall contain the following
information:
A. The fee for a license under this section shall be as set forth in Chapter
149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees, for each day that the activity is
to be conducted. Each license shall be issued for one day, except that a
license may be extended for any number of consecutive days, excluding
Sundays, upon the payment of the per-diem license fee.
B. Religious, charitable, fraternal and similar nonprofit organizations
conducting activities licensed by this chapter in order to raise money
for charity or some other public purpose, or for the entertainment or
recreation of the residents of the City, shall not be required to pay any
fee, but shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
A. The date or dates and the hours which the licensed activity will be
conducted.
B. A list of all the games, attractions, contests or performances that will be
included in the activity to be conducted, a general description of each
and, if not operated by the licensee or his employees, the name and
address of the concessionaire or other person operating them.
§ 107-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 112-3
107:152
§ 112-4. Inspection. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5;
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20
In addition to the investigation required by § 200-3, the premises at which
the licensed activity is to be conducted shall be inspected by the Chief
of Police or a police officer designated by him to determine if there is
adequate off-street parking available, and that the licensed activity can be
conducted without undue interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic
on public streets. The application shall also be investigated by the Division
of Housing and Code Enforcement, its agents or employees to determine if
the licensed activity can be conducted without endangering public health or
safety. All these officials shall report the results of their investigations to the
Municipal Clerk within 10 days.
§ 112-5. Approval of Council; issuance of license. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
Upon receiving the reports of the results of the investigations, the
Municipal Clerk shall transmit them, together with the information
contained in the application for the license, to the Council. The Council shall
approve or disapprove the application within a reasonable time. Upon the
approval of the Council and payment of the required license fee, the Clerk
shall immediately issue the license. The license shall be valid only on the
date or dates and during the hours set forth in the application.
§ 112-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 118
CHECKS, FRAUDULENT
§ 118-1. Authority.
The City of Bridgeton may, by this chapter, impose a service charge to be
added to any account owing to the municipality, if payment tendered on the
account was by a check, or other written instrument, which was returned
for insufficient funds.
C. A description of the off-street parking and sanitary facilities available at
the location at which the activity is to be conducted.
D. Appropriate evidence that the licensee has made adequate provision as
required for the payment of workmen's compensation to any of his
employees who shall be injured.
§ 112-3 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 118-2
118:153
§ 118-2. Inclusion of charge on list of delinquent accounts.
Whenever an account owing to the City of Bridgeton is for a tax or special
assessment, the service charge, authorized by this chapter, shall be
included on whatever list of delinquent accounts is prepared for the
enforcement of the lien.
§ 118-3. Amount of service charge.
The service charge for a check, or other written instrument, returned for
insufficient funds is $20 per check, or other written instrument.
§ 118-4. Collection of charge.
Any service charge authorized by this chapter shall be collected in the
same manner prescribed by law for the collection of the account for which
the check, or other written instrument, was tendered. Further, the City of
Bridgeton may require future payments to be tendered in cash, by certified
check or cashier's check.
Chapter 126
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 103.
Construction code and moving permit
fees — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 162, Art. I.
Manufactured and mobile homes — See Ch.
212.
§ 118-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 118-4
118:154
ARTICLE I
Enforcement of Uniform Code
[Adopted 1-23-1990 by Ord. No. 89-21]
§ 126-1. Enforcing agency established; subcode officials.
There is hereby established in the City of Bridgeton a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency which shall consist of a Construction
Code Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official
and such other subcode officials for such other additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey,
shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code.
The chief administrator of the State Uniform Construction Code enforcing
agency shall be the Construction Code Official.
§ 126-2. Qualifications of subcode officials.
Each official position created in § 126-1 hereof shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that in lieu of any
particular subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may
be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified pursuant
to P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.), and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold
each such position.
§ 126-3. Office location.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at
one office location except for emergencies, and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances.
§ 126-4. Fees. [Amended 2-4-2002 by Ord. No. 01-7]
Fees shall be as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
§ 126-5. Report recommending fee schedule.
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the City Council, biannually, a report recommending
a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the agency, and any other
expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of the
State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 126-6. Surcharge.
In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations,34 the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge as provided in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II,
Schedule of Fees. Said surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of
§ 126-1 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 126-6
118:155
Housing Inspection, Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis
for the fiscal quarter ending September 30, December 31, March 31, and
June 30, and not later than one month succeeding the end of the quarter
for which it is due. In the fiscal year in which The regulations first become
effective, said fee shall be collected and remitted for the third and fourth
quarters only.
34.Editor's Note: The "regulations" refers to the regulations established by the Commissioner
of the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 126-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 126-6
118:156
ARTICLE II
Waiver of Fees for Accessibility Construction
[Adopted 4-21-1992 by Ord. No. 91-18]
§ 126-7. Waiver authorized.
In connection with any construction, reconstruction, refurbishment or
repairs of any public or private structures within the City of Bridgeton,
any and all permit fees or enforcing agency fees with respect to such
construction which is solely undertaken and constructed for the purpose of
making such public or private structures more accessible to handicapped
persons, be and the same are hereby waived.
§ 126-8. Refinement of authorized waiver.
Permit fees and agency fees are expressly waived only with respect to
improvements to public or private structures in connection with
improvements designed solely for the benefit of accessibility for
handicapped persons, and shall not be applicable to any other buildings or
improvements other than as stated herein.
§ 126-7 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 126-8
118:157

ARTICLE III
Modular Home Moving Permits
[Adopted 5-2-1995 by Ord. No. 94-30]
§ 126-9. Permit required.
No mobile home, modular home or any other structure of any kind shall
be moved into the City of Bridgeton for purposes of permanent location
therein or temporary location therein for more than 24 hours without
having obtained a moving permit from the City of Bridgeton Construction
Official.
§ 126-10. Review by Construction Official for compliance with
regulations. [Amended 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-23]
Prior to issuance of any moving permit under this article, the Construction
Official shall ascertain that the structure is either new or not previously
occupied being sold by either a dealer or manufacturer, or shall ascertain,
by personal inspection, that the mobile home, modular home or structure
meets all of the requirements of New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, the
Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (N.J.A.C.
5:23 et seq.) and the ordinances of the City of Bridgeton. The Construction
Official shall also ascertain that the mobile home or modular home,
irrespective of whether new or used, contains the certification of the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs as meeting the code requirements.
After making the determination required in this section, the Construction
Official shall issue a moving permit, the cost of which shall be as provided
in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
§ 126-11. Inspections outside of the City of Bridgeton.
For all personal inspections provided for under § 126-9 hereof, of any
structure, that shall be physically entering the jurisdiction of the City of
Bridgeton, the cost of such inspection shall be borne by the applicant for a
moving permit at rate provided in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of
Fees.
§ 126-12. Permanent location for unit required.
No permit shall be issued under this article unless it is determined by the
Construction Official that the applicant therefor has a permanent location
for the mobile home, modular home or structure in the City of Bridgeton
on which said unit can be installed in full compliance with all applicable
federal, state and local regulations and has all permits required thereto.
§ 126-13. Exceptions.
The permit required under this article shall not be required for the
movement of a mobile home, modular home or other structure through the
City of Bridgeton on a purely transient basis, outside the City on the state
§ 126-9 CHECKS, FRAUDULENT § 126-13
118:159
highways or county roads within the City, so long as such unit does not
remain for more than 24 hours in the City of Bridgeton.
§ 126-14. Violations and penalties.
Violations of any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. Each day during which a violation
takes place may be deemed a separate violation.
§ 126-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 126-14
118:160
Chapter 130
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 238.
Loitering by minors — See Ch. 251, § 251-9C.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 251.
Minors in pool halls — See Ch. 260, § 260-4.
§ 130-1. Hours established. [Amended 5-7-1996 by Ord. No. 95-19]
Except as set forth in § 130-4 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a
juvenile below the age of 17 years to be on any public street or public place,
including but not limited to highways, roads, playgrounds, public buildings,
places of amusement, entertainment or places of business conducted for
profit to which the public is invited and all public or quasi-public places
either on foot or in any vehicle, within the City of Bridgeton between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and it shall be unlawful for any juvenile
under the age of 18 years to be on any public streets, highways, roads,
playgrounds, places of amusement or entertainment or places of business
conducted for profit to which the public is invited, and all public or quasi
public places either on foot or in any vehicle within the City of Bridgeton
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless accompanied by a
parent or guardian or unless engaged in or traveling to or from a business
or occupation which a juvenile is authorized to perform under the laws of
the state.
§ 130-2. Responsibility of parents.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult having custody,
care or control of a minor under the age of 18 years to knowingly permit
such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or remain in or upon the public
streets, highways, roads and other public or quasi-public places within the
City.
§ 130-3. Notice of violation.
If any minor under the age of 18 years should be apprehended for violating
the provisions of this chapter, the assigned police officer shall notify the
parents, guardian or other person having the custody, care or control of
such minor of the arrest and may, if deemed advisable, make further inquiry
or take such action concerning the presence of the minor in or upon the
public or quasi-public places as may seem advisable.
§ 126-14 CURFEW § 130-4
130:161
§ 130-4. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any minor under
the age of 18 years during the time necessarily required for such minor to
travel to his residence from any of the following:
§ 130-5. Presumption.
If it should be established that any minor under the age of 18 years idled,
loitered, wandered or remained in or upon any public street, highway, road
or other public or quasi-public place within the City in violation of this
chapter, it shall be presumed, in the absence of proof to the contrary, that
the parent or other adult person having care, control or custody of such
minor, knowingly permitted the minor to do so.
§ 130-6. Responsibility of operators of premises. [Added 5-7-1996
by Ord. No. 95-19]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any premises or his agents
or employees to knowingly permit a minor to remain on the premises over
which the operator has supervision, custody, or control when for the minor
to so remain on the premises would be in violation of this chapter.
§ 130-7. Posting of regulations.
Notice of the curfew regulations established by this chapter shall be posted
in or at such public or quasi-public places as may be deemed by the Chief of
Police in order that the public may be constantly informed of the existence
of the curfew regulations.
§ 130-8. Violations and penalties.
A. A place of employment at which the minor may be gainfully employed.
B. A school or place of instruction at which such minor may be a bona fide
attendant.
C. A place at which a function may be held which is sponsored by a
religious, school, or civic organization.
D. A place at which a bona fide, supervised social meeting, gathering or
assemblage was held.
E. An emergency arising necessitating a minor under the age of 18 years
to be dispatched on an errand requiring his presence in or upon a street
or automobile or in any public or quasi-public place during the curfew
hours.
A. Any minor under the age of 18 years who violates this chapter shall be
treated as a juvenile offender in accordance with the laws of the State
of New Jersey.
§ 130-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 130-8
130:162
Chapter 135
DOCKS AND WHARVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
§ 135-1. Definitions.36
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WHEELED VEHICLE — Any vehicle with wheels, such as but not limited to
bicycles, skates, skateboards, scooters and motorcycles.
§ 135-2. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful to fish, crab or swim from the City of Bridgeton floating
dock or to operate a wheeled vehicle on said floating dock.
§ 135-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
B. Any parent of a juvenile or any person or persons of the age of 18 years
or older violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment not to exceed
90 days, or both. In addition, any person found in violation of this
chapter may be required to perform community service to such extent
as may be ordered by the court. If both a juvenile and parent or
guardian or other person having custody and control of a juvenile
violate the provisions of this chapter, they shall be required to perform
community service together. Any person who is convicted of a second
offense of this chapter shall pay a mandatory minimum fine of not less
than $200 and not to exceed $1,000 and may be subject to
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. In addition, in lieu of all or
part of the fines imposed hereunder, the court may order any parent or
parents of juveniles to attend a training program approved by the court
to improve parental child-raising skills and effectiveness. The failure of
any parent or juvenile to adequately complete such a program shall
constitute cause for imposition of or reinstatement of any fines imposed
under this chapter.35 [Amended 5-6-1996 by Ord. No. 95-19]
35.Editor's Note: Original Section 4-10, Penalty, which immediately followed this section, was
deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
36.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 130-8 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 135-3
135:163
Chapter 141
EMERGENCY LANES
§ 141-1. Creation of lanes on public and private property.
§ 141-2. Use of designated lane prohibited; exceptions.
All vehicles other than police, fire and ambulance vehicles are prohibited
from using, parking or standing in any designated emergency lane as
established by the City.
§ 141-3. Removal of offending vehicles; responsibility for charges.
Any unoccupied vehicle parking or standing in violation of this chapter shall
be deemed a nuisance, and any police officer, Code Enforcement Officer
or Fire Department officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable cost of removal and storage which may
result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 141-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person owning a vehicle, and the person operating said vehicle wherein
a violation of this chapter is caused, shall be responsible for a penalty as
provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. Such violations may
be issued by any police officer, Code Enforcement Officer or officer of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention within the Fire Department. The Bureau of Fire
Prevention officer may issue such violations consistent with this chapter or
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
Chapter 149
FEES
A. The City may provide, subject to approval of the Planning/Zoning
Boards in consultation with the City Engineer, for the creation of
emergency lanes for the usage of police, fire and ambulance vehicles
only on public property of the City or may similarly provide, subject to
the approval of the City Engineer, and the consent of the private
property owner, which consent shall be given in writing, to the creation
of emergency lanes for the usage of police, fire and ambulance vehicles
on private property.
B. Additionally, the appropriate City of Bridgeton Fire Official may
establish fire lanes at any time, so long as such establishment does not
conflict with any prior approval granted.
C. Further, application may be made to the Planning and/or Zoning
Boards, as appropriate, for additional fire lanes. Any application made
to the Planning/Zoning Board for site plan approval shall be provided to
the Fire Official for comment and approval of emergency lanes.
§ 135-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 141-4
135:164
ARTICLE I
Escrow Fees
[Adopted 11-1-1994 by Ord. No. 94-7]
§ 149-1. Escrow deposits.
The Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall require
application fees and escrow deposits in accordance with the provisions of
this article. Such escrows shall be utilized to pay the cost of any professional
fees incurred for the review of and/or testimony and taking of testimony
concerning an application for development submitted by an applicant.
§ 149-2. Application fees. [Amended 6-11-2005 by Ord. No. 04-11;
5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30; 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 10-30]
A. The following application fees shall be collected in connection with
applications before the Planning and Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
City of Bridgeton:
Type Fee
Minor subdivision $150
Major subdivision $400
Minor site plan $150
Major site plan $400
Each site plan waiver $75
Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a) $150
Interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b) $150
Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:55D-70(c) $170
Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:55D-70(d) $250
Special meeting requested by applicant (in addition
to other fees herein stated)
$750
B. Subject to the provisions of Subsections C through E below, each
applicant shall, prior to the application being ruled complete pursuant
to the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law, submit the following
sums to be held in escrow in accordance with the provisions hereof:
Type Fee
Conceptual subdivision plan review $1,500
Minor subdivisions $2,000
Minor subdivisions with variance(s) $3,000
Major subdivisions (preliminary and final approval)
0 to 100 lots $5,000
101 to 500 lots $10,000
§ 149-1 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-2
135:165
Type Fee
Plus each lot over 501 $25
Site plans
Conceptual site plan (major or minor) $2,000
Major/minor site plan (preliminary)
0 to 25 acres disturbed area $5,000
25 plus acres disturbed area $10,000
Plus each acre over 100 $100
Major/minor site plan (final approval)
0 to 25 acres disturbed area $3,000
25 plus acres disturbed area $10,000
Plus each acre over 100 $100
Land mining applications
0 to 20 acres $5,000
20 acres plus $5,000
Plus each acre over 20 acres $200
Mobile home parks (new or expansions)
0 to 25 mobile home sites $3,000
26 to 100 mobile home sites $5,000
Plus each site over 26 $50
101 to 500 mobile home sites $7,500
Plus each site over 101 $50
501 plus mobile home sites $10,000
Plus each site over 501 $50
Site plan with variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d) for a resource extraction use:
First acre or part thereof $5,000
Plus each additional acre or part thereof $250
Site plan with variance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d) other than for a resource extraction
use
First acre or part thereof $5,000
Plus each additional acre or part thereof $150
Conditional use
First acre or part thereof $2,000
Plus each additional acre or part thereof $250
Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a) $2,000
§ 149-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-2
135:166
§ 149-3. Compilation review. [Amended 6-11-2005 by Ord. No.
04-11]
Type Fee
Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b) $2,000
Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) $3,000
Variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) $4,000
C. Acreage for the purpose of computing the fee for a resource extraction
use development application shall include all area within the mandatory
buffer area and the buffer area itself, plus any improvements outside
the buffer area.
D. "Disturbed area," for the purpose of computing application fees and
escrow fee deposits for site plan applications, shall include road rightof-
way improvements, building area, parking, access drives, walks,
lawn area, landscaped area and areas to be cleared.
E. Escrow fees shall be administered in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1 to 40:55D-53.2(a). If an escrow account becomes depleted
to 25% of the original amount, the applicant shall replenish the account
in the amount of 50% of the original escrow amount upon notification
from the City of Bridgeton, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c).
A. Within 45 days after the filing of an application for development, the
Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall cause a compilation
review to be made of any development application. Such compilation
review may, in the discretion of the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, be conducted by administrative personnel of the Planning
Department of the City of Bridgeton to determine whether or not the
application and escrows as required by this article are complete. In
conducting such review, the Board shall consider the following criteria:
(1) The presence or absence of public water and/or sewer service at
the site.
(2) Environmental considerations including but not limited to
geological, hydrological and ecological factors.
(3) Traffic impact to the proposed development.
(4) Impact of proposed development on existing aquifer and/or water
quality.
(5) Impact of the proposed development of off-tract facilities.
(6) Surface drainage impact on side or on surrounding properties or
facilities.
B. Upon completion of said review and within 45 days, the Board shall
adopt a resolution specifying whether the escrow amount specified
§ 149-2 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-3
135:167
§ 149-4. Posting of escrow required to complete application.
No application for development shall be deemed complete until such time as
the applicant shall have posted with the City of Bridgeton in cash, certified
check or money order, the amount of the escrow deposit determined by the
Planning Board and/or Board of Adjustment to be required in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
§ 149-5. Utilization of escrows; refund.
All such escrow funds shall be utilized by the appropriate Board to pay
the cost of any professional fees incurred by the Board for review and/
or testimony or the taking of testimony in connection with the particular
application for development. All sums not actually so expended shall be
refunded to the applicant within 120 days after certification by the Board
Chairman that said application has been finally determined. "Finally
determined" shall mean:
§ 149-6. Resubmission or revision of application.
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to any resubmission or
revision of a development plan or application as if same were an initial
development application. The escrow deposits required by this article shall,
therefore, be the same for a resubmission or revision of a development
plan or application as for a new application, which shall be in addition to
the amount paid or owed for the original application and for any previous
resubmissions or revisions. New application fees and escrow deposits on
account of a revised plan or application shall, in the discretion of the
reviewing agency, not be required for any revision not necessary for
approval but which is requested by the reviewing agency, nor for any
above is sufficient, excessive, or insufficient. In the event that the Board
shall determine that said amount is excessive, it shall, in the resolution,
specify the amount that shall be deemed sufficient. In the event that the
Board shall determine that the amount specified above is insufficient,
it shall so specify and shall further set forth the amount required to
be posted in light of the criteria specified herein and shall notify the
applicant thereof in writing. No further review of the application shall
be made until after the additional sum is deposited. Failure to make an
escrow deposit under this article after written notice shall be grounds
for disapproval on application.
A. Denial of preliminary approval.
B. Denial of final approval.
C. Compliance with all conditions following preliminary or final approval.
D. Withdrawal of an application.
E. Expiration of approval.
§ 149-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-6
135:168
revision not involving any additional cost or review by professional
personnel or hearing expenses.
§ 149-7. (Reserved)37
37.Editor's Note: Former § 149-7, Waiver of fees, adopted 7-5-1995 by Ord. No. 95-1, was
repealed 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30.
§ 149-6 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-7
135:169

ARTICLE II
Schedule of Fees
[Adopted 1-3-1984 by Ord. No. 83-12; amended in its entirety
10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
§ 149-8. Charging of fees.
The following fees shall be charged from and after the effective date of this
article. All other fees or charges by the City of Bridgeton shall remain the
same unless and until provided otherwise by ordinance.
§ 149-9. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
03-9; 6-11-2005 by Ord. No. 04-11; 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30;
3-19-2013 by Ord. No. 12-34]
Liquor licenses (§ 77-3C):
§ 149-10. Amusement devices. [Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No.
06-30]
License fees (§ 80-4):
§ 149-11. Block off street. [Amended 10-1-2013 by Ord. No. 13-07]
A. Plenary retail consumption, per year: $2,500.
B. Plenary retail distribution, per year:
Year License Fee
2012/2013 $1,281
2013/2014 $1,537
2014/2015 $1,844
2015/2016 $2,212
2016/2017 $2,500 (maximum allowed by law)
C. Club, per year: $188.
A. Per machine, per year: $100.
B. For riding machines, per year: $100.
C. All other machines, per year: $50.
A. Permit.
(1) Permit application fee: $75 for each day of an event requiring a
street to be blocked off. City and City-related events are exempt
from this fee.
§ 149-8 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-12
135:171
§ 149-12. Carnivals, circuses and fairs. [Amended 12-15-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-9; 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
Licenses for carnivals, circuses, fairs, etc., per day (§ 112-2A): $200.
§ 149-13. Dance permits. [Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 03-9;
5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
§ 149-14. Dog and cat licenses and registration; kennels and
pounds. [Amended 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 06-2138]
A. Per year, per room or hall: $50.
B. Per night: $10.
A. Dog and cat licenses and registration tags:
(1) Dog license and registration tag:
(a) Dog license per year, if paid by May 1: $5.80.
(b) Dog license per year, if paid after May 1: $10.80.
(c) State dog clinic fee: $ 0.20.
(d) Dog registration tag: $1.
(e) Dog population control fee: $3.
(f) No dog license fee shall be charged for a person applying for a
license if the person is over 65 years of age.
(2) Cat licenses and registration tags:
(a) Cat licenses and registration tags per year for a person under
65 years of age, if paid by May 1: $5.
(b) Cat licenses and registration tags per year for a person under
65, if paid after May 1: $10.
(c) Cat population control fee for a person under 65: $3.
(d) No fees shall be charged under this section if the person
making the application is over 65 years of age.
B. Impoundment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-16 et seq. (§ 83-2E): $100 for
the first day and $5 per day thereafter.
C. Destruction of dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-16 et seq. and 4:19-17 et
seq. (§ 83-2E): $50.
D. Potentially dangerous dog license [§ 83-4H(1)]: $1,000. [Amended
5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that these fees be effective 1-1-2007.
§ 149-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-14
135:172
§ 149-15. Fire Code fees.
E. Kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds (§ 83-11E):
(1) Kennel accommodating 10 or fewer dogs: $100. [Amended
5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
(2) Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs: $10 per dog.
[Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
(3) Pet shop: $50. [Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
(4) Shelter or pound: no fee.
A. Non-life-hazard uses (§ 162-7): [Amended 6-11-2005 by Ord. No.
04-11; 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-21]
Business Use Group Annual Fee
B-1 under 2,500 square feet $25
B-2 2,500 - 4,999 square feet $35
B-3 5,000 - 9,999 square feet $75
B-4 10,000 and over square feet $150
Factory Use Group
F-1 under 5,000 square feet $100
F-2 5,000 and over square feet $150
Mercantile Use Group
M-1 under 6,000 square feet $35
M-2 6,000 - 11,999 square feet $75
Storage Use Group
S-1 under 2,500 square feet $35
S-2 2,500 square feet and over $75
Residential Use Group
R-A non-owner-occupied 1 and 2
units
$25
R-B 3 - 6 units $35
R-C 7 - 12 units $75
R-D 13 - 20 units $225
R-E over 20 units $500
Assembly Use Group
A-1 under 2,500 square feet $25
A-2 2,501 to 5,000 square feet $50
A-3 5,001 to 10,000 square feet $75
§ 149-14 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-15
135:173
§ 149-16. Games of chance. [Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
§ 149-17. General licensing fees. [Amended 11-7-2005 by Ord. No.
05-2; 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
Administrative services fee for licensed business moving to a new location
within the City and under the same ownership [§ 200-11C(1)]: $50.
§ 149-18. Handbill distribution. [Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No.
06-30]
License fee (§ 203-24C): $50 per activity or event.
§ 149-19. Health and Welfare Department fees. [Amended
12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 03-9; 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 03-25; 5-1-2007
by Ord. No. 06-30]
Business Use Group Annual Fee
A-4 10,001 to 11,999 square
feet
$100
Vacant use group-closed or
shuttered commercial building
C-1 under 1,000 square feet $50
C-2 1,000 square feet or more $75
B. The cost for issuance of a certificate of Fire Code status (§ 162-8B): $25.
C. Fire lane violation penalties. [Added 7-17-2018 by Ord. No. 18-14]
(1) First offense: $35.
(2) Second offense: $100.
(3) Third offense: $250.
(4) Fourth (or more) offense: $500.
A. Raffles (§ 173-3), per day when sales are made only to persons present
at time of drawing or per each $1,000 of prizes when tickets or rights to
participate are sold in advance: $20.
B. Bingo for each day games are conducted (§ 173-4): $10.
A. Certified copies of birth, marriage, domestic partnership, and civil
union certificates: $20 per certificate; certified copies of death
certificates: $10 per certificate.
B. Minor (typographical errors) corrections of vital statistics: $20.
[Amended 10-1-2013 by Ord. No. 13-07]
C. All other changes to vital statistics records $35.
§ 149-15 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-20
135:174
§ 149-20. Housing permits. [Amended 12-22-2003 by Ord. No.
03-10; 6-11-2005 by Ord. No. 04-11; 12-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-17;
3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
A. Residential property sales and residential rental property sales
certificate of inspection or certificate of occupancy fee under § 265-32
shall be as follows: [Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
(1) Requests for a certificate of occupancy/inspection received more
than 10 business days prior to the closing date: $35.
(2) Requests for a certificate of occupancy/inspection received four to
10 business days prior to the closing date: $70.
(3) Requests for a certificate of occupancy/inspection received fewer
than four business days prior to the closing date: $125.
(4) One reinspection is included in the base fee. Each additional
reinspection: $40.
B. Residential rental properties rental registration application fee under
§ 277-35B. [Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
(1) Existing rental property registration if paid and received on or
before March 1: $75 per year. This fee shall apply to all new rental
registrations received after March 1 and the fee shall be prorated
during the initial year of registration.
(2) Existing rental property registration if paid and received after
March 1: $125 per year.
(3) Each rental registration shall include a certificate of occupancy
inspection and one reinspection. Each additional reinspection: $40.
(4) A change of tenancy certificate of occupancy/inspection during the
rental registration year and one reinspection shall be provided at
no cost upon receipt of the updated rental registration request.
Each additional reinspection: $40.
C. Residential rental properties.
(1) For initial inspection prior to issuance of certificate of inspection:
$75.
(2) For each and every reinspection for a certificate of inspection: $40.
(3) No charge for certificates of occupancy pursuant to § 277-19B.
D. Application fee under § 277-35B: [Amended 8-2-2011 by Ord. No.
11-03]
(1) If paid on or before March 1: $75 per year.
(2) If paid after March 1: $125 per year.
§ 149-20 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-21
135:175
§ 149-21. Junkyards. [Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 03-9]
Junkyard license, per year (§ 189-3): $500.
§ 149-22. Mechanical fees.
§ 149-22.1. Notary service fees. [Added 4-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-04]
Any City employee performing a notary service shall require payment of the
fee noted in the following table in advance of performing said service:
Notary Service Fee
Administering an oath/affirmation $2.50/ea
Executing a jurat $2.50/ea
Taking proof of a deed (proof of
execution)
$2.50/ea
Taking an acknowledgment $2.50/ea
§ 149-23. Preexisting and premanufactured homes. [Amended
6-11-2005 by Ord. No. 04-11; 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
Moving permits (§ 126-11):
§ 149-24. Parking permits.
A. For first $50,000 worth of mechanical improvements: $5 per $1,000.
[Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
B. For the next $100,000 worth of mechanical improvements: $2.50 per
$1,000.
C. Over the aforesaid amount: $2 per $1,000.
D. Minimum fee: $10.
A. Permit fee: $250.
B. Per-mile charge and inspections: $0.41 per mile for each mile of the
round trip to and from the place of inspection plus $45 per hour for the
time spent by the Construction Official in travel and inspection of the
unit involved. For each year commencing with the year 2008, and
annually thereafter, such charge shall be adjusted by the mileage
reimbursement rate allowed by the United States Internal Revenue
Service and shall be effective contemporaneously with such changes.
A. From January 1 through December 31 (§ 242-4): $90.
B. Prorated fee (§ 242-5): $7.50 per month.
C. Retirement of permit (proration) [§ 242-6]: $7.50 per month for the
balance of the permit period.
§ 149-21 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-25
135:176
§ 149-25. Park and recreation fees. [Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No.
06-30; 8-5-2008 by Ord. No. 08-3; 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 10-42]
All fees are daily fees; total fee charged shall be based on the total number
of days (or partial days) of use.
A. Park event fee: $500 (plus any extraordinary expenses).
B. Facility use fees, single-day use:
(1) Alden Baseball Field: $200. [Amended 4-3-2012 by Ord. No.
11-22; amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
(2) Amphitheater: $500.
(3) Ridgeway-Hunter Field and Little League baseball fields: $125 (per
field). [Amended 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 11-22]
(4) Basketball court: $100 (per court).
(5) Cinderella and industrial softball fields: $125 (per field).
[Amended 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 11-22]
(6) Fountain Plaza: $250.
(7) Gazebo, near Nail House: $150.
(8) Mary Elmer Picnic Area: no fee, due to the absence of bathroom
facilities.
(9) Riverfront: $250.
(10) Soccer fields: $125 (per field). [Amended 4-3-2012 by Ord. No.
11-22]
(11) Veteran's Memorial Park: $500.
(12) Midget football field: $125. [Added 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 11-22]
C. Rental fee for canoes, kayaks and other modes of water transportation:
$10 per hour. Said fee may be waived by the Business Administrator. 39
[Added 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-13]
D. Picnic area fees:
(1) Berkowitz area: $150. [Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
(2) Piney Point: $150.
(3) Sunset Lake (front): $150.
(4) Zoo (outside areas): $80.
39.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C, Facility use fees, seasonal/multiple-day use, was
repealed 4-3-2012 by Ord. No. 11-22.
§ 149-25 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-25
135:177
E. Per-event equipment use fees:
(1) Bleachers: $250 (per section).
(2) Field lights: $250.
(3) Picnic tables: $25 (per table).
(4) Podium: $200.
(5) Speaker's stage: $250.
(6) Tent: $500.
F. Parking and access fees.
(1) Buses providing transportation into, or out of, parks and recreation
areas: $25.
G. Splash park: [Added 5-7-2013 by Ord. No. 12-42; amended
3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-03]
(1) General admission $3 per person. Said fee may be waived by the
Business Administrator on select days or times.
(2) Semi-private parties as defined by the Director of Recreation and
Public Affairs: $125.
(3) Private parties as defined by the Director of Recreation and Public
Affairs: $200.
H. Animal education program fees. [Added 10-21-2014 by Ord. No.
14-0940]
(1) In-house programming:
(a) First hour: $100; includes one bus permit.
[1] Bus fee for additional buses: $25.
(b) Each additional hour: $50.
(2) In-house birthday parties:
(a) Two hours: $200.
(3) Mobile programs:
(a) Inside Cumberland County:
[1] Per hour: $120.
[2] Each additional hour: $75.
40.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided that the fees contained therein may be waived
by the Department Director and/or the Business Administrator.
§ 149-25 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-25
135:178
§ 149-26. Peddling and soliciting. [Amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No.
03-9; 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30; 1-6-2009 by Ord. No. 08-19;
5-6-2014 by Ord. No. 13-21]
§ 149-27. Police and Fire Department fees.
(b) Outside Cumberland County:
[1] Per hour: $150.
[2] Each additional hour: $75.
(4) Interactive displays:
(a) Monday through Friday: $85 per hour.
(b) Saturday and Sunday, after 4:00 p.m.: $95 per hour with a twohour
minimum.
(5) Zoo camp:
(a) Four-hour session, per camper: $100.
(b) Society members: $75.
I. Miniature golf: [Added 6-23-2015 by Ord. No. 15-17]
(1) For one round on the course: $2 per person.
(2) For a two-hour private party, unlimited golf for attendees: $200.
(3) Said fees may be waived by the Business Administrator.
J. The Department Director, upon approval of the Business Administrator,
may offer free, discounted or promotional pricing for marketing
purposes for recreational activities listed in § 149-25. [Added
8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 16-15]
A. Peddlers (§ 254-3).
(1) Weekend peddler license: $600.
(2) Weekly peddler license: $1,400.
(3) Special event vehicle/foot: $50.
B. Solicitors or canvassers (§ 254-14): $50.
A. Police and fire accident reports, per page: as specified in § 3-11,
Preservation, inspection, and copying of public records. [Amended
3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 10-26]
B. Firearms permit: $2.
C. ID cards: $5.
§ 149-25 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-27
135:179
D. The Bridgeton Police Department is authorized to charge and collect
fees for the production, reproduction and assembling various reports,
records and photographs as set forth in the following schedule:
(1) Discovery reports and records: See Article III below.
(2) Photographs: $1 per photograph.
E. Police coverage: $20 - $60.
F. Fingerprinting services (§ 154-2): $25 per set of fingerprints.
G. Preparation of release regarding towed vehicle: $30 per vehicle.
[Added 1-15-2008 by Ord. No. 07-23; amended 4-23-2013 by Ord.
No. 12-39]
H. The following fees shall be charged for services provided by the
Division of Fire for medical services: [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No.
08-11]
(1) There shall be a fee of $800 for ambulance transportation.
[Amended 1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 12-15; 6-18-2019 by Ord. No.
19-8]
(2) There shall be a fee of $18 per loaded mile for basic life support
(BLS) mileage. [Amended 6-18-2019 by Ord. No. 19-8]
(3) There shall be a fee of $75 for oxygen administration.
(4) There shall be a fee of $75 for automatic external defibrillator
(AED) pads.
(5) There shall be a fee of $45 for cervical collar. [Amended 8-2-2016
by Ord. No. 16-13]
(6) There shall be a fee of $140 per hour for a fully staffed ambulance
to stand by for medical assistance for private party events. [Added
5-15-2012 by Ord. No. 11-25]
I. The following fees shall be charged for rescue services provided by the
Division of Fire: [Added 11-5-2008 by Ord. No. 08-11; amended
8-2-2016 by Ord. No. 16-13]
(1) There shall be a fee of $75 for on-site evaluation.
(2) Light rescue: batteries, fluid, stabilization. There shall be a fee of
$325 for light rescue operations such as stabilization, use of hand
tools, hazard control, extrication of patient from vehicle, and other
scene related light rescue operations.
(3) Medium rescue. There shall be a fee of $700 for medium rescue
operations, including the use of power tools and hydraulic rescue
tools to perform activities such as opening or removing doors to
§ 149-27 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-27
135:180
provide access to patients as well as stabilizing vehicles and
performing hazardous assessments.
(4) Heavy rescue. There shall be a fee of $1,500 for heavy rescue
operations. Heavy rescue operations include motor vehicle rescue
where the rescue includes the use of power tools and hydraulic
equipment to perform operations such as partial or full roof
removal, front/dash displacement, third door access and separating
vehicles from one another. [Amended 6-18-2019 by Ord. No.
19-9]
(5) Technical rescue. There shall be a fee charged for any technical
rescue response. Technical rescue includes rope rescue, trench
rescue, structural collapse rescue, confined space rescue, and
water rescue. Fees for technical rescue services shall be calculated
using the following guidelines. [Added 6-18-2019 by Ord. No.
19-9]
(a) Manpower.
[1] All manpower fees shall be figured on a per-person rate
based on that responder's assigned position.
[2] Chief: contracted salary rate figured at an overtime rate of
1 1/2 times hourly rate.
[3] Officers: top contracted salary rate figured at an overtime
rate of 1 1/2 times hourly rate.
[4] Firefighters: top contracted salary rate figured at an
overtime rate of 1 1/2 times hourly rate.
[5] Emergency medical technician: top contracted salary rate
figured at an overtime rate of 1 1/2 times hourly rate.
(b) Apparatus.
[1] Aerial apparatus: $300 per hour.
[2] Fire engine: $250 per hour.
[3] Ambulance: $200 per hour.
[4] Support/Command: $150 per hour.
(c) Equipment. A fee shall be charged at replacement cost plus
10% for any damaged equipment or equipment that has to be
placed out of service after an incident.
(6) Contracted services for permit-required confined space rescue/
recovery operations and standby services. Any municipality or
industrial business that operates or has the potential to operate in
permit-required confined spaces shall be assessed an annual
§ 149-27 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-27
135:181
§ 149-28. Pool halls and billiard parlors. [Amended 5-1-2007 by
Ord. No. 06-30]
License fees (§ 260-2):
§ 149-29. Public Works Department fees.
service fee as described below. [Added 6-18-2019 by Ord. No.
19-9]
(a) Annual fee.
[1] One to 10 permit-required confined spaces: $1,000.
[2] Each additional permit-required confined space: $200.
[3] Total fee not to exceed: $4,000.
(b) Standby fee (noncontracted). The fee for permit-required
confined space standby service requests shall be calculated
using the service fees outlined in Subsection I(5)(a), (b) and
(c).
(c) Standby fee (contracted). The annual fee for contracted
facilities for permit-required confined space standby services
shall cover the apparatus and equipment fees (unless
damaged). Manpower shall be calculated as an additional
charge following the fee schedule set forth in Subsection
I(5)(a).
J. There shall be a fee for police detail services as follows: [Added
5-15-2012 by Ord. No. 11-25]
(1) Police officer, Class II: $20 per hour.
(2) Police officer: $40 to $70 per hour.
(3) Police officer supervisor: $73 to $88 per hour.
(4) Police vehicle: $10 per hour.
K. A nonrefundable deposit of $100 shall be required for all requests for
standby Police and Fire Department services pursuant to § 149-27H(6)
and § 149-27J. [Added 5-15-2012 by Ord. No. 11-25]
A. Five tables or less, per year: $250.
B. In excess of five tables, each additional table, per year: $1,000.
A. Street openings (§ 307-15):
(1) Charge for 10 square feet or less:
(a) Earth or gravel: $30.
§ 149-27 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-29
135:182
§ 149-30. Street openings.
(b) Blacktop: $60.
(c) Plain concrete: $90.
(d) Reinforced concrete: $75.
(e) Concrete sidewalks: $30.
(2) Additional charge per square foot:
(a) Earth or gravel: $30.
(b) Blacktop: $2.40.
(c) Plain concrete: $2.80.
(d) Reinforced concrete: $4.
(e) Concrete sidewalks: $2.
B. (Reserved)41
C. Engineer's office: [Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
(1) Plans, minimum fee: $50.
(2) Specifications: $50.
D. Searches for public improvements authorized but not assessed: $10.
[Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30]
E. Tax Map sheets: $5 per sheet. [Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No.
06-30]
F. Wash facility fees. [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 12-20]
(1) Passenger vehicles/pickup trucks: $10.
(2) Dump truck (single axle): $ 35.
(3) Dump truck (tandem axle): $50.
(4) Small heavy equipment: $25.
(5) Large heavy equipment: $35.
(6) Small bus (CATS-size): $25.
(7) School bus (reg. size ): $50.
A. Permits:
41.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, regarding water turn-on and turn-off fees, as
amended, was redesignated as § 149-35G.
§ 149-29 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-30
135:183
§ 149-31. Two-hundred-foot property lists. [Amended 9-2-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-04]
Notices required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 {§§ 311-43J(2)(d)[1] and
370-90} shall be charged a sum not to exceed $10 or $0.25 per name,
whichever is greater.
§ 149-32. Taxicabs. [Amended 2-24-2003 by Ord. No. 02-9; 5-1-2007
by Ord. No. 06-30; 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 10-27]
(1) Permit application fee: $60 for each street opening. [Amended
5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30; 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 10-31;
10-1-2013 by Ord. No. 13-07]
(2) Engineering review fee: $75 for each street opening. [Amended
5-1-2007 by Ord. No. 06-30; 4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 10-31]
(3) Security deposit schedule for each street opening: [Amended
4-5-2011 by Ord. No. 10-31]
Type of Road
Deposit for
10 Square
Feet or Less
Additional
Deposit per
Square Foot in
Excess of 10
Square Feet
Earth or gravel $100 $1
Blacktop or oil and chip $180 $5
Reinforced concrete $300 $15
Concrete sidewalks $50 $1
Concrete curb, per tenfoot
length (minimum
$50)
$75 $5
(4) In lieu of a security deposit in accordance with the above schedule,
the applicant may deposit the sum of $1,500 in cash with the
Municipal Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
B. Performance bond (§ 307-15B): $15 per square yard of excavation.
A. Taxicab owner's license (new or renewal), per year (§ 321-2): $375.
B. Taxicab driver's license (new or renewal), per year (§ 321-2): $75.
C. Annual taxicab inspection, per vehicle (§ 321-2): $50.
D. Replace a license (all types), each occurrence (§ 321-2): $15.
§ 149-30 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-32
135:184
§ 149-33. Towing.
§ 149-34. Uniform construction code. [Amended 6-11-2005 by Ord.
No. 04-11; 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 10-08; 10-1-2013 by Ord. No.
13-07; 2-4-2014 by Ord. No. 13-12; 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 17-06;
5-1-2018 by Ord. No. 18-9]
The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed
in Subsections A through C hereof and shall be paid before the permit is
issued (§ 126-4), unless the permit applicant is eligible for a senior citizen
discount according to the provisions of § 149-34F.
E. Add, remove, or otherwise alter documented vehicle registration
information, per vehicle, per occurrence (§ 321-2): $30. [Amended
10-1-2013 by Ord. No. 13-07]
A. Annual license fee for towing application (§ 334-6): $100.
B. Towing charge for motor vehicles which are not private passenger
automobiles (§ 334-15C): not to exceed $50, together with $1.75 for
each mile towed.
C. Storage fees (§ 334-16A): not to exceed the amount set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.50, i.e., $3 per day for the first 30 days of storage and $2 per
day for each day from the 31st day and thereafter, up to a limit of $400
per stored vehicle, regardless of duration.
A. Building subcode fees. The minimum building subcode fee shall be: $80.
(1) For new construction: $0.038 per cubic foot of building or structure
(volume). For Use Groups A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, F1, F2, S1, S2 $0.021
with farm buildings not to exceed $1,602 and that the minimum fee
shall be $650 for a residential structure.
(2) For new construction with unfinished interiors totaling 50,000
cubic feet or more: $0.015 per cubic foot of building or structure
(volume).
(3) Modular homes and premanufactured structures; based on site
work, with a fee of: $120 per $1,000 of work installed on site, with a
minimum fee of $650.
(4) Renovations, reconstruction, rehabilitation, alterations and/or
repairs to existing structures: $120 for the first $1,000 of estimated
cost; and $40 per additional $1,000 or fraction thereof of estimated
costs.
(5) Demolition of a residential structure and foundation: $230.
(6) Demolition of a residential accessory building greater than 100
square feet: $80 each.
(7) Demolition of a building other than residential: $375.
§ 149-32 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-34
135:185
(8) Installation of a residential pool: $140 (inground pool greater than
550 square feet: $210).
(9) Installation of a nonresidential pool: $250.
(10) Installation of a residential accessory shed (greater than 200
square feet):
(a) Two hundred one square feet to 300 (foundation required):
$145.
(11) Signs, greater than 25 square feet [shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14(b)(6)]: $6 per square foot with a minimum cost of
$100, $4.75 per square foot for the next 400 square feet, $3.50 per
square foot thereafter.
(12) Lead hazard abatement: $196 plus a certificate of clearance; lead
hazard abatement (N.J.A.C. 5:17): $65.
(13) Reinstatement of a permit: $120, applicable after one year of
issuance date plus volume increase.
(14) Certificate of occupancy:
(a) Residential structure (per dwelling unit): $120.
(b) Residential accessory structure (201 square feet or greater):
$90.
(c) All other uses: $160.
(d) Temporary certificate of occupancy extension: $90.
(e) Change of use: $168.
(15) Continuing certificate of occupancy:
(a) Residential structure: $145.
(b) Nonresidential: $185 per unit or structure.
(16) Plan review fee: Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.27, the plan review fee
which is established as 20% of the total fee shall be nonrefundable
in the event the applicant advises in writing that the project will not
be completed.
(17) DCA state training fees:
(a) New buildings and additions: $0.00334 times volume of
structure.
(b) Repairs, renovations, and other: $1.70 per $1,000 value of
construction.
(18)Radon mitigation system: $145.
§ 149-34 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-34
135:186
(19) Photovoltaic systems:
(a) Less than 10 KW: $150.
(b) Ten KW to less than 20 KW: $12 per KW.
(c) Greater than 20 KW to 49 KW: $8 per KW.
(d) Greater than 50 KW: $4 per KW.
(20)Wind generator systems:
(a) Less than 50 KW: $480.
(b) Fifty KW to less than 200 KW: $650.
(c) Two hundred KW to less than 800 KW: $850.
(d) Eight hundred KW and greater: $0.65 per KW.
(21) Variation to subcode requirement:
(a) Class I structures: $748.
(b) Class II and III structures: $151.
B. Plumbing subcode fees. The minimum plumbing subcode fee shall be
$80.
(1) For each toilet, tub, sink, mop sink, dishwasher, washing machine,
and like items, per item: $25.
(2) For the following devices and like items: grease traps, water
fountain, three-bowl sink, oil separators, utility connections,
backflow preventers, low-water cutoff, LPS/fuel oil/or natural gas
piping, interceptor, refrigerator unit, sewer pump, indirect or
subsoil drains, water and sewer connection, water-cooled air
conditioner, backflow preventer, per device: $91.
(3) Radon mitigation system: $120.
(4) Domestic solar water systems:
(a) Up to two panels: $175.
(b) Each additional panel: $50.
(5) New or replacement of residential forced-air heater in combination
with central air conditioning (whole or part), includes a condensate
pump: $120.
(a) All other use groups (whole or part): $185.
(6) New and/or replacement of a hot-water boiler, hot-water heater, or
steam boiler, which shall include temperature/pressure relief valve,
§ 149-34 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-34
135:187
backflow preventer, check valve(s), low-water shut off as required
per code: $120.
(7) Grey water systems: $90.
C. Electrical subcode fees. The minimum electrical subcode fee shall be
$80.
(1) Receptacles, lighting fixtures, switches, convenience receptacles,
GFCI, alarm devices/F.A.C. panel, thermostat, garbage disposal,
detectors, light poles, fractional HP motors, emergency and exit
lights, and communication points:
(a) One to 50 devices: $80.
(b) Each additional 25 devices or fraction thereof: $40.
(2) For each motor, transformer, or other electrical device rated:
(a) From one HP or one KW to 10 HP or 10 KW, per item: $30.
(b) From 11 HP or 11 KW to 50 HP or 50 KW, per item: $130.
(c) From 51 HP or 51 KW to 100 HP or 100 KW, per item: $150.
(d) One hundred one HP or 101 KW or greater, per item: $600.
(3) Service entrance, panels, subpanels, temporary or three-phase
service, and motor control center:
(a) Zero to 200 amps, and includes a two gang outlet: $120.
(b) Two hundred one to 1,000 amps, and includes a two gang
outlet: $150.
(c) One thousand one amps and greater, and includes a two gang
outlet: $640.
(4) Three-phase service:
(a) One thousand amps or less: $150.
(b) Greater than 1,000 amps: $600.
(5) Miscellaneous line items:
(a) Annual pool inspection: $100.
(b) Lawn sprinklers: $80.
(c) Sign: $80.
(d) Work, office, and classroom trailers: $90.
(e) Pool permit with UW lights: $150.
(f) Storable pool/spa/hot tub: $90.
§ 149-34 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-34
135:188
(g) Walk-in freezer, cooler: $80.
(h) Heat pump: $80.
(6) Solar voltaic panels and wind generator systems:
(a) Less than 10 KW: $220.
(b) Ten KW to less than 20 KW: $380.
(c) Twenty KW to less than 50 KW: $480.
(d) Greater than 50 KW and less than 100 KW: $580.
(e) Greater than 100 KW: $640.
(7) Wind generating systems:
(a) Less than 20 KW: $280.
(b) Twenty KW to less than 50 KW: $380.
(c) Fifty KW to less than 800 KW: $480.
(d) Eight hundred KW and larger: $0.50 per KW.
D. Fire subcode fees. The minimum fire subcode fee shall be $80.
(1) Sprinkler systems, per head:
(a) One to 20: $125.
(b) Twenty-one to 100: $200.
(c) One hundred one to 200: $375.
(d) Two hundred one to 400: $831.
(e) Four hundred one to 1,000: $1,150.
(f) One thousand one or greater: $1,469.
(2) Standpipe system, each: $321.
(3) Fire pump, each: $200.
(4) Smoke control systems:
(a) Building system: $150.
(b) Hood system: $90.
(c) CO2 or halogenated systems: $265.
(5) Independent preengineered system: $129.
(6) Alarm systems:
§ 149-34 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-34
135:189
(a) One- and two-family dwellings, 110v only, per unit: $45.
[1] Permit no longer required as of March 5, 2018, for lowvoltage
detectors.
(b) All other uses (commercial):
[1] One to six devices: $95.
[2] Each additional 10 devices: $60.
(7) Exit signs and emergency lighting, per device: $30.
(8) Gas- or oil-fired appliances, not connected to the plumbing system,
per device: $120.
(9) Installation of an aboveground or underground storage tank, per
tank:
(a) Five hundred gallons or less: $175.
(b) Greater than 500 gallons and less than 1,000 gallons: $225.
(c) One thousand gallons or more: $325.
(10) Removal of an aboveground or underground storage tank
(including propane gas), per tank:
(a) Six hundred gallons or less: $150.
(b) Greater than 600 gallons: $375.
(11) Incinerator: $511.
(12) Crematorium: $511.
E. Elevator subcode fees. The elevator subcode fees shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20 and 5.25-12.6. Third-party agency
fee is 74% of the state fee plus 45% for administration costs.
F. Senior citizen construction code discount.
(1) Eligibility. A New Jersey drivers license (or New Jersey State-issued
identification card) is required for proof of eligibility. The permit
applicant must satisfy each of the following requirements to be
eligible for this discount:
(a) Be a Bridgeton resident who is 65 years of age (or older).
(b) The work is being performed on the applicant's single-family,
owner-occupied, residential property of record according to
the tax office block and lot numbers.
(c) The application is for renovations, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, alterations and/or repairs to the property
§ 149-34 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-34
135:190
§ 149-35. Water and sewer charges.
identified in § 149-34F(1)(b) above. (It shall not apply to new
construction or commercial properties.)
(2) Discount. Provided that the requirements of § 149-34F(1) are met,
the applicant will receive a fee credit to be applied to the sum of the
subcode fees listed in § 149-34A through D not exceeding $250.
The total collective credit available in any calendar year (beginning
January 1) shall be $250.
A. Standby services for fire sprinklers or other special services (§ 360-38):
[Amended 10-4-2016 by Ord. No. 16-17]
Standby System
Service Line (inches) Quarterly Charge
5/8 - 1 $25
1 1/2 $40
2 $55
4 $74
6 $120
8 $180
10 $240
12 $300
14 $360
16 $420
B. Water supply connection charges (§ 360-40):
(1) One-inch copper water service connection: $600.
(2) Over one inch, inspection of work of contractor: $300.
C. Repair charge. Additional fee as provided in § 360-41C: $50 per
occurrence to repair or replace. [Amended 6-19-2007 by Ord. No.
06-39]
D. Four-inch sewer service from the main sewer line to the curb
(§ 360-69): $750.
E. Water system tapping fee (§ 360-10): [Added 6-11-2005 by Ord. No.
04-11]
(1) Up to and including one-inch copper water service: $1,200.
(2) Over one-inch service: $1,800.
F. Sewer system tapping fee (§ 360-51): [Added 6-11-2005 by Ord. No.
04-11]
§ 149-34 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-35
135:191
§ 149-36. Zoning and sign permits. [Amended 10-1-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-07]
(1) Up to and including four-inch sewer service: $1,200.
(2) Over four-inch service: $1,800.
G. Service charges for water turn off or on. [Amended 6-11-2005 by
Ord. No. 04-11; 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 06-39]
(1) Service charge for water turn off or water turn on, not to include
turn off/turn on for nonpayment of either a sewer or water bill: $35
for each turn off or turn on.
(2) Service charge for water turn off and on for nonpayment of either a
water or sewer bill: $100.
H. Service charges for final meter readings shall be: [Added 3-15-2016
by Ord. No. 16-03]
(1) Requests for final meter reading received more than 10 business
days prior to the closing date: $35.
(2) Requests for final meter reading received four to 10 business days
prior to the closing date: $70.
(3) Requests for final meter reading received fewer than four business
days prior to the closing date: $125.
(4) Requests for final meter readings rescheduled shall be charged the
appropriate fee in Subsections H(1) through H(3) above.
(5) Fees shall be paid with the final water bill payment.
A. Zoning permits (§ 370-86D): $25 for each use on each lot.
(1) Each separate business and/or residence and each industrial,
utility, fraternal, quasi-public or other establishment to be located
on one lot, tract or parcel of land shall be required to pay the
zoning permit fee.
(2) Each use that occupies one or more lots shall be required to pay a
zoning permit fee for each lot occupied by that use.
B. Sign permits. Every applicant, before being granted a permit
hereunder, shall pay to the City of Bridgeton the following permit fee
for each sign or other advertising structure regulated by Chapter 370:
(1) All signs requiring a permit other than temporary signs: $25.
(2) Temporary signs, each 60 square feet or fraction thereof: $5.
(3) Canopy or awning: $10.
(4) Marquee: $30.
§ 149-35 BRIDGETON CODE § 149-36
135:192
(5) Street or wall clocks: $10.
(6) For illuminated signs an additional charge of $10 shall be paid over
and above the aforesaid fees.
(7) Biennual inspection fee: $5.
C. Outdoor display of merchandise permit: Downtown Central Business
District. [Added 2-18-2014 by Ord. No. 13-17; amended 4-1-2014
by Ord. No. 13-19]
(1) Application/permit fee: $25 for each application and issuance of
permit, said fee to be refunded after six months to the applicant,
provided there are no issued violations of the rules established for
the outdoor display of merchandise in the Downtown Central
Business District. Permits shall be valid from January 1 to
December 31 of the year issued.
(2) Annual permit renewal fee: $25 per year for prior year applicants
with issued violations of the rules established for the outdoor
display of merchandise in the Downtown Central Business District.
A no-fee permit will be issued to prior year applicants with no
violation of the rules established for the outdoor display of
merchandise in the Downtown Central Business District.
§ 149-36 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-36
135:193

ARTICLE III
Discovery Fees
[Adopted 1-6-2003 by Ord. No. 02-8]
§ 149-37. Discovery fees for defendants and defense attorneys.
[Amended 3-19-2013 by Ord. No. 12-34]
The following discovery fees are established for the production of discovery
for defendants and defense attorneys in the Bridgeton Municipal Court:
§ 149-38. Court-appointed counsel and Prosecutor exempt from
charges.
There shall be not charge for discovery for court-appointed counsel or for
the Prosecutor for use to prosecute the matter.
§ 149-39. Disposition of fees.
A. Standard copy fees for discovery:
(1) Letter-size page: $0.05.
(2) Legal-size page: $0.07.
(3) Other materials (CD, DVD, etc.): actual cost of material.
B. Delivery/postage fees additional depending on delivery type.
A. Fees for discovery under this article shall be made payable to the City of
Bridgeton and forwarded to the Bridgeton Police Department together
with the discovery request to be deposited into the City account.
B. The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be entitled to a discovery fee of
$15 per case in which discovery has been provided and the discovery
fee paid, in order to reimburse the administrative expense, which fee
shall be billed to the City by way of voucher listing the cases in which
discovery was provided on a monthly basis.42
42.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Mercantile License and Business Registration Fees, which
immediately followed, adopted 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 05-3, was repealed 6-4-2008 by Ord.
No. 07-41.
§ 149-37 DOCKS AND WHARVES § 149-39
135:195
Chapter 154
FINGERPRINTING SERVICES
§ 154-1. Appointment for fingerprinting required.
Individuals desiring to have fingerprint records made on their behalf by
personnel of the City of Bridgeton Police Department may do so by making
an appointment through the Police Department of the City of Bridgeton
during normal business hours to have such fingerprint records created and
filed with the appropriate recording agencies or authorities.
§ 154-2. Fee; exceptions to payment of fee.
The fee for each set of fingerprints taken in accordance with the foregoing
shall be as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees,
except that any employees of the Bridgeton Board of Education who are
residents of the City of Bridgeton shall not be required to pay the
aforestated fee.
§ 154-3. Disposition of fees.
Fees collected for the foregoing services shall be received and deposited
into the general fund of the City of Bridgeton.
Chapter 158
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 158-1. Payment of claims.
A. No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay any claims for fire damages in excess of
$2,500 on any real property in the City of Bridgeton unless:
(1) The anticipated demolition costs, and all taxes and assessments,
and all other municipal liens or charges due and payable appearing
on the official certificate of search have been paid by the owner of
the real property or by the insurance company as set forth in
§ 158-2; or
(2) The City submits to the insurance company a copy of a resolution,
adopted pursuant to § 158-3, establishing an agreement with the
owner of the fire-damaged property for payment by installments of
all charges and liens, including any anticipated costs of demolition.
B. Any request for an official certificate of search, pursuant to this chapter,
shall specify that the search concerns fire-damaged property.
C. All search fees incurred, pursuant to the search, shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the fire-damaged property.
§ 149-39 BRIDGETON CODE § 158-1
154:196
§ 158-2. Payment by insurance company; appeal.
§ 158-3. Resolution of agreement.
D. The Construction Code official for the City of Bridgeton shall file, on a
form prescribed by the City, a statement with the City officer authorized
to issue an official certificate of search of municipal liens and other
charges of the anticipated costs of demolition.
A. Unless a resolution is received from the municipality authorizing an
installment agreement, pursuant to § 158-3, with the real property
owner to pay liens, charges and anticipated demolition costs, an
insurance company writing fire insurance policies in the City of
Bridgeton is required, prior to payment of any claims in excess of
$2,500, to pay the amount of the anticipated demolition costs to the
City, which shall hold said funds in an interest-bearing escrow account
in a state or federally chartered bank, savings bank or savings-and-loan
association in the State of New Jersey and to pay to the City the amount
of the liens appearing on the official certificate and on such other
recorded liens or related charges as may be certified to the insurance
company.
B. If an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge, other than an
appeal on the assessed valuation of real property, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall issue a draft payable to the court
of record to be held by the court in an interest-bearing escrow account
in a state or federally chartered bank, savings bank or savings-and-loan
association in the state, in an amount totaling 75% of the full amount of
the lien or charge being contested but not to exceed the proceeds
payable under the insurance policy, and the insurance company shall
issue a draft payable to the City for the remaining 25% of the lien or
charge being contested, with the full amount paid by the insurance
company to the court and the City not to exceed the proceeds payable
under the insurance policy, pending termination of all proceedings, at
which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon, at a rate
paid on interest-bearing accounts in state- or federally chartered banks,
savings banks or savings-and-loan associations in the state, shall be
disbursed in accordance with the final order or judgment of the court.
A. The City may enter into an agreement with the owner of any firedamaged
property to pay, in full, all delinquent taxes, assessments or
other municipal liens by installment, pursuant to N.J.S.A. § 54:5-19, or
for the redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments,
pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes, or
for the payment in full of any anticipated costs of demolition by
installment, if the City Council of the City of Bridgeton is satisfied that
the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve the firedamaged
property.
§ 158-1 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 158-3
154:197
§ 158-4. Authorization.
Chapter 162
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Emergency lanes — See Ch. 141.
Uniform Fire Code fees — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 158.
B. An insurance company receiving a copy of a resolution of agreement
from the City Council of the City of Bridgeton is authorized to make full
payment on the claim to the insured person.
A. The terms and provisions of N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq. are hereby adopted
by reference and incorporated herein as if they were set forth with
particularity, including all amendments and supplements thereto.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to alter or affect any other remedy
available to the City of Bridgeton under any other law of the State of
New Jersey.
C. The amendments to Chapter 158 of the Municipal Code of the City of
Bridgeton, as set forth herein, shall be effective upon the Municipal
Clerk filing a certified copy of this chapter with the Commissioner of
Insurance of the State of New Jersey. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-20]
§ 158-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 158-4
154:198
ARTICLE I
Uniform Fire Code
[Adopted 4-18-1995 by Ord. No. 94-28]
§ 162-1. Local enforcement. [Amended 11-1-1999 by Ord. No.
99-10]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et
seq.) shall be locally enforced in the City of Bridgeton.
§ 162-2. Agency designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the City of Bridgeton Fire Department
through its Bureau of Fire Prevention which is hereby created therein. The
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall hereinafter be known as the local enforcing
agency.
§ 162-3. Duties.
§ 162-4. Organization.
§ 162-5. Appointments, qualifications, term of office and removal of
Fire Official.
A. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all
buildings, structures, and premises within the established boundaries
of the City of Bridgeton other than one- and two-unit owner-occupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and buildings,
structures, and premises owned or operated by the federal government,
interstate agencies or the state.
B. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all the pertinent
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
A. The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 162-2 of this article shall
be under the direct supervision and control of a Fire Official who shall
report to the Chief of the Fire Department.
B. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have at least one paid inspector.
A. Appointment and qualifications of Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be
certified by the state and hired by the Business Administrator with
approval of the Mayor.
B. Appointment and qualifications of inspectors and other employees.
Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be hired
by the Business Administrator with the approval of the Mayor upon
recommendation of the Fire Official. All life hazard use inspectors shall
be certified by the state.
§ 162-1 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 162-5
154:199
§ 162-6. Life hazard uses.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention established by § 162-2 of this article shall
carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 162-7. Non-life-hazard uses.
§ 162-8. Permits and certificate of Fire Code status. [Amended
11-1-1999 by Ord. No. 99-10]
C. Appointment of legal counsel. The governing body shall specifically
appoint legal counsel to assist the agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire
Code.
D. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of three years.
Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
E. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees
of the agency shall be subject to removal by the Business Administrator
for just cause. Before removal from office, all persons shall be afforded
an opportunity to be heard by the governing body or a hearing officer
designated by the same.
A. In addition to the registrations required by the Uniform Fire Code, the
following non-life-hazard uses shall register with the Bureau of Fire
Prevention. These uses shall be inspected once per year and shall pay
an annual fee as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of
Fees.
B. R-A uses shall be inspected and charged a fee only upon sale or change
of tenant.
C. Uses not classified above that are subject to code will be classified as
business uses.
D. Uses required to register with the state as life hazard uses shall not be
required to register under this section.
E. In the discretion of the Fire Official, vacant buildings will be charged
and inspected according to the previous use of the building.
F. All residential uses except R-A uses shall be inspected in the common
areas only.
A. The application fees for the permits listed in N.J.A.C. 5:70 shall be as
provided current state regulations for the following type application
and permit:
(1) Type 1.
(2) Type 2.
§ 162-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 162-8
154:200
§ 162-9. Technical amendments.
(Reserved)
§ 162-10. Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208), any person aggrieved by an action of the local
enforcing agency shall have the right to appeal to the local Construction
Board of Appeals. If no such body exists, appeals shall be made to the
County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 162-11. Enforcement and violations and penalties.
Enforcement and violations and penalties shall be managed in conformity
with the Uniform Fire Safety Act, and Uniform Fire Code and all other laws
of the State of New Jersey.
(3) Type 3.
(4) Type 4.
(5) Type 5.
B. The cost issuance of a Certificate of Fire Code Status shall be as set
forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
C. Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide alarms shall be inspected by the
Division of Housing and Code Enforcement within the City limits of the
City of Bridgeton, in accordance with N.J.A.C. §5:70-4.19 et seq, and
certificates of approval with respect to operation thereof shall be issued
by the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement as required. The
approval or denial of a certificate with respect to the operation of such
devices shall be undertaken by the Division of Housing and Code
Enforcement of the City of Bridgeton, notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 265 or Chapter 267 of the Code of the City of Bridgeton to the
contrary. [Added 3-6-2007 by Ord. No. 06-22; amended 3-15-2016
by Ord. No. 16-07]
§ 162-8 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 162-11
154:201
Chapter 167
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 311.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 162-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 162-11
154:202
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 167-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Bridgeton of
Cumberland County, New Jersey does ordain as follows:
§ 167-2. Findings of fact.
§ 167-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Bridgeton are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 167-1 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-3
154:203
§ 167-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 167-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 167-4
154:204
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 167-5. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one feet and three feet. Base Flood Elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one feet and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Code Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a 1% annual
or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one feet to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or
AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For zones VE and
V1-30 the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus wave
effect (BFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a 1% or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL A ZONE — The portion of the special flood hazard area (SFHA)
starting from a velocity (V) zone and extending up to the landward limit
§ 167-5 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-5
154:205
of the moderate wave action delineation. Where no V zone is mapped the
Coastal A Zone is the portion between the open coast and the landward limit
of the moderate wave action delineation. Coastal A Zones may be subject to
wave effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of these forces.
Construction and development in Coastal A Zones is to be regulated the
same as V Zones/coastal high hazard areas.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor or, in the case of a building in a Coastal A Zone, to have the bottom
of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated
above the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of piling, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In areas of Coastal A
Zones "elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
§ 167-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 167-5
154:206
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without accumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 167-5 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-5
154:207
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA) — Inland limit of the area
affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base flood
conditions between the V Zone and the LiMWA will be similar to, but less
severe than those in the V Zone.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of sand
in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 167-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 167-5
154:208
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damage
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditionsl; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 167-5 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-5
154:209

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 167-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Bridgeton, Cumberland County, New Jersey.
§ 167-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 167-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty for each
violation, and in addition nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of
Bridgeton from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
§ 167-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 167-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Bridgeton, Community
No. 340165 are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study,
Cumberland County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated June 16,
2016.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cumberland County, New Jersey
(All Jurisdictions)" as shown on Index and panel(s) 34011C0135E,
34011C0142E, 34011C0153E, 34011C0154E, 34011C0161E,
34011C0162E, and 34011C0163E whose effective date is June 16,
2016.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The flood insurance study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at 181 East Commerce Street, Bridgeton, New Jersey.
§ 167-6 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-10
154:211
§ 167-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Bridgeton, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 167-10 BRIDGETON CODE § 167-11
154:212
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 167-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 167-7 shall be made on forms furnished
by the Construction Code Official and may include, but not be limited to;
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 167-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 167-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 167-17B; and,
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of § 167-18 are met.
(4) Review all development permits in the Coastal A Zone area of the
area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
§ 167-12 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-14
154:213
development alters the terrain or sand dunes so as to increase
potential flood damage.
(5) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with section § 167-19B.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 167-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Code Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 167-17A, Specific standards, residential
construction, and § 167-17B, Specific standards, nonresidential
construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 167-12C.
(3) In Coastal A Zone areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
§ 167-19B(1) and § 167-19B(2) are met.
(4) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
§ 167-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 167-14
154:214
§ 167-15. Variance procedure.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 167-17A, Specific standards, residential construction, and
§ 167-17B, Specific standards, nonresidential construction.
F. Interpretation of firm boundaries. Make interpretations where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 167-15.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Board of Adjustment, as established by the Municipal Land Use
Law, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from
the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Code Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of
Cumberland County.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Board of Adjustment, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
§ 167-14 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-15
154:215
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 167-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the
purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 0.5 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
A-K in § 167-15A(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
§ 167-15 BRIDGETON CODE § 167-15
154:216
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 167-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 167-15 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-15
154:217

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 167-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction to be placed or substantially improved and
substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
§ 167-16 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-16
154:219
§ 167-17. Specific Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 167-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard or in § 167-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) For Coastal A Zone construction see § 167-19 Coastal A Zone.
(2) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation plus
one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
(3) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's FIRM that
all new construction and substantial improvement of any
§ 167-16 BRIDGETON CODE § 167-17
154:220
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified); and require adequate drainage paths
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction.
(1) In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure located in an A or AE zone (for Coastal A
Zone construction see § 167-19 Coastal A Zone) shall have the
lowest floor, including basement together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities, either:
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's DFIRM
to elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one
foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified); and require adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from proposed structures; or
(c) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, whichever is
more restrictive, the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(d) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(e) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 167-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 167-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
§ 167-17 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-17
154:221
§ 167-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 167-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
§ 167-19. Coastal A Zone.
Coastal A Zones are located within the areas of special flood hazard
established in § 167-7. These areas may be subject to wave effects, velocity
flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of these forces; therefore, the
following provisions shall apply:
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If § 167-18A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Article V, Provisions for Flood Hazard
Reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
A. Location of structures.
(1) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
(2) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
B. Construction methods.
(1) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or
§ 167-17 BRIDGETON CODE § 167-19
154:222
above the base flood elevation plus one foot or as required by
ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 4-1, whichever is more restrictive; and
(b) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided or in § 167-19B(4).
(2) Structural support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year
mean recurrence interval).
(c) Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings within
Coastal A Zones on the community's FIRM.
(3) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of § 167-19B(1) and
§ 167-19B(2)(a) and § 167-19B(2)(b).
(4) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open-wood lattice work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open-wood lattice work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or State codes) may be
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions:
§ 167-19 FINGERPRINTING SERVICES § 167-19
154:223
[1] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
[2] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable state or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage,
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building Sub-
Code Official for approval.
C. Sand dunes. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Coastal
A Zones on the community's DFIRM which would increase potential
flood damage.
§ 167-19 BRIDGETON CODE § 167-19
154:224
Chapter 173
GAMES OF CHANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Games of chance licensing fees — See Ch.
149, Art. II.
§ 173-1. Gaming prohibited.
No person shall in public, as defined in § 173-6, for money or other valuable
thing, play or engage in faro, roulette, dice, card games or any games of
chance, and no person shall aid, abet, assist or participate in any of the
foregoing prohibited activities.
§ 173-2. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not be construed to apply to the conducting of games of
chance commonly known as "bingo" or "lotto" under a license duly issued
under the provisions of the Bingo Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.),
and to the conducting of games of chance commonly known as raffles under
a license duly issued under the provisions of the Raffles Licensing Law
(N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.).
§ 173-3. Raffles.
The holding, conducting and operating of raffles within the City shall be
subject to and in accordance with all the terms and provisions of the Raffles
Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-50 et seq.), as amended or supplemented, and
to all general rules and regulations promulgated or to be promulgated by
the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 173-4. Bingo.
The holding, conducting and operating of bingo within the City shall be
subject to and in accordance with all the terms and provisions of the Bingo
Licensing Law (N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq.), as amended or supplemented, and
to all general rules and regulations promulgated or to be promulgated by
the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission.
§ 173-5. Administrative authority.
The City Council shall constitute the authority for the administration of the
issuance of licenses under §§ 173-3 and 173-4, and shall have and exercise
control and supervision over all games of chance so licensed.
§ 167-19 GAMES OF CHANCE § 173-6
173:225
§ 173-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IN PUBLIC — On any public or quasi-public street, sidewalk, alleyway,
passageway, or property; or in private property if in view from any public or
quasi-public street, sidewalk, alleyway, passageway or property.
Chapter 176
GARAGE/YARD SALES
§ 176-1. Definitions.
The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings when
used in this chapter.
GARAGE/YARD SALES — Occasional sales by a householder of personal
property accumulated in the normal use of a dwelling as a residence and
no longer needed by the occupants, such as used crockery, kitchenware,
dishes, toys, furniture, costume jewelry, used clothing, used appliances,
rugs, drapes, and the like, offered for sale in the dwelling, appurtenant
garage or other outbuilding on the property or appurtenant yards.
§ 176-2. License required.
§ 176-3. Regulations for conduct.
No garage/yard sale shall be conducted except in the following
circumstances:
A. Sales are prohibited unless licensed under a permit issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter and conducted in compliance with this
chapter. Sales of personal property not permitted by this chapter must
conform to the requirements of Chapter 370, Land Use.
B. The fee for a license under the preceding section shall be $5 for each
scheduled garage sale or yard sale.
C. No person or entity shall conduct more than three garage sales or yard
sales in any one calendar year.
A. The merchandise offered at the sale shall be only merchandise acquired
for normal use by the householder or other persons occupying the
dwelling on the premises where the sale is held.
B. No more than three garage sales shall be permitted on the same
premises in any twelve-month period, and no such sale shall continue
longer than two days.
§ 173-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 176-4
176:226
§ 176-4. License applications; hours; signs; nuisances.
All sales shall comply with the following provisions:
A. Application for a license to hold such sale shall be made, in writing, to
the Zoning Officer at least one business day before the date the sale is
to be held. The application form shall show:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The place, date and time when the sale is to be held.
(3) The name, address and phone number of the person who assumes
responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
which person shall also sign the application.
(4) The name of the auctioneer, if an auction sale.
(5) The nature of the sale and the merchandise to be sold.
(6) Whether or not any signs pertaining to the sale are to be posted
and, if so, where. The application shall be accompanied by the
written permission of the utility or person on whose property such
sign is to be posted.
(7) The date the last sale was conducted on such property.
B. For the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter, there is
imposed and the applicant shall pay at the time of filing the application
the sum of $5 for each sale.
C. No sales of any kind shall be held before 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on
any day.
D. No merchandise offered for sale shall be displayed more than one day
before the commencement of the sale or allowed to remain more than
24 hours after the termination of the sale.
E. No signs pertaining to the sale, directional or otherwise, shall be posted
on any utility pole, tree or property without the written consent of the
utility or owner of such tree or property. No nails shall be driven into
trees, and no sign shall be any larger than three feet by two feet. No
sign shall be posted more than 48 hours before the sale, and all signs
must be removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of the sale.
F. Sales shall be conducted wholly within the confines of the property and
in such a manner so as to cause no obstruction or encroachment on
neighboring property or public sidewalks, streets or other public ways.
G. The person responsible for the conduct of the sale shall be responsible
to see that no disorder occurs, that there is no littering of adjoining
property or public ways, that there is no trespassing on adjoining
property and that these regulations are adhered to.
§ 176-4 GARAGE/YARD SALES § 176-4
176:227
§ 176-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not exceeding $ 500.
Chapter 180
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
(The definitions for this chapter are included in Article III.)
H. No device or amplifying sound, music or other sound device shall be
allowed, and any necessary sound shall be kept sufficiently low so as
not to be audible within 50 feet of the property where the sale is held.
§ 176-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 176-5
176:228
ARTICLE I
Application of Graffiti
§ 180-1. Graffiti prohibited.
§ 180-2. Exclusions.
Easily removable markings (chalk or water soluble) on public sidewalks
and streets used in connection with traditional children's games, or city
sponsored events, shall not be considered graffiti.
§ 180-3. Property owner responsibility.
A. It shall be unlawful for any persons to apply graffiti to any building,
structure, tree, shrub, curb, vehicle, or to other personal or real
property (public or private) located within the City.
B. Nothing contained within this chapter shall prohibit the enforcement of
any other chapter of the Municipal Code of the City of Bridgeton.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.59, property owners of record are
responsible for either:
(1) Graffiti removal within 90 days of a removal notice being sent; or
(2) Objecting to the removal notice within 30 days of the order's date
that they will have instituted a court action challenging the removal
order within 60 days of the removal order's date. All such
objections shall be made by personal delivery or certified mail.
B. Property owners who have complied with a removal order shall:
(1) Complete the notice's provision that states they have removed the
graffiti;
(2) Sign the provision statement, which indicates that the facts set
forth therein are true and that the signature is considered as if
being made under oath and subject to the same penalties as
provide by law for perjury.
(3) Return the removal notice by personal delivery or certified mail.
C. If a property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within 90
days of the date of the order, unless an action challenging the order to
remove graffiti is still pending pursuant to § 180-3A(2), the City of
Bridgeton may remove the graffiti from that property and present the
property owner with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by the
municipality, by certified mail and regular mail, for reimbursement from
the property owner.
§ 180-1 GARAGE/YARD SALES § 180-3
176:229

ARTICLE II
Violations and Penalties; Enforcement
§ 180-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 180-5. Restitution.
Convicted offenders shall make a restitution to the victim for damages or
loss caused directly or indirectly by the violator's offense in the amount (or
manner) determined by the court.
§ 180-6. Community service.
Community service shall be based on the following minimum requirements:
A. Committing an act of graffiti is a violation of this chapter.
B. Failure to remove graffiti pursuant to § 180-3 shall be a violation for
which the cost of the graffiti removal shall be assessed against the
property owner as specified by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.59.
C. Violations for committing an act of graffiti shall be charged on a perproperty-
or-structure basis (one offense for each violation). Violations
do not reset over time.
D. Upon conviction, each offense shall have the following penalties
applied:
(1) Each person shall be subject to a fine of $50 for the first offense;
$100 for the second offense; and $150 for each subsequent offense.
(2) In addition to any fines imposed (or waived), the court shall order
the offender to make restitution pursuant to § 180-5.
(3) In lieu (or as part) of the penalties imposed by this section, it is
strongly recommended that the court order community service
pursuant to § 180-6.
A. Offenders shall perform community service based on their level of
conviction as follows:
(1) First offense: service sufficient to remove the graffiti and restore
the property to its prior condition.
(2) Second offense: service sufficient to remove the graffiti and restore
the property to its prior condition plus 10 additional days of
community service.
(3) Third (and subsequent) offense: service sufficient to remove the
graffiti and restore the property to its prior condition plus 20
additional days of community service.
§ 180-4 GARAGE/YARD SALES § 180-6
176:231
§ 180-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any police, housing, or
code enforcement officer of the City of Bridgeton.
B. Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the offender to a type of
community service that is reasonably expected to have the most
rehabilitative effect on the offender.
C. The ordered period of service shall be performed under the supervision
of a community service provider approved by the Chief of Police.
§ 180-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 180-7
176:232
ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 180-8. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrase used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AERSOL PAINT CONTAINER — Any container, regardless of the
material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the
purpose of spraying paint, undercoating, insulation, or other such
substance.
CITY — The City of Bridgeton.
COSTS — A collective term that embodies all costs related to the
prosecution and conviction of persons charged with the application of
graffiti, as well as the cost of its removal. Examples include (but are not
limited to) court cost, attorney's fees, law enforcement costs incurred
by the City to identify and apprehend those who created, caused, or
applied the graffiti; and the cost to repair or remediate the defaced
property.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any City employee, or contract agent,
authorized to enforce the provision of this chapter.
GRAFFITI — Any inscription, word, symbol, figure, marking, or design
that is marked, etched, scrawled, stained, drawn, painted, stuck on,
or adhered to any surface (or structure) on public or private property
visible from a public street right-of-way (or public building) without the
expressed permission of the owner or the owner's agent. This includes
(but is not limited to) any building, structure, or other improvement
whether permanent or temporary regardless of the content or nature of
the material applied.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person, partnership, corporation, or other
entity who owns, possess, occupies, or otherwise has responsibility for
the repair or maintenance of real property.
REMOVAL NOTICE/ORDER — A written document sent to a property
owner by certified (and regular) mail that specifies an action to remove
graffiti from the owner's property.
STRUCTURE — Any physical item within the city limits including (but
not limited to) buildings, walls, underpasses, trestles, trees, fences,
poles, signs, posts, railings, playground apparatuses, benches, tables,
fixtures, waste containers, utility boxes, sidewalks, streets, and cargo/
shipping containers.
§ 180-8 GARAGE/YARD SALES § 180-8
176:233
Chapter 189
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Junkyard fee — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 189-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKYARD — An area, covered or uncovered, used for the purpose of
buying, selling, exchanging or storing old or secondhand metals, bottles,
glassware, tinware, paper, lumber, plumbing fixtures, dismantled or
inoperable automobiles, or any other thing which is no longer used or
usable for its intended purpose, but which may have value because of the
parts or materials it contains.
§ 189-2. License required.
No person shall operate a junkyard in the City without having first obtained
a license from the Clerk and paid the required license fee.
§ 189-3. License fee.
The fee for a junkyard license shall be as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees,
Article II, Schedule of Fees.
§ 189-4. Application information.
In addition to the information required by § 200-2 of this Code, the
application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a
plot plan in triplicate and drawn to scale showing the dimensions of the
premises, the location of all fences and screening and any other information
which may appropriately be required for the effective enforcement of this
chapter.
§ 189-5. Certificate of occupancy required.
No license shall in any event be issued unless the applicant has obtained a
certificate of occupancy of the location to be used therefor.
§ 189-6. Investigation.
In addition to the investigation provided for by § 200-3, the Division of
Housing and Code Enforcement, its agents or employees, shall inspect the
§ 180-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 189-6
189:234
premises for which a license is desired to determine whether it complies
with the provisions of this chapter. The Director of the Division shall report
the results of his investigation to the Clerk. No license shall be issued unless
the report is favorable.
§ 189-7. Fencing.
Each licensed place or premises shall at all times be entirely surrounded or
fenced by a fence extending from the ground to a height not greater than
seven feet. The fence shall not be used for advertising purposes either by
the operator of the business or by any other person, except that there may
be affixed to the fence a sign not larger than 60 inches by 20 inches setting
forth the name of the business.
§ 189-8. Health and safety regulations.
A. Adequate precautions shall be taken in every junkyard to prevent fire
from breaking out or spreading. In particular, no explosive or extremely
inflammable material shall be stored in a junkyard.
B. No material shall be treated, separated or prepared by burning the
same by means of fire unless such burning shall be by a mechanically
controlled method approved by the Chief of the Fire Department;
provided, however, that the Chief of the Fire Department may from time
to time grant special permits to allow burning by fire without any
mechanical control thereof at such places and times and with such
precautions as may be deemed safe to life and property in the
neighborhood.
C. Junk shall be stored and stacked so as to permit customers of the
junkyard and other persons to move about easily and without risking
injury.
D. No material shall be stored or deposited on any licensed premises to a
height greater than the height of the fence required to be constructed
around such premises.
E. It shall be unlawful to hammer or pound any metals or other materials
on the premises between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m on
weekdays, or at any time on Sundays.
F. No automobiles, parts thereof or other junk or material shall be
stacked, placed or kept within 20 feet of the inside sidewalk line of any
street.
G. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to permit any of the materials
regulated herein to be placed upon the licensed premises in such a
manner so as to permit rainwater to collect and remain in and about the
premises for a period longer than 24 hours.
§ 189-6 JUNKYARDS § 189-8
189:235
§ 189-9. Compliance with regulations; inspections.
The licensed place or premises shall at all times comply with all necessary
police or fire regulations imposed by the Police and Fire Departments of
the City in order to prevent conflagration and the storage and disposition of
stolen property. The business and the place and premises where conducted
shall be subject to reasonable inspection by police authorities, fire
authorities and the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement of the City.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief
of the Police Department to immediately report, in writing, to the Mayor
and Council any violation of any regulation imposed by their respective
departments. The Division of Housing and Code Enforcement shall
determine if there is a violation of other local or state regulations. The
report shall set out the specific regulation violated and the nature of the
violation.
§ 189-10. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 197
LIBRARY PROPERTY
§ 197-1. Compliance with rules required.
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, audiovisual material or any other article or item of any kind
from the Bridgeton Public Library without complying with the rules,
regulations and procedures of the Library for borrowing such items or
articles.
§ 197-2. Time limit for return of materials.
No person shall retain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, audiovisual material or any other article or item of any
kind from the Bridgeton Public Library contrary to the rules and regulations
of the Library, after 30 days have elapsed from the date of posting (by
certified mail, return receipt requested) of a notice demanding the return
of the book, etc., addressed to that person at the last address furnished to
the Library. In the case of a minor, the notice shall be sent to the parents or
guardian of the minor, as shown on the records of the Library.
H. No operator of a junkyard shall permit rodents or conditions likely to
attract rodents, or any other unhealthy or unsanitary condition, to exist
on the premises.
§ 189-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 197-3
197:236
§ 197-3. Damaging of materials prohibited.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or destroy any book, article or other item of any kind (or any part thereof)
which is owned by or in the custody of the Bridgeton Public Library.
§ 197-4. False information and fraudulent use of cards.
No person shall, with the intent to defraud, register or furnish a false name
or address, or use any card other than the card issued to that person, for the
purpose of borrowing any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction,
audiovisual material or any other article or item of any kind from the
Bridgeton Public Library; neither shall any person allow the use of his or her
Library card by another individual. The obtaining of any book, periodical,
pamphlet, artistic reproduction, audiovisual material or any other article by
means of the registration or furnishing of a false name or address, or by
the use of a card other than that issued to the person, shall be prima facie
evidence of an intent to defraud.
§ 197-5. Posting of borrowing rules.
The Library Board of Trustees shall adopt and post in a conspicuous place
in the Bridgeton Public Library the rules, regulations and procedures
governing the borrowing of books, periodicals, pamphlets, artistic
reproductions, audiovisual materials or any other article or item of any kind
which may be available for such borrowing to the general public.
§ 197-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon
conviction, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty, exclusive of restitution to the Library for the cost of the damage to
or loss of the subject article or item. The penalties contained in this section
do not in any way affect a person's responsibility to return borrowed Library
material. For the purpose of this section, each book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, audiovisual material or any other article or item of
any kind used, borrowed or removed from the Bridgeton Public Library
in violation of Bridgeton Public Library's rules, regulations or procedures,
shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 200
LICENSES, MERCANTILE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 77. Fees — See Ch. 149.
§ 197-3 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 197-6
197:237

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)43
§ 200-1. through § 200-15. (Reserved)
43.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Mercantile Licensing, was repealed 6-4-2008 by Ord. No.
07-41.
§ 200-1 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 200-1
197:239

ARTICLE II
Payment of Taxes
§ 200-16. Applicability.
The following provisions shall apply to each and every license or permit of
any kind issued by or requiring the approval of the City of Bridgeton.
§ 200-17. Payment required.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2, any applicant who is the
owner of the property seeking the issuance or renewal of any license or
permit issued by or requiring the approval of the City of Bridgeton shall
be required to pay any delinquent property taxes or assessments on the
property wherein the business or activity for which the license or permit is
sought or wherein the business or activity is to be conducted.
§ 200-18. Revocation or suspension of existing license or permit.
Any licensee or permittee who is an owner of the property on which the
licensed business or permitted activity is conducted who has failed to pay
the property taxes due on the real estate for at least three consecutive
quarters shall be subject to the revocation or suspension of said license or
permit upon notice thereof by the City of Bridgeton. Each such licensee
or permittee shall have 30 days within which to make payment of the
delinquent taxes or assessment. Upon failure to make payment, the
licensing officer, without further notice, shall cause the license or permit
in question to be revoked or suspended and shall notify said licensee
or permittee of said suspension or revocation. Any licensee or permittee
who, during any period of suspension or revocation, continues the business
or activity licensed or permitted during such period of suspension or
revocation shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90
days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 200-19. Proof of payment.
Prior to the issuance or renewal of any license or permit subject to the
provisions of this article, the licensing officer shall require that the
applicant present sufficient proof from the Tax Collector of the City of
Bridgeton indicating that no taxes or payment are due on the property.
The Director of Development and Planning may provide to the applicant a
form upon which such proof may be given by the Tax Collector of the City
Bridgeton.
§ 200-20. Nonapplicability to alcoholic beverage licensee or
permittee.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverages licensee or permittee subject to the provisions of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.44
§ 200-16 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 200-20
197:241
44.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Business Registration, which immediately followed, was
repealed 6-4-2008 by Ord. No. 07-41.
§ 200-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 200-20
197:242
Chapter 203
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Handbill license fee — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
Storage of tires — See Ch. 328.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 347.
§ 200-20 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 200-20
197:243

ARTICLE I
Unsolicited Advertising Material
[Adopted 1-4-1977 by Ord. No. 76-19]
§ 203-1. Written consent to leave samples required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave hanging any kind of bag or bags
containing advertising materials or samples, or to distribute advertising
material or samples at a home located within the City of Bridgeton, other
than the home of the person soliciting the same, by placing such material at
the home or on the property of the person owning or occupying such home,
unless the person distributing such advertising material or samples obtains
the written consent of the person occupying the home.
§ 203-2. Exceptions.
The foregoing provision shall not apply to the distribution of advertising
materials through the United States Postal Service. The provisions of this
article shall not apply to the distribution of any newspaper of general
circulation nor to materials distributed by charitable or nonprofit
organizations. For the purpose of this article a newspaper of general
circulation is defined as any newspaper having a total paid circulation of at
least 90% of the total circulation.
§ 203-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, including corporations, found in violation of this
article shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty, for each offense.
§ 203-1 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 203-3
197:245

ARTICLE II
General Littering Regulations
[Adopted 6-7-1988 by Ord. No. 87-17]
§ 203-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context of this article, words used in the
present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular include the
plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
B. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top,
cap, or detachable tab of any bottle, jar, or can, any unlighted cigarette,
cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash,
refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste,
newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or
other packaging or construction material but does not include the
waste of the primary processes of mining or other extraction processes,
logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any vacant lot or tract of land or spaces not
in the public domain but privately owned by one or more persons
and any fountain, pool, lake, stream or body of water located within
any tract or parcel of land privately owned or any dwelling house,
building or other structure designed or used either wholly or in part
for private residential purposes, whether uninhabited or temporarily or
continuously inhabited or vacant, and shall include, but not be limited
to, any yard, ground, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling house, building or other
structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, square, spaces,
grounds, buildings or conversation areas.
REFUSE — All putrecible and nonputrecible solid wastes (except body
waste), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned or junk automobiles and solid market and
industrial wastes.
§ 203-4 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 203-4
197:247
§ 203-5. Littering prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within this municipality except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 203-6. Locations where receptacles and servicing required.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrapping,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding,
crockery and similar materials.
A. Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following
public places which exist in the municipality, including:
(1) Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear 1/4
mile without a receptacle.
(2) Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools,
government buildings, and railroad and bus stations.
(3) Parks.
(4) Drive-in restaurants.
(5) All street vendor locations.
(6) Self-service refreshment areas.
(7) Construction sites.
(8) Gasoline service station islands.
(9) Shopping centers.
(10) Parking lots.
(11) Campgrounds and trailer parks.
(12) Marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations.
(13) Boat launching areas.
(14) Public and private piers operated for public use.
(15) Beaches and bathing areas.
(16) At special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses, and festivals.
B. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
§ 203-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 203-7
197:248
§ 203-7. Illegal dumping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances, furniture, or
private property, except by written consent of the owner of said property, in
any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste storage
or disposal.
§ 203-8. Maintenance of private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open, occupied or vacant
private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter and maintain authorized receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon any private property.
§ 203-9. Deposit in gutters prohibited; sidewalks to be litter-free.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within this municipality the accumulation of litter from any building
or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalks in front of their premises free
of litter.
§ 203-10. Responsibility of business owners.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within this municipality
the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business within this municipality shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
business premises free of litter.
§ 203-11. Manner of placement of litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 203-12. Storage of household bulky waste.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owners to store or permit
storage of any bulky household waste, including household appliances,
furniture and mattresses, in areas zoned residential, except in a fully
enclosed structure or during days designed for the collection of bulky items.
§ 203-7 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 203-13
197:249
§ 203-13. Storage of tires. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
the storage of tires in areas zoned residential, except in a fully enclosed
building. No more than four tires per registered vehicle shall be allowed.45
§ 203-14. Parking of vehicles on residential lawns. [Amended
2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 07-31]
A. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to park or permit the
parking of any vehicle between the street, alley or right-of-way and any
building unless upon an existing, defined driveway or parking area
(having been created by paving, concrete or stone).
B. Any person who shall violate this provision of this section shall be first
issued a written warning for such violation. If such violation is not
corrected within the time prescribed in such warning, a violation shall
he issued and impose a fine of $75 for a first offense, $150 for a second
offense, and $300 for each and every offense thereafter. Such amounts
may be paid without appearance in court unless the summons
otherwise indicates that a court appearance is necessary before the
Judge of the Municipal Court of Bridgeton. If a court appearance is
required, the Court may impose remediation and community service up
to 30 days for third or subsequent offenses. The provisions hereof may
be enforced by any official of the City of Bridgeton. Each day that a
violation occurs may be considered as a separate violation of the
provisions of this section.
C. Any property owner may create further parking areas consistent with
this section by making the appropriate application to the proper City
entity and shall obtain all necessary permits and approvals.
D. Exemptions: [Added 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 08-6]
(1) A property owner or resident may apply to the City Tax Office/
Police Department for an exemption sticker/placard/hangtag, in
which case the vehicle properly exhibiting this exemption
certificate shall be permitted to park on the lawn of such property.
(2) Exemptions shall be granted to any senior citizen (over 65 years of
age) or handicapped individual showing proper verification of
residency (including but not limited to drivers' license, tax bill,
lease agreement or utility bill) and qualification (including but not
limited to drivers' license as to age or doctors' verification as to
medical condition). Upon presentation of verification, the Tax
Office/Police Department shall issue such permit/sticker/hangtag to
the resident and forward a copy of the exemption to Code
Enforcement.
45.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 328, Tires, Storage of.
§ 203-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 203-14
197:250
§ 203-15. Inoperable vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on streets,
vacant lots and residential lawns except in a fully enclosed structure, any
motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which is:
§ 203-16. Litter from vehicles; responsibility for cleanup.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects
have fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle,
or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, shall immediately cause
the property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the costs
therefor.
(3) When making such application, the applicant shall provide a map
indicating where the applicant proposes to park. Such proposed
parking area shall not be in the front of any residence nor in any
setback area.
(4) There shall be no fee for making such application under this
exemption provision, but should the exemption identification need
replacement, there shall be an administrative fee of $5 required for
a replacement sticker/placard/hangtag.
(5) For any resident otherwise entitled to such exemption but who does
not own his or her own vehicle, such resident may make such
application for a friend or family member who regularly provides
transportation for such resident. In such case, the permit shall be
identified as temporary and such exemption shall be limited to
parking for no longer than one hour at a time.
(6) Any other resident shall be entitled to request such exemption
sticker for a limited period of time for purposes of moving,
cleaning, home repairs, etc. as necessary. Such application shall
state the limited amount of time the exemption shall be issued for,
which shall not exceed 48 hours, and such sticker shall be clearly
identified on the vehicle. There shall be no charge for such a
temporary exemption application.
A. Missing tires, wheels, engine, or any essential parts; or
B. Which displays extensive body damage or deterioration; or
C. Which does not display a current, valid state license; or
D. Which is wrecked, disassembled or partially disassembled.
§ 203-14 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 203-17
197:251
§ 203-17. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas, and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 203-18. Open or overflowing waste disposal bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 203-19. Responsibility of owners and tenants.
The owner, agent, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person who manages
or controls a building or lot shall be jointly or severally responsible for
keeping the sidewalk, flagging, curbstone and the air shafts, all areaways,
backyards, courts, parking lots and alleys free from litter.
§ 203-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-2007 by Ord. No.
06-29; 7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 07-3; 8-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-8;
2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 07-31]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
liable to pay a fine of $35 for a first offense, $75 for a second offense,
and $150 for each and every offense thereafter. Such amounts may be
paid without appearance in court unless the summons otherwise indicates
that a court appearance is necessary before the Judge of the Municipal
Court of Bridgeton. If a court appearance is required, the court may impose
remediation and community service up to 30 days for third or subsequent
offenses. In addition, any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted
of a violation of this article shall pay all expenses incurred for the removal
of said litter. The provisions hereof may be enforced by any official of the
City of Bridgeton. Each day that a violation occurs may be considered as
a separate violation of the provisions of this chapter. The violations and
penalties provided herein shall not apply to a violation of § 203-14.
§ 203-21. Reward.
Any person supplying information to this municipality which leads to the
conviction of any persons for the violation of this article or any section
thereof, shall be entitled to an award in the amount of $50 to be paid
by the Treasurer upon receipt of a voucher accompanied by sufficient
documentation to substantiate the applicant's entitlement to the reward.
§ 203-17 BRIDGETON CODE § 203-21
197:252
ARTICLE III
Handbills and Circulars
[Adopted 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 00-6]
§ 203-22. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the standards and manner in
which handbills and commercial circulars are distributed within the City of
Bridgeton to insure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
Furthermore, this article is designed to improve the overall clean
appearance of the City, to reduce litter, and to preserve aesthetics and
property values.
§ 203-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is
intended:
COMMERCIAL CIRCULAR — An advertisement, notice, or statement
printed or written for general distribution in connection with a business or
commercial activity.
HANDBILL — An advertisement, notice, or statement printed or written for
general distribution in connection with a noncommercial activity or event.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
§ 203-24. License required.
§ 203-25. Application. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
The application for the license shall be made in writing and filed with the
Municipal Clerk. Each application shall contain the following information:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to circulate handbills or commercial
circulars within the City unless licensed to do so pursuant to this
article.
B. The license required shall be known as a handbill license and shall be
issued by the Municipal Clerk after payment of the required fee and
compliance with these regulations. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No.
17-20]
C. The fee for each license shall be as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees,
Article II, Schedule of Fees. Nonprofit organizations shall be exempt
from the payment of the fee.
D. This article shall not apply to legal notices.
A. The name and address of the business or organization conducting the
advertisement or event.
§ 203-22 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 203-25
197:253
§ 203-26. Regulations.
B. The name and address of the person in charge of the distribution of
handbills or commercial circulars.
C. A copy of the handbill or commercial circular shall be filed with the
application.
A. Public property. No person shall deposit, place, scatter or throw any
handbill or commercial circular in or upon any public property within
the City including public grounds, parks, sidewalks or streets. This
subsection does not prohibit the distributing, handing or transmitting of
any handbill or commercial circular to any person willing to accept it.
B. Private property. No person shall deposit, place scatter or throw any
handbill or commercial circular in or upon any private property within
the City including buildings, homes, mailboxes, porches, steps and
yards. This subsection does not prohibit the distributing, handing or
transmitting of any handbill or commercial circular to the owner or
occupant of any private property who is willing to accept it. It shall be
lawful for the owner or occupant of any private property to place a sign
in a conspicuous place near the entrance indicating that no handbills or
commercial circulars are desired. In that event, no person shall go upon
the premises so posted to distribute, hand or transmit any handbill or
commercial circular.
C. Motor vehicle. No person shall deposit, place, scatter or throw any
handbill or commercial circular in or upon any automobile or other
motor vehicle. This subsection does not prohibit the distributing,
handing, or transmitting of any handbill or commercial circular to the
occupant of any motor vehicle who is willing to accept it.
D. Public safety. No person shall distribute, hand or transmit any handbill
or commercial circular in such a manner as to impede the free flow of
motor vehicle traffic on any street or pedestrian traffic on any sidewalk,
unless otherwise approved by City Council. Furthermore, no person
distributing any handbill or commercial circular shall annoy or molest
any person, group or gathering.
E. No posting allowed. No person shall affix or attach any handbill or
commercial circular on benches, bridges, culverts, curbs, fences,
hydrants, lamps, public buildings, rocks, sidewalks, street signs,
stumps, trees and utility poles. Handbills and commercial circulars may
be affixed to private buildings with the prior consent of the owner. They
must be removed immediately after the activity or event is completed.
F. Exceptions. The provisions of § 203-24A and B do not apply to the
following activities when performed in the customary manner:
messenger service, the delivery of newspapers, the delivery of the
United States mail, and the delivery of telegrams.
§ 203-25 BRIDGETON CODE § 203-27
197:254
§ 203-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of these regulations shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty,
and any other remediation ordered by the Judge of the Municipal Court,
including but not limited to removal of the unlawfully distributed material
and/or community service.
§ 203-27 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 203-27
197:255

ARTICLE IV
Litter Control
[Adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 03-26]
§ 203-28. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering
in the City of Bridgeton, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 203-29. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 203-30. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property, other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
§ 203-28 LIBRARY PROPERTY § 203-31
197:257
§ 203-31. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department or other Municipal
Officials of the City of Bridgeton.
§ 203-32. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $100, in the discretion of the Municipal
Court.
§ 203-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 203-32
197:258
Chapter 212
MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Modular home moving permits — See Ch. 126,
Art. III.
Escrow fees for mobile home parks — See Ch.
149, Art. I.
§ 212-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MANUFACTURED HOME — A unit of housing which consists of one or
more transportable sections which are substantially constructed off site
and, if more than one section, are joined together on site; is built on a
permanent chassis; is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a
dwelling on a permanent or nonpermanent foundation; and is manufactured
in accordance with the standards promulgated for a manufactured home by
the Secretary pursuant to the National Manufactured Housing Construction
and Safety Standards Act of 1974, and the standards promulgated for a
manufactured or mobile home by the Commissioner pursuant to the State
Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
MOBILE HOME — Any unit, whether licensed or not, used for living,
sleeping or business purposes by one or more persons, built on a chassis,
designed without a permanent foundation, and shall include a dwelling,
sleeping or business unit of vehicular design used or intended or
constructed for use as a conveyance upon public streets and highways
whether licensed or not and shall further include self-propelled and nonself-
propelled vehicles and other structures so designed, constructed and
reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such manner as to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling, sleeping place, or for business
purposes for one or more persons having no foundation other than wheels,
jacks, piers, or skirting so arranged as to be integral with or portable by the
mobile home and shall further include the type of dwelling known as trailer,
or camp car. A mobile home shall not include a manufactured home of 22
feet in width or more as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-102(c).
TRAILER — A recreational vehicle, travel trailer, camper or other
transportable, temporary dwelling unit with or without its own motor power,
designed and constructed for travel and recreational purposes to be
installed on a nonpermanent foundation if installation is required.
§ 203-32 MANUFACTURED AND MOBILE HOMES § 212-2
212:259
§ 212-2. Use of mobile homes as dwellings prohibited; exception.46
It shall be unlawful for any person to dwell in or otherwise occupy any
mobile home or trailer anywhere within the City of Bridgeton. An exception
will be made for people whose dwelling was damaged by fire or other
disaster. The Construction Official may permit temporary use of a trailer or
mobile home for a period not to exceed six months.
§ 212-3. Prohibition limited to equal applicability of regulations to
similar uses.
The City of Bridgeton shall not exclude or restrict, through its development
regulations, the use, location, placement, or joining of sections of
manufactured homes which are not less than 22 feet wide, on land the
title to which is held by the manufactured home owner, and are located on
permanent foundations, unless these regulations shall be equally applicable
to all buildings and structures of similar use.
§ 212-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 221
MOTORIZED VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 347. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 350.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 212-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 212-4
221:260
ARTICLE I
Operation Restrictions on Certain Property
[Adopted 4-17-1979 by Ord. 78-30]
§ 221-1. Operation of certain vehicles prohibited.
No motorized vehicle or motorized bicycle of any type or kind, including but
not limited to the following commonly described types: motorized bicycles,
motor vehicles, mopeds, and go-carts, shall operate or trespass on the
property more fully described below.
§ 221-2. Notice to public.
The City of Bridgeton shall post such notice on the premises as shall
reasonably notify the public, but in any event, publication of this chapter
shall be deemed to be sufficient notice to the public.
§ 221-3. Property described.
The property limited by the above was a portion of what was commonly
known as the old New Jersey Central Railroad right-of-way, now being a
portion of Lot 33, Block 184, on the Tax Map of the City of Bridgeton, more
formally described as follows:
BEGINNING at a point where the easterly line of Fayette Street intersects
the center line of the old New Jersey Central Railroad property, now of the
City of Bridgeton, said point being 138 feet and 8/100 of a foot more or
less as measured along the easterly line of said Fayette Street from the
southerly line of Harvard Avenue; thence extending in an easterly direction
along the center line of the said old railroad right-of-way, two thousand one
hundred feet more or less to a point opposite the southeasterly corner of
Lot Number 20, Block 194 as shown on Sheet 66 of the City of Bridgeton
Tax Assessment Map and there to end.
§ 221-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 221-1 MOTORIZED VEHICLES § 221-4
221:261
Chapter 226
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
False alarms — See Ch. 76, Art. I.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 77.
Carnivals and circuses — See Ch. 112.
Curfew — See Ch. 130.
Garage/Yard sales — See Ch. 176.
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 238.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 247.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 251.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 254.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 350.
§ 226-1. Definitions.
The terms in this chapter shall be defined as follows:
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual
or imminent physical trauma or property damage or loss, which demands
immediate action.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed for the purpose of preventing
or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused
by an emergency.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Every vehicle defined as a motor vehicle under Title
39 of the New Jersey Statutes.
NOISE DISTURBANCE or UNNECESSARY NOISE — Any sound that can be
detected by any person using unaided hearing faculties at a distance of 30
feet from the sound source.
PERSON — A natural person, male or female, an association, firm,
partnership or corporation.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by any person using
unaided hearing faculties at a distance of 30 feet from the sound source. For
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or personal
vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the
rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible
sound. A law enforcement officer or other complaining witness need not
determine the title, specific words or artist performing the song.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — The property line along the ground
surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned
by one person from that owned by another person.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — The area designated for residential use within the
City of Bridgeton.
§ 221-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 226-2
221:262
§ 226-2. Noise disturbance.
At no time shall any person play, use, operate or permit to be played, used
or operated any radio, television, phonograph, jukebox, musical instrument
or other device for the production or reproduction of sound with louder
volume than is necessary and convenient for the hearing of the person so
playing, using or operating such instrument or device and such persons who
are voluntary listeners thereto or in such a manner as to disturb the peace,
quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants. The use or operation of any
such radio, television, phonograph, jukebox, musical instrument or other
device that is plainly audible more than 30 feet from the source of origin
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
§ 226-3. Noise from motor vehicles.
No person in charge of or operating a motor vehicle shall cause to be heard
more than 30 feet from the source any noise or music at any time of day.
§ 226-4. Authorized activities; applicability of state laws.
§ 226-5. Audible advertising; permit required.
No person, in an attempt to advertise or attract public attention, shall
sound, play, operate or permit to be sounded, played or operated any
radio, television, receiving set, musical instrument, jukebox, phonograph,
loudspeaker, sound amplifier, sound truck or other machine or device that
produces or reproduces sound that is plainly audible in any public space,
public right-of-way or adjacent neighboring premises, unless a permit has
been obtained from the Police Department or as provided in another City
ordinance.
§ 226-6. Construction operations; emergency permit.
No person shall, from Monday through Saturday between the hours of 6:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or on Sunday, in conducting any excavation, demolition,
erection, alteration, repair or other building operation within 1,000 feet
of any dwelling or business property, operate or use any steam shovels,
tractors, excavators, pneumatic hammers, pile drivers, derricks, steam or
electric hoists or any tools or equipment which shall make any plainly
audible noise, except in cases of urgent necessity in the interests of public
safety, and then only upon obtaining a permit from the Building Inspector.
A. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a musical band or
orchestra from performing in an authorized parade, during a Citysponsored
event, during any permitted event (as authorized by the City
or any of its departments) or during any lawful activity subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
B. State noise control laws and regulations apply where appropriate.
§ 226-2 MOTORIZED VEHICLES § 226-7
221:263
§ 226-7. Quiet zones.
No person shall create any plainly audible noise that is on any public space
or public right-of-way adjacent to any school, hospital, library, house of
worship, senior citizen center or any other area designated by City Council,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions.
§ 226-8. Disturbing the peace with noise.
No person shall create any plainly audible noise that disturbs the peace,
quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or persons in any public
space or public right-of-way. Furthermore, noise of such character, intensity
or duration detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited.
§ 226-9. Industrial and commercial operations excluded.
This chapter shall not apply to the normal operation of any plant, factory
or industry engaged in the business of manufacturing, processing of food or
other industrial or commercial operation.
§ 226-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating these sections shall be fined $50 for a first offense, $75
for a second offense, and $100 for each and every offense thereafter. Such
amounts may be paid without appearance in court unless the summons
otherwise indicates that a court appearance is necessary before the Judge
of the Municipal Court of Bridgeton. If a court appearance is required, the
Court may impose community service up to 30 days for third or subsequent
offenses.
§ 226-11. Permits issued by City Recreation Department.
Any person or group holding a permit issued by the City of Bridgeton
Recreation Department for use of City facilities shall comply with the terms
of this chapter. In the event that such person or group believes its permitted
activity will violate the terms of this chapter, such person or group may
make application to the Bridgeton City Council through the City Clerk's
office for an exemption from the requirements of this chapter. If such
exemption is granted, such exemptions will state the date, time and means
by which the exemption applies. Violation of the limits of the exemption
shall be considered a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
sanctions as enumerated here in this chapter.
§ 226-12. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
A. Emergency warning devices.
B. Emergency work to provide electricity, water or other public services
when public health or safety is involved.
§ 226-7 BRIDGETON CODE § 226-12
221:264
Chapter 230
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Noise associated with animals — See Ch. 83,
§ 83-6.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 103.
Vehicles parked in emergency lanes — See
Ch. 141.
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Noise — See Ch. 226.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
Rental property — See Ch. 277.
C. Public celebrations authorized by the City of Bridgeton.
D. Use of explosive devices which are regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Labor under the 1960 Explosives Act.47
E. Any other activity authorized by the City of Bridgeton or City Council.
F. Bona fide religious services or events.
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 21:1A-128 et seq.
§ 226-12 MOTORIZED VEHICLES § 226-12
221:265

ARTICLE I
Public Health Nuisances
[Adopted 11-4-1970 as Ch. XIX of the 1970 Code]
§ 230-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or acts
and each of them as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises or sounds,
requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or rental
of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal of abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations
is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950 (N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 et seq.). A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part
thereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 230-2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this article is described and commonly
known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)."
§ 230-3. Copies on file.48
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the office of the Clerk of the City and will remain on
file in such office for the use and examination of the public.
§ 230-4. Amendments.
The Public Health Nuisance Code is amended in Section 1.1 to read as
follows:
"1.1. Enforcing officials shall mean and include regular and special
patrolmen and superior officers of the Police Department of the City of
Bridgeton, the Division of Housing and and Code Enforcement, the Health
Officer, or any other official authorized by the City Council to enforce this
code and chapter."
§ 230-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 230-1 MOTORIZED VEHICLES § 230-5
221:267

ARTICLE II
Nuisance Houses
[Adopted 12-2-2002 by Ord. No. 02-6]
§ 230-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Any person, group of persons, firm, corporation, or officer
thereof, partnership, association, trust, or other legal entity who owns,
operates, exercises control over or is in charge of a rental property or
owner-occupied property.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY — A building, group of buildings, or a
portion thereof which contains one or more individual apartments which is
kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where living
accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for pay
or other consideration, to one or more individuals and is meant to include
one or more individual apartments. A property shall be presumed to be a
rental property is a lease exists for the property; there is written proof of
rent being paid thereon or the property is registered as a rental property.
OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING — Any structure which the owner thereof
occupies, uses, or allows to function or be occupied as a domicile or home
other than as a rental property.
§ 230-7. Lawful service of notice.
Any of the notices required by this article shall be deemed to be lawfully
served if such notice is personally served upon the individual named, or sent
via regular mail to the individual named at the last known address without
return, or by posting or affixing a copy of the same upon the door or other
conspicuous part of such premises. Such posting shall be deemed to be
lawful service.
§ 230-8. Rental properties.
A residential rental property whose tenant(s), occupants(s) or guest(s) shall
be so disorderly as to disturb the peace and quiet of the landlord or other
tenant(s) and occupant(s) living in the dwelling or the neighborhood shall
be rebuttably resumed to be a nuisance house if any of the following have
occurred within 12 months prior to the filing of any charge regarding a
premises being a nuisance house:
A. A residential rental property whose tenant(s), or occupant(s) have been
convicted of a second or subsequent offense of overcrowding; or
B. A residential property whose tenant(s), occupant(s) or guest(s) have
been convicted of a second or subsequent offense for violation or noise
ordinances or other disorderly conduct ordinances of the City of
Bridgeton; or
§ 230-6 MOTORIZED VEHICLES § 230-8
221:269
§ 230-9. Owner-occupied properties.
An owner-occupied dwelling, whose owner(s) or occupant(s) shall be so
disorderly as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by the
following, shall be rebuttably presumed to be a nuisance house if any of the
following have occurred within 12 months prior to the filing of any charge
regarding a premises being a nuisance house:
C. A residential property whose tenant(s), occupant(s) or guest(s) have
been convicted of a second or subsequent offense for public
drunkenness in or about the residential rental property; or
D. A residential property whose tenant(s), occupant(s) or guest(s) have
been convicted of a second or subsequent offense for a disorderly
persons offense or criminal offense as defined by statute in or about the
residential rental property; or
E. A residential property whose tenant(s), occupant(s) or guest(s) have
been convicted for any drug or controlled substance(s) related offense
in or about the residential rental property; or
F. A residential property whose tenant(s), occupant(s) or guest(s) have
been convicted for prostitution or solicitation for same in or about the
residential rental property; or
G. A residential property whose tenant(s), occupant(s) or guest(s) have
been convicted of a third or subsequent offense under Chapter 265,
Article II, §§ 265-7 regarding debris, litter, trash, abandoned,
inoperable, untagged, illegally parked motor vehicles in or about the
residential rental property.
H. A residential property whose tenant(s), occupant(s) or guest(s) have
been responsible for persistent police reports of criminal activity or
dangerous activity. [Added 1-7-2014 by Ord. No. 13-11]
A. An owner-occupied dwelling whose owner(s) or occupant(s) have been
convicted of a second or subsequent offense for violation of noise
ordinances or prior disorderly conduct ordinances of the City of
Bridgeton; or
B. An owner-occupied dwelling whose owner(s) or occupant(s) have been
convicted of a second or subsequent offense for public drunkenness on
or about the owner-occupied dwelling; or
C. An owner-occupied dwelling whose owner(s) or occupant(s) have been
convicted of a second or subsequent offense for disorderly persons
offense or criminal offense as defined by statute in or about the owneroccupied
dwelling; or
D. An owner-occupied dwelling whose owner(s) or occupant(s) have been
convicted for any drug or controlled substance(s) related offense in or
about the owner-occupied dwelling; or
§ 230-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 230-9
221:270
§ 230-10. Violations and penalties.
E. An owner-occupied dwelling whose owner(s) or occupant(s) have been
convicted for prostitution or solicitation for same in or about the owneroccupied
dwelling; or
F. An owner-occupied dwelling whose owner(s) or occupant(s) have been
convicted of a third or subsequent offense under under Chapter 265,
Article II, §§ 265-7 regarding debris, litter, trash, abandoned,
inoperable, untagged, illegally parked motor vehicles in or about the
owner-occupied dwelling.
G. An owner-occupied dwelling whose owner(s) or occupant(s) or guest(s)
have been responsible for persistent police reports of criminal activity
or dangerous activity. [Added 1-7-2014 by Ord. No. 13-11]
A. Any owner of a residential rental property which has been deemed a
nuisance house as set forth in this article shall be subject to the
following:
(1) Upon written notification, the owner of a residential rental
property that has been deemed by the Municipal Court to be a
nuisance house as set forth in this article shall take those actions
required by law to evict the tenants(s), occupant(s) or guest(s) from
that residential rental property. The landlord shall give notice of
such act with a copy of the complaint and date of hearing and shall
allow the City's representative to appear and testify therein.
(2) A landlord who refuses to take those actions required by law, after
30 days' written notice to evict the tenant(s), occupant(s) or
guest(s) from a residential rental property that has been deemed by
the Municipal Court to be a nuisance house as set forth in this
article or who fails to otherwise successfully correct said violations,
shall be subject to fines (pursuant N.J.S.A. 40:49-5) of not less than
$100 and not more than $1,250 and/or imprisonment in the county
jail for up to 90 days at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
Each day during which a failure to take action continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. Any owner of an owner-occupied dwelling which has been deemed a
nuisance house as set forth in this article shall be subject to the
following: Upon written notification, the owner-occupant of a
residential dwelling who fails to cease and desist from unlawful actions
or who fails to cause such unlawful actions to cease or who fails to
remediate violations as set forth in § 230-8 of this article shall be
subject to fines (pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5) of not less than $100 and
not more than $1,250 and/or imprisonment in the county jail for up to
90 days at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. Each day during
which a failure to take action continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 230-9 MOTORIZED VEHICLES § 230-11
221:271
§ 230-11. Notice.
Written notice of conviction of the offenses set forth under §§ 230-8 and
230-9 hereof shall be given to owners of residential rental properties and
owner-occupied dwellings by the City of Bridgeton Housing Department at
least 30 days prior to a complaint for violation of this article is issued.
§ 230-12. Board-up order.
In the event that the Municipal Court finds that a defendant charged with
violation of this article is maintaining a nuisance house which is creating
an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare, and such
defendant has failed to appear and respond to the summons or orders of
the Court, the Municipal Court may order that such house be boarded and
locked from human occupancy, and the costs thereof may be placed against
the real estate as a lien.
§ 230-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 230-12
221:272
Chapter 238
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Curfew — See Ch. 130.
Loitering by minors — See Ch. 251, § 251-9C.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 251.
Minors in pool halls — See Ch. 260, § 260-4.
§ 238-1. Supervision of minors required.
It shall be unlawful for any parent or legal guardian or other person having
the care, custody, or supervision of a minor child under 18 years of age to
fail to supervise such minor child.
§ 238-2. Determination of delinquency and parental offense.
A person commits the offense of failing to supervise a minor if the person
is a parent, legal guardian, or person with legal responsibility for the safety
and welfare of a child under 18 years of age and the child has been found on
private property or premises open to the public in violation of any ordinance
enacted by the City of Bridgeton or any law or statute of the State of New
Jersey or the United States of America.
§ 238-3. Offenses in the presence of guardian.
It shall be a defense to the offense of failure to supervise a minor if a child's
violation of the law occurred in the presence of the parent, guardian, or
other person having care, custody, and control over a minor. It shall be a
defense of failure to supervise a minor if a violation by the minor occurred
on private property owned by the parent, guardian, or other person having
the care, custody, and control of the minor.
§ 238-4. Restitution.
In addition to any fine or penalty imposed pursuant to this chapter, the
Court may order any parent, guardian, or other person having care, custody,
or control over the minor to pay restitution to a victim of a minor's conduct,
the amount of which shall be determined by the Court.
§ 238-5. Citation to parent.
If a minor below the age of 18 is in violation of any provision of the
ordinances of the City of Bridgeton, then in such event, any citation issued
pursuant to this chapter shall be issued to the parent, guardian, or other
person with responsibility for care, custody and control over such minor for
the violation of this chapter rather than to the offending minor.
§ 230-12 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 238-6
238:273
§ 238-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 242
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 242, Parking, comprised of Art. I, Parking Permits for
Municipally Owned Lots, adopted 8-21-1979 by Ord. No. 79-3, as
amended; Art. II, Parking of Tractor-Trailers, Trucks and Trailers,
adopted 10-17-2005 by Ord. No. 05-1; and Art. III, Parking Permits
for Residential Streets, adopted 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 07-30, was
repealed 4-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-06.]
Chapter 247
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Park and recreation fees — See § 149-25.
Games of chance — See Ch. 173.
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 251.
§ 238-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 238-6
238:274
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 247-1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED AGENT — Any City employee either specifically designated
by the Director of Recreation and Public Affairs, or by the nature of his or
her inherent job responsibilities (police and fire personnel) may enforce the
requirements of this chapter.
AUTHORIZED PERMIT — A document signed by the Director of Recreation
and Public Affairs authorizing the use of a park facility for a stated event, or
duration, or both; and for which the appropriate fee has been paid pursuant
to § 149-25.
DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR — For the purpose of this chapter, the Director
of Recreation and Public Affairs may also be referred to as the Department
Director.
PARK FACILITY / RESOURCE — Any recreational area, park, lake,
structure, or building under the direct responsibility of the Director of
Recreation and Public Affairs as expressed in Section § 3-22.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, limited-liability
company, partnership, trust or other legal entity.
PUBLIC LANDS — Lands and improvements owned or leased by the City of
Bridgeton including public alleys, highways, roads and streets.
SERVICE (ASSISTANCE) DOG — Any dog that has been trained to assist
its handler with a physical or psychiatric disability. These dogs can be
identified by tags, photo IDs, or other document types provided by
organizations such as the Service Dogs of America.
SPECIAL EVENT — An artistic, educational, recreational or social event
sponsored, cosponsored or authorized by the City of Bridgeton for the
benefit of the public at large which may or may not have a charge for
admission.
SUNRISE (SUNSET) — The time of day designated for sunrise (or sunset)
as specified in the weather section of the most local official newspaper for
the City of Bridgeton.
§ 247-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 247-1
238:275

ARTICLE II
Park and Facilities General Use Regulations
§ 247-2. Park hours; closing of parks or sections.
§ 247-3. General conduct of persons.
While using (or in) any park facility, all persons shall conduct themselves in
an orderly manner; and, in particular, no person shall:
A. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, park facilities will be
open to the public every day of the year from sunrise until sunset unless
written permission to the contrary has been granted by the Department
Director.
B. The use of the park facilities specified in § 149-25B shall first require an
authorized permit pursuant to Chapter 247, Article III.
C. At the discretion of the Department Director, the park facility's hours
may be modified and areas declared "closed to the public" as the
Director may find reasonably necessary.
A. Feed the wildlife in any park facility, with the exception of foods
specifically authorized by the Zoo Curator.
B. Taunt or tease, throw any rock, missile, or object of any kind at any
wildlife or zoo animal.
C. Climb any fencing within, or surrounding, the zoo.
D. With the exception of service dogs, no pets (dogs, cats, birds, reptiles,
etc.) are permitted in the zoo unless permitted in writing by the
Department Director.
E. Fail to produce or exhibit the authorized permit required for use of a
park facility when requested by an authorized agent.
F. Fail to comply with a direct request for compliance with any
requirement of this article from an authorized agent.
G. Possess, or consume, any alcoholic beverages in any park facility or
land, without the written approval of the Department Director. Proof of
the written approval must be available for inspection at all times while
in the park facilities.
H. Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be specified by an authorized agent. No person shall
drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or
cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within any park
facility or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous
thereto. In an emergency, or during dry spells, the authorized agent
may impose restrictions prohibiting the building of fires or use of any
spark- (or ember-) producing product in park facilities.
§ 247-2 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 247-3
238:277
I. Have in his or her possession, set off, or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks,
or explosive devices, or propel them into any area from any place.
J. Enter any area posted as "closed to the public," nor use, or abet the use
of, any area in violation of posted notices.
K. Expose, or offer for sale, any article (or thing), nor station (or place) any
stand, cart (or vehicle) for the transportation, sale (or display) of any
article or thing. At the discretion of the Department Director, a limited
exemption may be granted for existing duly licensed concessionaires
pursuant to § 247-19.
L. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private,
without the written approval of the Department Director.
M. Participate in or abet any game of chance, except as authorized by
Chapter 173, Games of Chance.
N. Go onto the ice on any of the park facility waters.
O. Sleep on seats or benches.
P. Engage in (or abet) any disorderly behavior or offensive language
(N.J.S.A. 2C:33-2).
Q. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party lawfully
occupying any area, or participating in any activity, under the authority
of an authorized permit.
R. Paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or
inscription whatsoever, nor erect or cause to be erected any sign:
(1) On, or within, any park facility.
(2) On any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park facility.
S. Enter into, loiter, or otherwise remain in any bath, or restroom, facility
which may be identified as reserved (by the Department Director) for
the use of the opposite sex. An exception is made for children less than
six years of age.
T. No person shall indecently expose their person, or dress or undress, on
any beach.
U. Smoking, or the use of any tobacco product, is prohibited in all seating
areas of all outdoor amphitheaters, stadiums, bleachers, and recreation
areas used by any spectators at sporting events and other public
events. Smoking, or the use of any tobacco product, is also prohibited
on all public playgrounds, athletic fields, and courts. In recreation areas
which are not part of the park system of the City of Bridgeton, smoking
cigarettes and other tobacco products shall be permitted so long as the
smoking is not conducted any closer than 25 feet from the border of any
recreational area, including but not limited to basketball courts, tennis
§ 247-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 247-3
238:278
§ 247-4. Vehicles and horses.
Unless authorized by the Department Director, no person shall:
§ 247-5. Bicycles, skateboards and roller skates.
§ 247-6. Injuring or removing park property.
No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with,
displace or remove any tree, plant, building, bridge, table, bench, fireplace,
railings, paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or
parts of appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments or others structures or equipment,
facilities or City property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal, in any public park, lake or recreational area.
courts, soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, and football fields.
Any person violating this provision shall be subject to the penalties as
provided in § 247-22 of the Code of the City of Bridgeton and as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Operate any vehicle (on-road, off-road, recreational, etc.) in any park
facility except on paved park roads.
B. Park on areas not specifically designated as parking areas.
C. Leave a vehicle standing or parked in any park facility between sunset
and sunrise.
D. Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails. Where permitted,
horses shall be thoroughly broken, properly restrained, and ridden with
due care and shall not be allowed to graze, go unattended, nor shall
they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
A. All bicycles, skateboards, and roller skates shall be operated in
accordance with Title 39 of the Motor Vehicle and Traffic Regulation
laws (N.J.S.A. 39:4 et seq.).
B. Skateboarding and roller-skating shall be confined to those areas
specifically designated for such activities.
C. With the exception of walked bicycles, no bicycles, skateboards, or
roller skates are permitted to be ridden or otherwise operated inside
the zoo perimeter fence.
D. No person shall:
(1) Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when provided
and there is space available.
(2) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set bicycles
against trees or in any place or position where other persons may
trip over or be injured by them.
§ 247-3 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 247-7
238:279
§ 247-7. Picnic area regulations.
In addition to the requirements of § 247-2, the following regulations apply
to the use of park facility picnic areas:
§ 247-8. Maintenance of sanitary facilities.
All persons using or within park facilities shall maintain restrooms and
washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. The Department Director is
A. Only places designated as picnic or lunch areas may be used for that
purpose.
B. Authorized agents have the authority to regulate activities in picnic and
lunch areas when necessary to prevent congestion, and to secure the
maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. All persons shall
comply with any directions given to achieve these objectives.
C. Unless reserved by permit, the use of individual fireplaces, tables, and
benches is on a "first come, first served" basis.
D. Using park facilities for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion
of other persons, or for an unreasonable time is not permitted.
E. Before leaving a picnic or lunch area, all fires shall be completely
extinguished, and all trash, garbage, and similar refuse that is present,
or may have accumulated, shall be placed in disposal receptacles,
where provided. When no such trash receptacles are available, said
trash, garbage, and refuse shall be carried away from the park area by
the picnicker, to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
F. Unless authorized in writing by the Department Director, the following
activities shall not be permitted:
(1) Erecting tents, shacks, movable structures, or any other temporary
shelters for any purpose.
(2) Run, or string, water, electric, or sewer service into, upon, or
across park facilities.
(3) Set up or erect any special vehicle that could be used for such
purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or the
like to remain overnight.
(4) The playing of rough (or comparatively dangerous) games, such as
football, or baseball not on designated fields and courts. In their
discretion, authorized agents may assess the degree of roughness
or danger of any game.
(5) The playing of any games involving thrown (or otherwise propelled)
objects, such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins, or model airplanes,
except in designated areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
(6) The use of devices or products that generate or contain a flame.
§ 247-7 BRIDGETON CODE § 247-8
238:280
hereby authorized to establish rules and regulations for the control of all
park facility restrooms and washrooms within the City.
§ 247-9. Littering waters or lands.
§ 247-10. Fishing.
§ 247-11. Boating regulations.
The Department Director may designate by regulation areas available in
City waters for boating purposes, provided that:
A. No person may throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into such water any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may alter the natural color or chemistry, or
otherwise pollute such waters.
B. The following acts are considered littering. Violators shall be subject to
the penalties specified in § 203-20:
(1) Dumping, depositing or leaving bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper,
boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash
in or upon any park facility, lake, or body of water within the City.
(2) Casting or throwing debris upon any ice which may form within
park facilities.
C. No refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any
park facility, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be
placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided. Where
receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried
away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and
properly disposed of elsewhere.
A. All lakes and lake areas within the City shall be available to the public
for lawful fishing as may be permitted by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Fish and Wildlife, provided that
those persons who utilize said areas for fishing shall have, and properly
display, any and all valid licenses.
B. Whenever it is deemed necessary for the conservation (or preservation)
of fish, or any other reasonable cause in which the best interest of the
City is in any manner involved, fishing privileges may be amended by an
approved City Council resolution.
A. Only canoes, kayaks, or boats using electric motors may be operated in
any such designated areas.
B. Motorized canoes and boats have a valid New Jersey Department of
Motor Vehicles (DMV) registration.
§ 247-8 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 247-11
238:281
§ 247-12. Hunting and trapping; possession of firearms.
Within, or while on, park facilities, no person may:
§ 247-13. Authority of Department Director.
The Department Director and any authorized agent:
C. Operators of motorized canoes and boats shall be in possession of a
New Jersey Boating Safety Certificate.
D. Nonmotorized canoes and kayaks are not required to be registered with
the NJ DMV.
A. Hunt, trap, throw stones or other projectiles at or pursue wildlife at any
time.
B. Use, carry or possess firearms of any description, nor air rifles, spring
guns, bow and arrows, slings, or any other forms of weapons potentially
dangerous, injurious or harmful to wildlife or human safety.
C. Use any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or
any kind of trapping device.
D. Shoot, or otherwise propel projectiles into park areas from beyond park
facility boundaries.
E. No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease,
shoot or otherwise propel projectiles at any wildlife, or remove or have
in his possession the young of any wildlife or their eggs or nest.
F. Kill on sight any snakes or other reptiles, unless they are known to be
deadly poisonous.
A. May enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Shall have the authority to eject from the park any person in violation of
this chapter.
C. Shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing, or
device used in the park in violation of this chapter.
§ 247-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 247-13
238:282
ARTICLE III
Fees and Permits
§ 247-14. Fees.
Fees shall be collected pursuant to § 3-22E for the following activities
and services. The amount of each fee is set forth in § 149-25, Park and
recreation fees.
§ 247-15. Fee waiver.
At the discretion of the Mayor, or Business Administrator, the fees described
in § 247-14 may be waived for organizations that have been recommended
by the Department Director.
§ 247-16. Bus permits required.
A. Park event fee for the issuance of a permit for special events pursuant
to Article IV held on, or within, park facilities.
B. Facility use fee for the use of various park facilities such as fields,
structures, and picnic areas for organized activities.
C. Equipment use fee for the use of items such as tents, picnic tables,
stages, canoes, kayaks, etc. [Amended 6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 17-12;
9-5-2017 by Ord. No. 17-18]
D. Light fee for the use of lights on sporting fields.
E. Parking and access fees:
(1) Buses: a fee paid by any bus (or minibus) transporting persons into
park facilities, with the exception that parking and access fees shall
not be charged to any bus or minibus transporting:
(a) Cumberland County residents into park facilities.
(b) Persons who are participating in athletic events within park
facilities.
(c) Senior citizens to park facilities.
(2) (Reserved)
F. Special event fees specified in § 149-25 and 25% of any estimated
support labor and associated equipment costs shall be paid 14 calendar
days prior to the scheduled special event.
A. A permit is required for all buses (or minibuses) transporting persons
into park facilities.
B. Permit applications are obtained from, and approved by, the
Department Director, or his or her designee.
§ 247-14 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 247-16
238:283
§ 247-17. Bus permit application.
The Department Director shall specify the information required by the bus
permit application, which may include the following information:
§ 247-18. Liability of permit holder; revocation of permit.
C. Applications shall be secured in advance; permits shall not be issued on
Saturdays, Sundays or holidays.
A. Name and address of the organization.
B. Name of the person responsible for the organization using park
facilities.
C. Description of the bus transporting persons to park facilities, including
the name of registered owner, the year, make, model and color of the
bus.
D. Number of persons on the bus.
E. Length of time that the bus and its passengers will remain in the park
facilities.
F. Purpose for which passengers on the bus will use the park facilities.
G. Amount of the fee to be paid by the organization.
A. A permit holder shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in such
permit.
B. The person or persons to whom a permit is issued shall be liable for any
loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of
the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit shall have
been issued.
C. The Department Director shall have the authority to revoke a permit
upon a finding of violation of any of the provision of this chapter.
§ 247-16 BRIDGETON CODE § 247-18
238:284
ARTICLE IV
Special Events
§ 247-19. Special event permits.
Permits for special events in park facilities shall be obtained by application
to the Department Director in accordance with the following procedure:
§ 247-20. Exemptions and waivers.
A. Application. A person seeking a permit hereunder shall file a letter of
intended use with the Department Director; whose content may require
such information as the Department Director shall find necessary to
make a fair determination as to whether a permit may be issued. The
letter's content will include (but is not limited to):
(1) The name and address of the applicant, and person sponsoring the
activity, if any.
(2) The date, time, and duration for which the permit is desired.
(3) The park facilities requested for the event, and an estimate of the
anticipated attendance.
(4) Proof of insurance, health certificate(s), sanitary facilities, ADA
plan.
(5) Need for supporting services such as police, EMS, utilities, etc.
B. Standards for issuance. The Department Director shall issue a permit
hereunder when it is determined that the facilities desired have not
been reserved for other use at the day and hour requested in the
application, and that the proposed activity (or use) will not:
(1) Unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the park.
(2) Unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of
public health, welfare, safety and recreation.
(3) Be reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly
conduct.
A. The following special events are exempt from the payment of the fee for
a special event permit:
(1) Events sponsored solely or in part by the City of Bridgeton.
(2) Events sponsored or cosponsored by a local nonprofit organization
held for the benefit of the Bridgeton residents at large which is
open to the public free of charge, and where no beverages, food,
goods or services are sold by vendors sponsored by the local
nonprofit organization in accordance with § 247-15. A spirit parade
§ 247-19 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 247-20
238:285
and rally sponsored by the Bridgeton Board of Education is an
example of this type of event.
B. Whenever the local nonprofit organization desires to sponsor vendors
for beverages, food, goods or services for the special event, the
vendor's permit fees required by § 149-26 of the Municipal Code may be
waived in accordance with § 247-15.
C. Whenever a local nonprofit organization's event requires a road
closure, the governing body may authorize the closure in a resolution
for the special event.
§ 247-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 247-20
238:286
ARTICLE V
Violations and Penalties
§ 247-21. Enforcement.
§ 247-22. Disciplinary action appeal process.
The Department Director may take disciplinary action to restrict, ban, or
otherwise limit a person, group, business, or organization's use or access to
park facilities. Those affected by such limitations have the right to appeal
that action as follows:
A. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a violation
and shall be enforced by any of the following personnel:
(1) The Department Director.
(2) Any person so designated by the Department Director.
(3) Any member of the Police or Fire Department.
B. Nothing contained within this chapter shall prohibit the enforcement of
any other chapter of the Municipal Code of the City of Bridgeton.
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., a "zero tolerance" policy shall be
enforced for all activities (league play, park permits, and special events,
etc.) conducted in all park facilities.
D. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty.
A. Within 10 days of the date of any disciplinary action imposed by the
Department Director, the affected group (or individual) shall submit a
letter to the Business Administrator clearly stating the reason(s) why
the affected party believes the imposed restriction should not continue,
or be mitigated.
B. The Business Administrator shall forward a copy of the appeal letter to
the Department Director as notification that certain disciplinary action
imposed is being appealed.
C. The Business Administrator shall schedule a de novo appeal hearing
with a designated three-person hearing committee composed of the
Business Administrator, Chief of Police, and City Council member as
directed by the Council President. The Mayor is an alternate to the
committee. The appeal hearing shall be scheduled within 10 working
days of receipt of the appeal by the Business Administrator.
D. At the hearing any person who is a City resident, taxpayer, or has firsthand
knowledge of the circumstances germane to the disciplinary
action may appear in person to testify in support of (or in opposition to)
the disciplinary action being appealed.
§ 247-21 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 247-22
238:287
E. The decision of the hearing committee is final and shall be retained by
the Department Director.
§ 247-22 BRIDGETON CODE § 247-22
238:288
Chapter 251
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 77.
Curfew for minors — See Ch. 130.
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Noise — See Ch. 226.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 238.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 247.
Pool halls and billiard parlors — See Ch. 260.
Smoking — See Ch. 294.
§ 251-1. Definitions.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:49
CITY — The City of Bridgeton.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Safety.
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location and shall
include the concepts of sleeping or protractedly lounge on seats,
benches, or other areas; spending time idly; being dilatory; lingering,
standing around, or engaging in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive,
insulting or indecent language; or engaging in any disorderly conduct
or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
PARENT OR GUARDIAN — Includes any adult person having care or
custody of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order
of any court or otherwise.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access and shall
include any street, highway, road, alley, boardwalk or sidewalk. It shall
also include the front or the neighborhood of any store, shop,
restaurant, tavern or other place of business, and public grounds, areas
and parks, as well as parking lots or other vacant private property not
owned by or under the control of the person charged with violating this
section or, in the case of a minor, not owned or under the control of his
parent or guardian.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 247-22 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 251-2
238:289
§ 251-2. Buildings and property; trees and shrubbery.
No person in a public place shall:
§ 251-3. Pollution of waters; refuse and trash.
No person in a public place shall:
A. With respect to buildings and other property:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, or displace or
remove, any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving or paving material, waterlines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards whether
temporary or permanent monuments, stakes, posts, or other
boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or
public property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
(2) Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition.
(3) Dig, or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any
soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down-timber or other
wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment,
blasting, or other means or agency.
B. With respect to trees, shrubbery, lawns:
(1) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, nor
shall any person attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any
tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass
areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or
usefulness of any area.
(2) Climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
fountains, railings, fences or gun carriages or upon any other
property not designated or customarily used for such purposes, or
improperly lounge or sit on any bench.
A. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in
or adjacent to any public place or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or
drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or
solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
B. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or
refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any public place or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where
these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all such
§ 251-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 251-3
238:290
§ 251-4. Alcoholic beverages.
No person in a public place shall:
§ 251-5. Fireworks and explosives. [Amended 5-2-2017 by Ord. No.
17-05]
No person in a public place shall bring, or have in his possession, or set
off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecrackers,
torpedo, rocket, or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material,
or discharge them or throw them into any such area from land or highway
adjacent thereto without a permit issued by the City of Bridgeton Fire
Official in accordance with the New Jersey State Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1
et seq.). This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture, or
article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would be
dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints.
§ 251-6. Fires and flammable material.
No person in a public place shall build or attempt to build a fire except
in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Director. No person shall drop, throw, or otherwise scatter lighted matches,
burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material,
within any public place area or on any highway, road or street abutting or
contiguous thereto.
§ 251-7. Closed areas.
No person in a public place shall enter an area posted as "Closed to the
Public," nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation of
posted notices.
rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the public place by the
person responsible for its presence, and properly disposed of
elsewhere.
A. Drink alcoholic beverages at any time in a public place.50
A. Applications to permit the use, display, or possession of fireworks or
pyrotechnics in the City of Bridgeton shall be made to the City of
Bridgeton Fire Prevention Bureau and approved in accordance with the
New Jersey State Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70-1 et seq.).
B. All public display applications shall also comply with N.J.S.A. 21:3-1 et
seq. regarding fireworks and explosives such that City Council adopts a
resolution prior to the scheduled use of the fireworks display.
50.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, prohibiting a person from being under the influence
of intoxicating liquor in a public place, which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 9-16-2008 by Ord. No. 08-8.
§ 251-3 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 251-8
238:291
§ 251-8. Going onto ice.
No person in a public place shall go onto the ice on any of the waters except
such areas as are designated as skating fields, and provided a safety signal
is displayed.
§ 251-9. Loitering.
§ 251-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall in the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court be
punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. Each day
such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle either alone and/or in consort with others in a public place
in such manner so as to:
(1) Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending
to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians.
(2) Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto.
B. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in Subsection A herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer
shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions
and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey
such orders shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
C. Loitering by minors. No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of
18 years shall knowingly permit that minor to loiter in violation of this
section. Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with
a violation of this section, his parent or guardian shall be notified of this
fact by the Chief of Police or any other person designated by him to give
such notice. If at any time within 30 days following giving of notice, the
minor to whom such notice relates again violates this section, it shall be
presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the minor did
so with the knowledge and permission of his parent or guardian.
[Added 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
§ 251-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 251-10
238:292
Chapter 254
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Peddling and soliciting fees — See Ch. 149,
Art. II.
Licensing — See Ch. 200.
§ 251-10 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 251-10
238:293

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 254-1. General interpretation.
§ 254-2. License required.
All peddlers, solicitors, and canvassers within the City of Bridgeton shall
be required to apply for and obtain a peddler or solicitor license (as
appropriate) pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 254-3. License fee.
§ 254-4. License/badge display.
All peddlers shall be required to conspicuously display their license on their
vehicle or cart. Solicitors and canvassers shall wear their badges constantly
and conspicuously on the front of their outer garment.
§ 254-5. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police, code enforcement, or zoning officer of the
City of Bridgeton to require any person seen within the city limits peddling,
soliciting, or canvassing who is not properly displaying the required
identification to produce their license, and otherwise enforce the provisions
of this chapter for anyone found to be violating the same.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the terms listed in § 254-6 shall have
the meanings as defined. Words not therein shall have the meanings
given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following rules of interpretation
shall apply:
(1) Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(2) Words in the singular case include the plural case, and vice versa.
(3) The term "such as" shall be considered as introducing a typical or
illustrative list of items, and shall not be interpreted as constituting
a complete list.
A. The applicable license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 149, Article II,
§ 149-26. Unless specifically described elsewhere in this chapter, no
portion of the fee shall be prorated for any part of the year. Fees are
payable upon the filing of an application for the issuance (or renewal) of
a license.
B. Providing the applicant's license is not revoked, the application fee (less
$50 for processing costs) will be refunded whenever a license is denied.
§ 254-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 254-6
238:295
§ 254-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSING — The act of conducting non-sales-related survey or poll
(traveling from one location to another), obtaining information from the
public for various purposes such a political poll, property assessments,
residential or animal censuses, etc.
CHARITABLE/PHILANTHROPIC — Terms used to describe organizations,
associations, and societies that are patriotic, religious, benevolent,
educational, civic, or fraternal.
CONTRIBUTION — A contribution is the uncompensated act of giving
something such as property, products, or money.
PEDDLER (HAWKER/HUCKSTER) — Types of vendors who sell products to
the public, on streets, or from door-to-door. They typically carry or transport
their products from one location to another and do not sell them at a fixed
place of business that pays real property taxes.
PERSON — The term "person" shall include organizations such as a firm,
partnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class or league.
PRODUCT — Anything that can be offered to anyone that might satisfy a
want or need, such as food, beverages, services, supplies, etc.
PROPERTY — Something owned; a possession whether tangible or
intangible to which its owner has legal title.
SERVICE — An act or any variety of work such as yard cleanup, driveway
seal coating, etc., performed for others in return for some form of
compensation, typically monetary.
SOLICITATION — The act of making a request (directly or indirectly) for
something of value, such as money, property, financial assistance, future
business, etc.
SOLICITOR — Someone who travels from one location to another seeking to
take orders for the sale of products or personal property of any nature for
future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future,
whether or not the individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of
the subject of the sale, and whether or not he accepts an advance payment
for the goods.
SPECIAL EVENT — One so declared by the Mayor, Business Administrator,
or the Director of Recreation and Public Affairs.
VENDOR — Anyone who transfers property, products, or services by sale or
barter.
WEEKEND PEDDLER LICENSE — A weekend peddler license shall be valid
on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday only.
§ 254-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 254-6
238:296
WEEKLY PEDDLER LICENSE — A weekly peddler license shall be valid on
any day of the week.
§ 254-6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 254-6
238:297

ARTICLE II
Peddlers
§ 254-7. Peddler license.
§ 254-8. Application information.
§ 254-9. Peddler operational restrictions; special event peddler
license.
A. Individual registration for each person engaged in the business of being
a peddler within the City of Bridgeton is required. Licenses shall not be
transferred from one operator to another.
B. An individual applying for a peddler license shall request either a
weekend peddler license or a weekly peddler license in the application.
C. With the exception of special events, only motorized peddling vehicles
shall be allowed to conduct business within the City of Bridgeton.
Special event licenses are subject to the additional restrictions of
§ 254-9H.
D. The holder of a peddler's license shall be entitled to operate a peddling
vehicle for the calendar year in which it is issued subject to the
inspection requirements of § 254-10.
E. The Mayor shall grant or deny peddler license applications. If the
application is approved, the Municipal Clerk shall issue the license.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
F. Applications that are denied may be appealed by the applicant to the
City Council provided that the request for appeal is filed with the
Municipal Clerk within seven calendar days of the denial date. A
notification stating the basis for the denial decision shall be sent to the
applicant. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
G. With the exception of special event peddler licenses, licenses shall be
renewed yearly, beginning January 1. Licenses shall expire on
December 31 of the calendar year issued.
A. Applications for a peddler license shall be made to the Municipal Clerk
on forms approved by the Business Administrator. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
B. As necessary for the protection of the public, the application will be
referred to the Chief of Police or his designee, to conduct a background
investigation into the applicant's business responsibility, moral
character and ability to properly conduct a peddler business.
C. Supplemental information pursuant to § 254-10 shall be required for all
vehicles and food product peddlers.
§ 254-7 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 254-9
238:299
A. No peddler shall operate in City of Bridgeton before 6:00 a.m. or after
9:00 p.m. These time limits shall apply throughout the calendar year.
B. No peddler shall operate in the Central Business District (CBD), defined
as encompassing Broad Street (Route 49) to the south, North Pearl
Street (Highway 77) to the east, Washington Street to the north and
Atlantic Street/City Park to the west.
C. No peddler shall operate within 250 feet of any existing store within the
area permitted herein.
D. No peddler shall have an exclusive right to any area or location, nor
shall be permitted to operate in any congested area where their
operations might impede or inconvenience the public. The judgment of
a police officer, code enforcement officer, or zoning officer exercised in
good faith shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is
congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced.
E. Peddlers shall not stay at any one location for longer than 15 minutes
between sales but must continue moving (at least 200 feet from a prior
location) from street to street, except with the express written
permission of the property owner having been previously obtained and
available for enforcement officers to view.
F. Peddler's vehicles (or conveyances) shall not be connected to any utility
service.
G. No person shall conduct any commercial business in the City Park or
recreation areas without prior written approval of the Director of
Recreation and Public Affairs.
H. When a special event is declared, applicants may apply for a special
event peddler's license. This license allows a peddler on foot (or in an
approved vehicle) to operate only on the days, times, and at the
location(s) specified on the license.
(1) A special event may be sponsored by an organization recognized by
the City of Bridgeton.
(2) The special event sponsor will file an application with the Municipal
Clerk and provide a certificate of insurance indemnifying the City
of Bridgeton against all claims and naming the City of Bridgeton as
an additional insured on the certificate of insurance for the special
event. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(3) The special event sponsor may request that the Mayor, Business
Administrator, or Director of Recreation and Public Affairs waive
peddler license fees for additional peddlers/vendors supporting the
special event.
(4) Special event food vendors are required to comply with
Cumberland County Health Department requirements and submit
§ 254-9 BRIDGETON CODE § 254-9
238:300
§ 254-10. Inspection of equipment.
§ 254-11. Exclusions.
This article shall not be construed to include:
appropriate approvals to the special event sponsor or Municipal
Clerk as appropriate. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(5) The Municipal Clerk will issue the peddler license upon receipt of
all approvals to the special event sponsor or the peddler as
appropriate. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
A. The equipment used or employed by food product peddlers (such as ice
cream, beverages, confections, etc.) shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary manner and is subject to the licensing and inspection of the
Cumberland County Health Officer or his authorized agent. Any
violation found and not immediately corrected shall be grounds for
revocation of the peddler's license (§ 254-22).
B. Any vehicle used by peddlers shall be licensed and insured with proper
verification provided upon application and as may be reasonably
requested thereafter. The applicant shall provide verification of
insurance coverage for a commercial motor vehicle of no less than the
minimum required by law as well as commercial general liability
insurance of no less than $1,000,000, and such insurance shall name
the City of Bridgeton as an additional insured.
A. The delivery of milk, eggs, bread, newspapers or such other necessary
and perishable articles of food or merchandise of the type commonly
delivered on a house-to-house basis at intervals of less than one week.
B. Any veteran or volunteer fireman who holds a special license issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be exempt from application for a
license, but shall be required to comply with all other applicable
sections of this article.
§ 254-9 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 254-11
238:301

ARTICLE III
Solicitors and Canvassers
§ 254-12. Solicitor/canvasser license.
§ 254-13. Application information.
§ 254-14. Time restrictions.
No soliciting or canvassing activities shall be conducted before 9:00 a.m. or
later than 7:00 p.m., or on Sundays or holidays.
§ 254-15. Exceptions.
With the exception of the provisions of § 254-14, this article shall not apply
to any:
A. Individual registration for each person engaged in the business of being
a solicitor or canvasser within the corporate limits of the City of
Bridgeton is required. Licenses shall not be transferred from one
person to another.
B. The Mayor shall grant or deny solicitor/canvasser license applications.
If the application is approved, the Municipal Clerk shall issue the
license. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
C. Along with license, the Clerk shall issue a badge on which shall appear
the words "Licensed Solicitor [or Canvasser]", the period for which the
license is valid, and the license number in letters and figures easily
discernible from a distance of five feet.
D. Applications that are denied may be appealed by the applicant to the
City Council provided that the request for appeal is filed with the
Municipal Clerk within seven calendar days of the denial date. A
notification stating the basis for the denial decision shall be sent to the
applicant stating the reasons for such disapproval. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
E. Licenses shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year issued.
A. Applications for a solicitor/canvasser license shall be made to the
Municipal Clerk on forms approved by the Business Administrator.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
B. As necessary for the protection of the public, the application will be
referred to the Chief of Police or his designee, to conduct a background
investigation into the applicant's criminal background and moral
character.
A. Person who has obtained a charitable solicitor's permit in accordance
with Article IV of this chapter.
§ 254-12 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 254-15
238:303
B. Person distributing political literature on behalf of a candidate for
public office.
C. Census taker or individuals conducting polls or surveys pursuant to
federal, state or local laws.
§ 254-15 BRIDGETON CODE § 254-15
238:304
ARTICLE IV
Charitable Solicitations
§ 254-16. Permit required.
§ 254-17. Written receipts required.
§ 254-18. Time restrictions.
No soliciting or canvassing activities shall be conducted before 10:00 a.m.
or later than 7:00 p.m., or on Sundays or federally recognized holidays.
§ 254-19. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to solicitations made within
the physical property boundaries of a legally established charitable or
philanthropic organization not operated for the pecuniary profit, such as an
offering during a church service or function.
§ 254-20. Calendar of solicitations.
A. Although the licensing provisions of Article III of this chapter apply to
individuals seeking charitable and philanthropic solicitations, there
shall be no fee payable to the City of Bridgeton.
B. Any investigation ordered pursuant to the provisions of § 254-13B shall
include a determination that the applicant is authorized to represent a
bona fide charitable or philanthropic organization.
C. No permit may grant the right to solicit charitable or philanthropic
contributions for a period longer than 30 consecutive days.
A. Any charitable solicitor receiving property or any other thing of value
from a contributor pursuant to this article shall provide the contributor
a written receipt signed by the solicitor listing the organization's name,
date, and the amount received (or fair value determined).
B. Where it is impractical to determine the amount (or fair value) of each
contribution, a receipt shall be not required, such as for closed box
contributions, items from collection receptacles, etc.
A. The Municipal Clerk shall be responsible to keep a calendar of
approved solicitations to be conducted within the City of Bridgeton.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
B. The Mayor shall have the right to propose alternate dates for a
solicitation whenever the requested dates conflict with other
solicitations being conducted within the City of Bridgeton.
§ 254-16 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 254-20
238:305

ARTICLE V
Violations, Penalties, Revocation
§ 254-21. Violations and penalties.
§ 254-22. Revocation of license.
A. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a violation.
B. Except as otherwise specifically provided within this chapter, any
person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to
pay a fine as follows, and may also be subject to the provisions of
§ 254-22:
(1) Violations of Article II (Peddlers), § 254-2, or § 254-4: $75 for a first
offense, $125 for a second offense and $250 for a third (or
subsequent) offense.
(2) Violations of Article III (Solicitors/Canvassers): $75 for a first
offense, $125 for a second offense and $250 for a third (or
subsequent) offense.
(3) Violations of Article IV (Charitable Solicitations): $75 for a first
offense, $125 for a second offense and $250 for a third (or
subsequent) offense.
C. If the applicant purposely misstates the facts on the application, the
applicant shall be deemed to have violated this chapter and the
maximum penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any misstatement
on the application is purposeful.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Mayor, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation, or a materially incorrect statement
made in the course of carrying on business under this chapter, or
contained in the application for a license;
(2) Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor;
(3) Conducting of business under this article in an unlawful manner or
in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to
constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public.
B. A peddler whose license has been revoked may appeal the revocation to
the City Council by submitting a letter to the Municipal Clerk stating
the reason(s) why the license should not have been revoked. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
C. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license before City Council
shall be given by the Municipal Clerk, in writing, setting forth
§ 254-21 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 254-22
238:307
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee
at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for
hearing, or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner
as a summons, at least three days prior to the date set for the hearing.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
D. City Council shall provide written notification of their decision on the
appeal to the appellant within 30 calendar days of the date of the appeal
hearing.
§ 254-22 BRIDGETON CODE § 254-22
238:308
Chapter 260
POOL HALLS AND BILLIARD PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Curfew for minors — See Ch. 130.
Pool hall fees — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
§ 260-1. License required.
No person shall operate a pool or billiard parlor in the City of Bridgeton
without having first obtained a license and paid the required fee.
§ 260-2. Fee.
The license fee for pool and billiard parlors shall be as set forth in Chapter
149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees. The application for license shall state
the number of tables which will be used.
§ 260-3. Exceptions.
§ 260-4. Regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to all licensed pool and billiard
parlors:
A. This chapter shall not apply to a pool or billiard table in a private
residence used solely by the occupants of the house and their guests.
B. This chapter shall not apply to a bona fide social club, golf club,
religious, charitable, benevolent, fraternal or other nonprofit
organization having a membership in excess of 25 which has pool or
billiard tables solely for the recreation and amusement of its members,
provided that the organization files with the Municipal Clerk on a form
provided by him a claim for exemption and a statement of the facts
upon which the claim is based. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No.
17-20]
A. Hours of operation. The hours of operation of pool and billiard parlors
shall be until 12:00 midnight on weekdays and Saturdays. From May 1
through September 30, hours shall be until 1:00 a.m., except Saturdays.
B. Minors. No person under the age of 16 years shall be permitted to
remain in any licensed premises after 10:00 p.m.
C. Card playing. No card playing shall be permitted on premises licensed
under this chapter even if card playing is for social purposes.
§ 254-22 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 260-4
238:309
§ 260-5. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license issued hereunder may be suspended by the City Council
pursuant to § 200-9; provided, however, that a second violation shall subject
the licensee to a mandatory suspension of his license for a period of 30 days
and a conviction for a third offense shall automatically revoke the license.
§ 260-6. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 265
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 103.
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Nuisances — See Ch. 230.
Rental property — See Ch. 277.
Solid waste — See Ch. 300.
Storage of tires — See Ch. 328.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 347.
D. Outside view of premises. All premises where pool and billiards are
played shall be so arranged and so lighted that a full view of the interior
may be had from an adjacent public thoroughfare or from adjacent
rooms to which the public is admitted at all hours.
§ 260-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 260-6
238:310
ARTICLE I
Boarded-Up Structures
[Adopted 5-19-1992 by Ord. No. 91-20]
§ 265-1. Applicability.
The following standards shall apply whenever a structure or premises is
secured or boarded up as a result of an order by the Construction Official of
the City of Bridgeton or otherwise. To secure or board up a structure means
to cover the door or doors, windows or other openings to prevent entry and
to secure said structure or premises against such entry.
§ 265-2. Standards.
Any such boarding up and securing of premises shall be done in a
professional and workmanlike manner with consideration given to the
following:
§ 265-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Quality and condition of material;
B. Conformance of material to size of area to be covered;
C. Method of securing; and
D. Color.
(1) Any material used for boarding up or securing of premises shall be
painted in such a way as to be compatible with the existing color
scheme of the structure or premises; and
(2) When the structure to be secured or boarded up is within the limits
of the Historic District, the Historic District Officer shall approve of
the color and materials used.
§ 265-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-3
238:311

ARTICLE II
Property Maintenance Code
[Adopted 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 94-19]
§ 265-4. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 9-19-2017
by Ord. No. 17-20]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Municipal Clerk, being marked and designated as the "BOCA National
Property Maintenance Code, Fourth Edition, 1993" as published by the
Building Officials and Code Administrators International, Inc., be and is
hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Bridgeton;
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each
and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said BOCA National Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the
additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any prescribed in this article.
§ 265-5. Status of prior ordinances.
Ordinance No. 89-27 or any other ordinance adopting a prior BOCA
National Existing Structures Code or a prior Property Maintenance Code
is hereby amended so that only the BOCA National Property Maintenance
Code, Fourth Edition, 1993, as amended herein is utilized by the City of
Bridgeton.
§ 265-6. Amendments. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
The BOCA National Property Maintenance Code is amended and revised in
the following respects:
SECTION PM-101.0 GENERAL
PM-101.5 Existing remedies: The provisions in this code shall not be
construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its
officer or agencies relating to the repair, removal or demolition of any
structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
PM-101.8 Application of City of Bridgeton Ordinance No. 83-21:
Any structure within the boundaries of the Bridgeton National Register
Historic District shall comply with the provisions of Article VI, Historic
District, of Chapter 370, Zoning, and any amendments thereto. If any
conflict in any section, paragraph, sentence or clause of this article shall
be in conflict with Article VI of Chapter 370, then provisions of Article VI
of Chapter 370 shall control.
SECTION PM-105.0 DUTIES AND POWERS OF CODE OFFICIALS
PM-105.2 General: The code officials shall enforce all of the provisions
of this code. The officials authorized to enforce the provisions of this
code are the Division of Housing and Code Inspections Supervisor or
designees and the Construction Code Official or designees.
§ 265-4 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-6
238:313
PM-105.8 Organization: The code official shall appoint such number
of officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall
be necessary for the administration of this code. The code official may
delegate any of his functions and powers under this code to such officers,
technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as he may
designate, including the designation of an employee as deputy who shall
exercise all the powers of the code official during the temporary absence
or disability of the code official.
SECTION PM-106.0 VIOLATIONS
PM-106.2 Penalties:
PM-106.2.1 Fines: Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
PM-106.2.2 Liens: The City Council of the City of Bridgeton, by
resolution, may abate a nuisance, correct a defect, or put the
premises in proper condition so as to comply with this code or any
other municipal ordinance, or state law applicable hereto, at the
cost of an owner or a person who lets for occupancy, and expend
municipal funds for such purpose and charge the same against the
real estate affected, and the amount thereof as determined by the
governing body shall be a municipal lien against the real estate
affected and may be collected as any other municipal lien or by an
action instituted at law. Liens may also be placed on real property
and collected as any other municipal lien for costs incurred by
the City in condemning, making emergency repairs or demolishing
building or structures.
SECTION PM-107.0 NOTICES AND ORDERS [Amended 8-21-2000 by
Ord. No. 00-5; 4-1-2008 by Ord. No. 07-34]
PM-107.1. Notice to owner or person or persons responsible:
Except with respect to overcrowding violations or violations of Chapter
203 of the Municipal Code, neither of which shall require prior notice,
whenever the Director or the Director's representative determines that
there has been a violation of this article or has grounds to believe that
a violation has occurred, notice of the alleged violation shall be given to
the owner, occupant or the person or persons responsible therefor in the
manner described hereafter.
PM-107.2 Form: Such notice prescribed in Section PM-107.1 shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires;
(4) Be served upon the following persons:
§ 265-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-6
238:314
(a) The record title owner as listed in the office of the Tax
Assessor; or
(b) The assessed owner as listed in the office of the Tax
Collector; or
(c) The occupants.
PM-107.3 Method of Service:A notice of violation shall be deemed to
be properly served if a copy thereof is delivered personally to the owner,
occupant or person responsible or sent by regular mail to the owner,
occupant or person responsible at their last known address. Service
shall be effective unless the notice is returned by postal service marked,
"moved," "unable to forward," "address unknown," or any other reason
to believe that service was not effected. If the notice is returned as not
delivered, service shall be effectuated by posting a copy of the notice
of violation in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by
such notice.
Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent
or upon the person responsible for the violations shall constitute service
of notice upon the owner.
SECTION PM-108.0 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT
PM-108.1 General: When a structure or equipment is found by the
code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human
occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned
pursuant to the provisions of this code.
This section is an additional remedy and does not impair or abolish
existing remedies for repair, removal or demolition of buildings
under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 et seq., as amended, or any other state law
and Chapter 103, Buildings, Unfit, of the Code of the City of
Bridgeton, as amended.
PM-108.1.5 Costs as a lien: Whenever the code official has condemned
a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section and the
owner fails to repair, alter, improve, close or board, then the code official
may cause the repair, alteration, improvement, closing or boarding to
be made and place a lien on the real property for the costs of same,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 et seq., as amended or any other state law
and Chapter 103 of the Code of the City of Bridgeton, as amended.
PM-108.3.1 Notice for placement of lien: Whenever the code official
has condemned a structure or equipment under provisions of this section
and seeks to place a lien on the property pursuant to PM-108.1.5, notice
shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected
by such notice and shall follow the process and procedures as set out in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 et seq., as amended, or any other state law and Chapter
103 of the Code of the City of Bridgeton, as amended.
SECTION PM-109.0 EMERGENCY MEASURES
§ 265-6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-6
238:315
PM-109.5 Costs of emergency repair: Costs incurred in the
performance of emergency work shall be paid from the treasury of the
jurisdiction on approval of the code official. The legal counsel of the
jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery
of such costs.
PM-109.5.1 Recovery of costs of emergency repair: The City may
recover the costs for the emergency repairs by instituting an action at
law or by placing a lien on the real property. Notice for placement of a
lien shall conform to PM-108.3.1 and shall be in writing, describe the
real estate sufficient for identification, include a statement of the reasons
why notice is being issued, a statement of the costs incurred and a date
by which payment of the costs must be made to the City, a statement
that if the costs are not paid, said costs shall become a lien upon the real
property and collected as any other municipal lien, and a statement of
the right to appeal.
PM-109.6 Hearing: Any person ordered to take emergency measures
shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall
thereafter, upon petition directed to the code official designated to hear
appeals, be afforded a hearing as described in this code.
SECTION PM-110.0 DEMOLITION
PM-110.2 Notice: All notices and orders under this section shall comply
with notices of condemnation as set out in PM-108.3.
PM-110.4 Salvage materials: This section shall be governed by
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 et seq., as amended, or any other state law and Chapter
103 of the Code of the City of Bridgeton, as amended.
PM-111.0 MEANS OF APPEAL
PM-111.1 Appeal procedure for violations under PM-108.0
(condemnation) and PM-110.0 (demolition): Any person aggrieved
by an order of decision of the code official under PM-108.0
(Condemnation) and PM-110.0 (Demolition) shall have the appeal
procedures as set out under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2 et seq., as amended, or any
other state law and Chapter 103 of the Code of the City of Bridgeton, as
amended.
PM-111.2 Appeal procedures for violations other than under
PM-108.0 and PM-110.0:
PM-111.2.1 Notice as final order: If a person affected by a notice
under PM-107.0 does not file a written request for a hearing within
10 days of service, the said notice shall automatically become
effective as a final order.
PM-111.2.2 Time for appeal: Any person affected by a decision of
the code official or a notice or an order issued under the code shall
have the right to appeal such decision, notice or order to the code
official within 10 days of the receipt of the decision, notice or order.
§ 265-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-6
238:316
PM-111.2.3 Reasons for appeal: An application for appeal shall
be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules
legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, that
the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of
this code are adequately satisfied by other means or that additional
time is required to comply with the order.
PM-111.2.4 Notice of hearing: The Code official shall schedule a
hearing within 10 days of the appeal.
PM-111.2.5 Hearing: All hearings before the code official shall not
require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but only relevant
information shall be received.
PM-111.2.6 Resolution: The decision of the code official shall be a
final order and shall be enforced immediately.
PM-111.3 Relief: Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
public officer may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent
jurisdiction within the time and according to the methods provided
by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
SECTION PM-301.0 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
PM-304.2 Street numbers: Notwithstanding the provisions of this
code, street numbers shall be consistent with the provisions detailed
in Chapter 98, Buildings, Numbering of, of the Code of the City of
Bridgeton.
PM-304.11.2 Openable windows: Every window, other than a
fixed window, shall be easily openable and capable of being held
in position by window hardware. Window locks must be installed
on every openable window accessible at street level and on every
window above street level that may be accessible from any exterior
roof, stair or landing, including porch roofs.
PM-304.12 Insect screens: During the period from April 15
through October 15, every door, window and other opening utilized
or required for ventilation purposes serving any structure
containing habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service
areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food
for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or
stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not
less than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging door shall have a
self-closing device in good working condition.
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required for out-swinging
doors or other types of openings which make screening impractical
provided other approved means, such as air curtains or insect
repellent fans, are employed.
§ 265-6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-6
238:317
PM-305.1 General: The interior of a structure and equipment
therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and
in a sanitary condition. Every occupant shall keep that part of the
structure which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming
house, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling units or two
or more nonresidential occupancies shall maintain, in a clean and
sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and
exterior property. No owner shall let to an occupant any vacant
dwelling unit unless it is clean and sanitary.
PM-506.4 Water heating facilities: Water heater facilities shall
be properly installed, maintained and capable of providing an
adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink,
lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of
not less than 110º F. A gas-burning water heater shall not be located
in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room
normally kept closed unless adequate combustion air is provided.
An approved combination temperature and pressure relief valve
and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and
maintained on water heaters. [Amended 3-21-1995 by Ord. No.
94-24]
PM-602.2.1. Heat supply: Every owner and operator of any
building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit,
rooming unit, dormitory or guest room on terms, either express
or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to
maintain the room temperatures specified in Section PM-602.2
during the hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and
not less than 60º F. (16º C.) during other hours.
PM-602.3 Nonresidential Structures: Every enclosed occupied
work place shall be supplied with sufficient heat during the period
from October 1 to May 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than
65° F. (18° C.) during all working hours.51
Exceptions:
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
PM-603.3 Flue: All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be
connected to an approved chimney or vent. Unvented portable space
heaters, burning solid, liquid or gaseous fuels, shall be prohibited.
Exception: Fixed fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are
labeled for unvented operation.
51.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 265-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-6
238:318
PM-605.2 Receptacles: Every habitable space in a dwelling shall
contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every
laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle.
Every bathroom shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle.
PM-702.9 Stairways, handrails and guards: Every exterior and
interior flight of stairs having more than three risers, and every
open portion of a stair, landing or balcony which is more than 30
inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards.
Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) nor more than
42 inches (1067 mm) high, measured vertically above the nosing
of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking
surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high
above the floor of the landing or balcony.
§ 265-7. Property to be kept free of trash, debris, vehicles and grass
overgrowth. [Added 11-19-2001 by Ord. No. 01-6]
Sections PM-106.2.1, PM-107.2, PM-303.1, PM-303.4, PM-306.1, PM-303.8
of the Property Maintenance Code, as amended, are further amended and
revised in the following respects:
A. All owners and occupiers of property are responsible to maintain their
property in a condition free from trash, litter, or debris, including
sidewalks, curblines, and rear and side access alleys over which they
have use and/or control.52
B. It shall be unlawful for a property owner or occupier to store trash or
debris in a fashion where it is visible to the general public. Nothing
herein shall prohibit the storing of trash in cans or bags in an orderly
and neat fashion.53
C. It shall be unlawful to store unregistered, untagged, inoperable motor
vehicles or vehicles in states of disrepair, which includes but is not
limited to vehicles with one or more missing or flat tires, one or more
broken windows, vehicles missing doors, trunks, hoods, or having body
damage of such an extent that a vehicle cannot legally be driven, on
property within the City of Bridgeton. This shall not apply to businesses
with proper zoning permits/appraisals/variances so long as vehicles are
stored in an orderly fashion, providing no attractive nuisance or
blighting. Nothing herein shall prohibit the storage or overhaul of a
vehicle, provided that such vehicle is maintained in a garage or
similarly approved structure.
D. It shall be unlawful for owners or occupants to store or park any
vehicle, regardless of condition, on residential lawns.54
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Littering.
53.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Solid Waste, Art. I, Collection of Garbage and Recyclables.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, § 203-14
§ 265-6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-7
238:319
§ 265-8. (Reserved)55
§ 265-9. Windows; screening of interiors. [Added 10-6-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-5]
All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and free of marks
and foreign substances. Except when necessary in the course of changing
displays, no storage of materials, stocks or inventory shall be permitted in
window display areas ordinarily exposed to public view unless such areas
are first screened by drapes, venetian blinds or other means of making
the windows translucent. All screening of interiors shall be maintained in a
clean and attractive manner and in a good state of repair.
§ 265-10. Temporary scaffolding and other equipment. [Added
10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
No temporary painting scaffold or other temporary equipment used for
construction, repair or maintenance shall be permitted to remain in place
beyond a period of six months after erection or placement thereof without
permission of the public officer.
§ 265-11. Compatibility of materials in repair of storefronts. [Added
10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
All store fronts shall be maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof
shall be kept painted, when necessary for purposes of preservation and
appearance. In the event repairs to a portion of a storefront are made,
such repairs shall be performed with materials identical or compatible with
E. All owners or occupiers of property are responsible to maintain and cut
grasses and weeds to a height of 10 inches or less, including along
sidewalks, curb lines, foundation walls, retaining walls, fence lines, and
rear access alleys.
F. All owners and occupiers of property are responsible to maintain
bushes, shrubs, and hedge lines in a neat and orderly fashion, so as to
avoid blighting and any interference with pedestrian or vehicle traffic
on sidewalks, roads, rights-of-way and public access areas.
G. A first violation of this section shall not require a court appearance
unless a not guilty plea is entered. The fine for a first offense absent a
court appearance shall be $50. Subsequent violations absent a court
appearance shall be $50.
H. Subsequent violations can, at the discretion of the enforcing agency or
public officer, require a court appearance. Fines for second or
subsequent offenses shall punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty.
55.Editor’s Note: Former § 265-8, Living space in rental units; parking requirements, was
repealed 9-18-2018 by Ord. No. 18-20.
§ 265-7 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-11
238:320
the materials used in the area not undergoing repair, to the end that the
appearance of the storefront shall be uniform and attractive and shall not
constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining properties.
§ 265-12. Removal of litter from commercial premises. [Added
10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
The occupants shall be responsible for removing litter from the sidewalk, if
any, in front of the occupant's commercial premises, at least once in any day
the premises is open for business.
§ 265-13. Marking of parking areas. [Added 10-6-2003 by Ord. No.
03-5]
All parking areas shall be marked with clearly visible parking lines and
necessary directional arrows. Such markings shall be consistent with any
requirements as to parking areas imposed by the City of Bridgeton or any
other duly constituted board or agency.
§ 265-14. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 265-11 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-14
238:321

ARTICLE III
Solid Waste, Weeds and Debris
[Adopted 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 94-21]
§ 265-15. Order to remove solid waste.
§ 265-16. Order to remove brush, weeds and debris.
§ 265-17. Order to remove plant life growing near intersections.
A. Whenever it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public health, safety or general welfare, the public officer designated to
exercise the powers described herein may order the removal or
destruction and/or the manner of removal or destruction of solid waste,
which is stored in such a way that is accessible to and likely to be
strewn about by animals, such as but not limited to, dogs, cats,
raccoons, birds, or rodents, within a specific period of time which shall
not be less than 72 hours or more than 10 days after the owner or
tenant or person in possession has received written notice to that
effect.
B. The public officer may cause the removal or destruction when the
owner or tenant or person in possession refuses to comply with the
order.
A. Whenever it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public health, safety or general welfare and for the elimination of a fire
hazard, the public officer authorized to exercise the powers described
herein may order the owner or tenant or person in possession of the
property to remove or to destroy brush, weeds, including ragweed,
dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage,
trash and debris within 10 days after the owner or tenant or person in
possession has received written notice to that effect. For the purposes
of this section, "garbage" shall not include solid waste stored in such a
way that it is accessible to or likely to be strewn about by animals, such
as but not limited to, dogs, cats, raccoons, birds or rodents.
B. The public officer may cause the removal or destruction when the
owner or tenant or person in possession refuses to comply with the
order.
A. Whenever it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of public
safety, the public officer authorized to exercise the powers described
herein may require the owner or tenant of lands lying within the limits
of the City of Bridgeton to keep all brush, hedges and other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of the
intersection of two roadways cut to a height of no more than 2 1/2 feet
within 10 days after notice to cut the same.
§ 265-15 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-17
238:323
§ 265-18. Notice to owners or tenants or persons in possession.
§ 265-19. Removal by City; costs established as lien.
In the event the owner, tenant or person in possession of the land refuses
or neglects to abate or remedy the condition complained of within 10
days after receipt of notice, the public officer shall cause the condition
complained of to be abated and remedied and shall certify the cost thereof
to City Council, which shall examine the certificate, and if found correct
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said dwelling
or lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such
dwelling or lands and shall be added to and become and form part of
the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such dwelling or lands, the
same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 265-20. Public officer.
The public officer designated to exercise the powers herein is the Director
of Housing and Code Enforcement. The Director may delegate any of his
functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he
may delegate.
§ 265-21. Other remedies.
This article is in addition to and supplements other remedies allowed by law,
including the imposition of a penalty for the violation of the ordinances of
the City of Bridgeton.
§ 265-22. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
B. The public officer may cause the cutting of the same in cases where the
owner or tenant or person in possession has refused or neglected to cut
the same in the manner and within the time provided in the notice.
A. The notice to remove or destroy as set out in §§ 265-15, 265-16 and
265-17 must be served personally on the owner or tenant or person in
possession of the property and must advise that if the conditions are not
remedied within the time set out in the complaint, the City shall
undertake to remediate or abate the conditions in the complaint and
may cause the costs to be charged against the land.
B. If the owner or tenant or person in possession cannot be served
personally, then simultaneous mailing of a copy of the notice, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, shall be
effective if the mail is not returned as undeliverable.
§ 265-17 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-22
238:324
ARTICLE IV
Vacant Properties
[Adopted 12-4-2012 by Ord. No. 12-08; amended in its entirety
2-20-2018 by Ord. No. 18-3]
§ 265-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any property that is determined to be
abandoned pursuant to P.L. 2003, C. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) as
follows:
Any beneficiary/trustee/mortgagee who holds a deed of trust/mortgage
on a property located within the City of Bridgton shall perform an
inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust/
mortgage, upon default by the trustor/mortgagor, prior to recording a
notice of default. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence
of vacancy, it is, by this article, deemed abandoned, and the beneficiary/
trustee/mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the
property with the Code Enforcement Office, on forms provided by the
municipality. If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall
be inspected by the beneficiary/trustee/mortgagee, or his designee,
monthly until 1) the trustor/mortgagor or other party remedies the
default; or 2) it is found to be vacant or show evidence of vacancy, at
which time it is deemed abandoned, and the trustee shall, within 10
days of that inspection, register the property with the public officer, or
his designee, on forms provided by the municipality.
A.
Property must not have been legally occupied for six months and must
meet any of the following criteria:
Property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment of
the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during that
six-month period.
(1)
Construction was initiated and discontinued prior to completion,
leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy, and no construction
has taken place for at least six months as of the date of
determination that the building is abandoned.
(2)
At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and
delinquent as of the date of determination.
(3)
The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer as defined in this section.
(4)
B.
"Vacant and abandoned" residential property means, consistent with
Section 1 of P.L. 2012, c.70 (N.J.S.A. 2A:50-73), residential real estate,
where a notice of violation has been issued pursuant to Paragraph e. 1
of that section and subsection b. of section 1 of P.L. 2014, c.35 (N.J.S.A.
C.
§ 265-23 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-23
238:325
40:48-2.12s), or property which any condition on its own or combined
with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe
that the property is or has been vacant for three or more months.
Residential property shall further be deemed vacant and abandoned
where a mortgaged property is not occupied by a mortgagor or tenant.
Such evidence would include, but is not limited to, evidence of the
existence of two or more of the following conditions at the property:
(a) overgrown or neglected vegetation; (b) the accumulation of
newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the property; (c) disconnected
gas, electric, or water utility services to the property; (d) the
accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials on the property; (e) the accumulation of junk, litter, trash or
debris on the property; (f) the absence of window treatments such as
blinds, curtains or shutters; (g) the absence of furnishings and personal
items; (h) statements of neighbors, association management, delivery
persons, or government employees indicating that the residence is
vacant and abandoned; (i) windows or entrances to the property that
are boarded up or closed off or multiple window panes that are
damaged, broken and unrepaired; (j) doors to the property that are
smashed through, broken off, unhinged, or continuously unlocked; (k)
a risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining
or adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering,
criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration of the
property; (l) an uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing,
or similar code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal
authorities declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to
remain vacant and unoccupied; (m) the mortgagee or other authorized
party has secured or winterized the property due to the property being
deemed vacant and unprotected or in danger of freezing; (n) a written
statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear intent of all
mortgagors to abandon the property; (o) any other reasonable indicia
of abandonment.
Exceptions to abandoned property.
A property on which an entity other than the municipality holds
a tax sale certificate is not deemed to be abandoned if the owner
of the certificate 1) continues to pay all municipal taxes and liens
when due; and 2) initiates foreclosure proceedings within six
months after the property is eligible for foreclosure.
Tax certificate holders who have foreclosed on a property are
no longer exempt from abandoned property registration once
they have become successful in gaining ownership of a
property; the maintenance rules and obligations will be
enforced against them as they would against any other owner,
in accordance with Bridgeton's code.
(a)
(1)
A property used on a seasonal basis is deemed to be abandoned
only if it meets any two of the criteria listed in Subsection A(1)
through (4) above.
(2)
D.
§ 265-23 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-23
238:326
CITY — The City of Bridgeton.
CREDITOR — A state-chartered bank, savings bank, savings and loan
association or credit union, any person or entity required to be licensed
under the provisions of the New Jersey Residential Mortgage Act, P.L.
2009, c.53 (N.J.S.A. 17:11C-51 et seq.), any foreclosing entity subject to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17, as amended from
time to time) and any entity acting on behalf of the creditor named in the
debt obligation including, but not limited to, servicers.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
LIENHOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER — Any person or entity holding a
note, mortgage or other interest secured by the building or any part thereof.
NUISANCE — Any property that is determined by the public officer to be a
nuisance if any one of the following applies:
OWNER — Includes the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity
that has filed a notice with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 (P.L. 2008, c.127, Sec. 17 as amended by P.L. 2009,
c.296), any debtor in possession of the property, or any other entity
determined by the City of Bridgeton to have authority to act with respect to
the property.
If a property is vacant but the owner maintains the exterior so that
there are no code violations, and the owner provides a satisfactory
explanation to Code Enforcement or the public officer as to the
reason why the property is vacant, based on health, finances or
other similar reasons, the property may be temporarily exempt
from placement on the vacant and Abandoned Property List.
(3)
The property is found to be unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3.
A.
The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the risk
of fire to the property and adjacent properties.
B.
The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable and
necessary measures to secure the property; or the municipality has
secured the property in order to prevent such hazards after the owner
has failed to do so.
C.
The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut vegetation
or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds have created
potential health and safety hazards and the owner has failed to take
reasonable and necessary measures to remove the hazards.
D.
The dilapidated appearance or other conditions of the property
materially affects, including the economic welfare of, the residents of
the area in close proximity to the property, and the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to remedy the conditions.
E.
§ 265-23 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-23
238:327
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Director of Code Enforcement and Housing and
Construction Official are authorized to act as the public officers for the
City of Bridgeton. A public officer may authorize a person or firm to act on
behalf of the public officer (as a designee) and to assist in the enforcement
and operations of the vacant and abandoned property program. The public
officers and their designees shall exercise powers prescribed by this article
and the public officer will file evidence of this granting of power by
providing it to the Business Administrator.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — An entity organized or authorized
to do business under the New Jersey statutes which shall have as one of its
purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential or nonresidential
buildings, the provisions of affordable housing, the restoration of
abandoned property, the revitalization and improvement of urban
neighborhoods, or similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified by
virtue of its staff, professional consultants, financial resources, and prior
activities set forth in P.L. 2003, C. 10 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) to carry out
the rehabilitation of vacant buildings in urban areas.
§ 265-24. Registration requirements.
Effective January 1, 2013, the owner of any vacant property as defined
herein shall within 30 calendar days after the building becomes vacant
property or within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant
property, whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice
by the municipality, file a registration statement for such vacant property
with the Code Enforcement Office on forms provided by the City for such
purposes. Failure to receive notice by the municipality shall not constitute
grounds for failing to register the property.
A. Each property having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the municipality shall be registered separately.
B. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of a person 21
years of age or older, designated by the owner or owners as the
authorized agent for receiving notices of code violations and for
receiving process in any court proceeding or administrative
enforcement proceeding on behalf of such owner or owners in
connection with the enforcement of any applicable code; and the name,
street address, telephone number, and e-mail address (if applicable) of
the firm and the actual name(s) of the firm's individual principal(s)
responsible for maintaining the property. The individual or a
representative of the firm responsible for maintaining the property
shall be available by telephone or in person on a twenty-four-hour-perday,
seven-day-per-week basis. The two entities may be the same or
different persons. Both entities shown on the statement must maintain
offices in the State of New Jersey or reside within the State of New
Jersey. The statement shall also include the name of the person
responsible for maintaining and securing the property, if different.
§ 265-23 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-24
238:328
§ 265-25. (Reserved)
§ 265-26. Access.
After filing a registration statement or a renewal of a registration statement,
the owner of any vacant property or their agent shall provide access to
the City to conduct an exterior and interior inspection of the building
to determine compliance with the Municipal Code, following reasonable
notice, during the period covered by the initial registration or any
subsequent renewal. Such inspections may be carried out by municipal
employees on weekdays during the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. or by
designees of the public officer at such a time as may be mutually agreed
upon between the owner and the City.
§ 265-27. Responsible owner or agent.
C. The registration shall remain valid for six months from the date of
registration. The owner or creditor or responsible party shall be
required to renew the registration every six months as long as the
building remains a vacant or abandoned property and shall pay a
registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in § 265-30 for
each vacant or abandoned property registered.
D. Upon a change of ownership, a new registration statement must be filed
within 10 days of closing or transfer.
E. The owner shall notify the Code Enforcement Office within 10 calendar
days of any change in the registration information by filing an amended
registration statement on a form provided by the City for such purpose.
F. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner
or owners of the building.
G. The owner shall maintain insurance in accordance with § 265-28E.
H. The registration statement may include any additional information that
the public officer may reasonably require.
A. An owner who meets the requirements of this article with respect to the
location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New Jersey
may designate himself or herself as agent or as the individual
responsible for maintaining the property.
B. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice of process on the authorized agent. Service on the owner
or the agent in compliance with this provision shall be sufficient to
§ 265-24 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-27
238:329
§ 265-28. Owner requirements.
The owner of any structure that has become vacant property, and any
person responsible for maintaining, operating, or collecting rent for any
such building that has become vacant shall, within 30 calendar days of the
structure becoming vacant or within 30 calendar days of the owner taking
title to the property, do the following:
satisfy the notice requirement discussed herein. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
City of Bridgeton in writing of a change of authorized agent or until
the owner files a new registration statement. The designation of an
authorized agent in no way releases the owner from any requirement of
this article.
C. Any owner who fails to register a vacant property under the provisions
of this article shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting
on the building, in plain view, and by service notice at the last known
address of the owner of the property on record with the City of
Bridgeton by regular and certified mail, any and all notices of code
violations and all process in an administrative proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the building.
A. Board and/or secure the structure and all unattached accessory
structures, garages or similar structures against unauthorized entry as
provided for in the applicable codes of the City of Bridgeton or as set
forth in rules and regulations promulgated by the public officer,
Housing or Construction Code Official, or by ordinance and/or
municipal code.
B. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including yards,
fences, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys, retaining walls,
attached or unattached accessory structures and driveways, are well
maintained and free from trash, debris, loose litter, and grass and weed
overgrowth.
C. Post a sign, affixed and protected from the elements, to the structure
indicating the name, address and telephone number of the owner and
the owner's authorized agent for the purpose of service of process, and
the name, address and telephone number of the entity responsible for
maintenance of the property, which may be the same as the owner or
authorized agent. The sign shall include the words "No Trespassing"
and "to report problems with this building, call...", shall be of sufficient
size and shall be placed in a location where it is clearly visible from the
nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer. The sign shall
meet the requirements pursuant to § 370-65, Signs, and shall be no
smaller than 18 inches by 24 inches and owner and/or agent must
ensure that the sign is visible and intact until the building is again
§ 265-27 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-28
238:330
§ 265-29. Rules and regulations issued by public officer.
The public officer or his/her designee may issue rules and regulations for
the administration of the provisions of this article. Such administratively
promulgated rules and regulations shall be in writing and shall be provided
to the owners of properties registered under this article or their designated
agents within 30 calendar days of their effective date.
§ 265-30. Fees.
occupied, demolished, or until repair and/or rehabilitation of the
building is complete.
D. Maintain the vacant property for the entire period of vacancy in
accordance with all applicable local and state property maintenance
codes or ordinances, building codes, health codes and fire codes
pertaining to the exterior condition and appearance of the building, the
safety and structural integrity of the building, the outdoor portion of the
property, the condition and safety of accessory structures on the
property, and any conditions on the property which may constitute a
hazard or adversely affect the health and safety of persons who may
have contact with the vacant property. Promptly repair all broken
windows, doors and other openings and unsafe conditions. Boarding up
of open and broken windows is prohibited, except as a temporary
measure for no longer than 45 consecutive days, which period may be
extended at the discretion of the Fire Official, public officer or his/her
designee, or Construction Code Official. Boards or coverings must be
installed and painted in accordance with City specifications.
E. The owner of any vacant property shall acquire and otherwise maintain
liability insurance, in an amount of not less than $300,000 for buildings
designed primarily for residential use, and not less than $1,000,000 for
any other building, including, but not limited to, buildings designed for
manufacturing, industrial, storage or commercial uses, covering any
damage to any person or any property caused by any physical condition
of or in the building or property subject to the provisions of this article.
Said insurance shall provide a rider for payment of all demolition costs
should the vacant building become abandoned and require the City of
Bridgeton to demolish the building. Any insurance policy acquired or
renewed after the building has become vacant shall provide for written
notice to the City of Bridgeton public officer within 30 calendar days of
any lapse, cancellation or change in coverage. The owner shall attach
evidence of the insurance to the owner's registration statement. Any
registration statement submitted that does not include such evidence
shall be deemed to be an invalid registration. Insurance must name City
of Bridgeton as party or payee for demolition costs should the City
deem demolition is required.
A. All fees applicable to this article may be revised by the City Council via
ordinance. Registration and inspection fees shall be paid at the time of
§ 265-28 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-30
238:331
§ 265-31. Violations and penalties.
submitting the registration or renewal form or affidavit. There shall
also be a fee for the filing of additional or new owner's affidavit, with
such fee being set by resolution of the City Council. For properties
that are not registered within the required time frame, an additional
fee for the added cost of the City's expenses in having to determine
ownership, which may include, but not be limited to, title searches,
shall be assessed and immediately payable.
B. A vacant and abandoned property registration form or renewal form
must be submitted every six months along with the initial registration
fee or renewal fee described in the Fee Schedule below.
C. Persons with primary residence in the City of Bridgeton with less than
$35,000 in annual income may apply to the City Council for a limited,
temporary financial hardship waiver that lasts for one registration
period. With the exception of the hardship waiver recipients, all
owners/creditors or their agents will pay pursuant to the following Fee
Schedule:
(1) First registration: $500 for residential properties, $1,000 for
commercial and all other properties.
(2) First renewal: $1,500 for residential properties, $3,000 for
commercial and all other properties.
(3) Second renewal: $3,000 for residential properties, $6,000 for
commercial and all other properties.
(4) Third and all subsequent renewals: $5,000 or 5% of the assessed
property value, whichever is greater for residential properties,
$10,000 for commercial and all other properties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder may be fined not less than $500 and no
more than $2,000 for each offense based on the recommendation of the
public officer, and/or 30 days of community service and/or 30 days in
the County Jail in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. The
Municipal Court Judge may enforce and/or modify the fines
recommended by the public officer, but all fines recommended by the
public officer and issued under a Vacant and Abandoned Property
Ordinance are to be retained by the Vacant and Abandoned Property
Department and used for Code Enforcement and vacant and abandoned
property related purposes or as the Business Administrator determines
to be appropriate. Fines assessed under this article shall be recoverable
from the owner/responsible party if they have been identified; when the
owner or responsible party cannot be found, the costs of the
maintenance incurred by the City will be entered as a property
maintenance lien.
§ 265-30 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31
238:332
§ 265-31.1. Designation and power of public officer to create
Abandoned Property List.
The public officer is hereby directed to identify abandoned properties within
the municipality, place said properties on an Abandoned Property List,
established as provided in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55),
as amended, and provide such notices and carry out such other tasks as are
required to effectuate an Abandoned Property List as provided by law.
§ 265-31.2. Abandoned property report.
The public officer shall provide a report to the Mayor, City Administrator
and governing body every six months with respect to the number and
location of properties on the Abandoned Property List, the status of those
properties, and any actions taken by the municipality or by any qualified
rehabilitation entity, designated pursuant to the authority granted the
public officer, with respect to any property on the list or any other
abandoned property within the City of Bridgeton.
§ 265-31.3. Establishment of and updates to Abandoned Property
List.
The public officer shall establish the Abandoned Property List or any
additions thereto by publication in the official newspaper of the City of
Bridgeton, which publication shall constitute public notice and, within 10
days after publication, shall send a notice, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by regular mail, to the owner of record of every property
included on the list. The published and mailed notices shall identify
property determined to be abandoned setting forth the owner of record, if
known, the tax lot and block number and street address. The public officer,
in consultation with the Tax Collector, shall also send out a notice by regular
mail to any mortgagee, servicing organization, or property tax processing
organization that receives a duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to
Subdivision d of N.J.S.A. 54:4-64. When the owner of record is not known
for a particular property and cannot be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be mailed but
instead shall be posted on the property in the manner as provided in
Section 5 of P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7). The mailed notice shall
B. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 calendar days after a building becomes vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later; or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, and failure to provide correct information on the
registration statement, failure to comply with the provisions of § 265-28
of this article, or such provisions contained herein, shall be deemed to
be violations of this article.
C. If not paid within six months of notification by the City, the applicable
registration fee shall double.
§ 265-31 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.3
238:333
indicate the factual basis for the public officer's finding that the property is
abandoned property as that term is defined in Section 35 of P.L. 1996, c. 62
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-54) and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder,
specifying the information relied upon in making such finding. In all cases a
copy of the mailed or posted notice shall also be filed by the public officer
in the office of the Cumberland County Clerk or Register of Deeds and
Mortgages. This filing shall have the same force and effect as a notice of lis
pendens under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice shall be indexed by the name of
the property owner as defendant and the name of the City as plaintiff, as
though an action had been commenced by the City against the owner.
§ 265-31.4. Appeals of Abandoned Property List inclusion.
A. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his or her
property on the Abandoned Property List by appealing that
determination to the public officer within 30 days of the owner's receipt
of the certified notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice
was sent. An owner whose identity was not known to the public officer
shall have 40 days from the date upon which notice was published or
posted, whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on
the Abandoned Property List. For good cause shown, the public officer
shall accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30 days of receipt of a
request for an appeal of the findings, the public officer shall schedule a
hearing for redetermination of the matter. Any property included on the
list shall be presumed to be abandoned property unless the owner,
through the submission of an affidavit or certification by the property
owner averring that the property is not abandoned and stating the
reasons for such averment, can demonstrate that the property was
erroneously included on the list. The affidavit or certification shall be
accompanied by supporting documentation, such as but not limited to
photographs, repair invoices, bills and construction contracts. The
ground for appeal shall be that the property in question is not
abandoned property as that term is defined in Section 35 of P.L. 1996, c.
62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-54) or exempted pursuant to this article. The public
officer shall decide any timely filed appeal within 10 days of the hearing
on the appeal and shall promptly, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and by regular mail, notify the property owner of the
decision and the reasons therefor.
B. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the public officer by instituting, in accordance with the
New Jersey Court Rules, a summary proceeding in the Superior Court,
Law Division, sitting in Cumberland County, which action shall be tried
de novo. Such action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of the
notice of decision mailed by the public officer pursuant to Subsection A
of this section. The sole ground for appeal shall be that the property in
question is not abandoned property as that term is defined in Section 35
of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-54). The failure to institute an action
of appeal on a timely basis shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to
§ 265-31.3 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31.4
238:334
§ 265-31.5. Sale of tax lien.
challenging the adverse determination, except that, for good cause
shown, the Court may extend the deadline for instituting the action.
C. The public officer shall promptly remove any property from the
Abandoned Property List that has been determined not to be
abandoned on appeal.
D. The Abandoned Property List shall become effective, and the City of
Bridgeton shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect
to properties on the Abandoned Property List, at such time as any one
property has been placed on the list in accordance with the provisions
of this section, upon the expiration of the period for appeal with respect
to the property or upon the denial of an appeal brought by the property
owner.
A. The City of Bridgeton shall hold special tax lien sales in compliance with
New Jersey Tax Sale Law as described in N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq. and in
compliance with the provisions of the Abandoned Properties
Rehabilitation Act as described within N.J.S.A. 55:19-101 and in
compliance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-86(b).
B. Remediation.
(1) If the City of Bridgeton or the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority
or its subsidiaries acquire the tax sale certificate for a property on
the Abandoned Property List, then, upon 10 days' written notice to
the property owner and any mortgagee as of the date of the filing of
the lis pendens notice under Subdivision d of Section 36 of P.L.
1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), that entity shall be permitted to
enter upon the property and remediate any conditions that caused
the property to be included on the Abandoned Property List. No
remediation shall be commenced, however, if within that ten-day
period the owner or mortgagee shall have notified the City of
Bridgeton or the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority or its
subsidiary, as appropriate, in writing that the owner or mortgagee
has elected to perform the remediation itself. When the owner or
mortgagee elects to perform the remediation itself, it shall be
required to post bond in favor of the City of Bridgeton or the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority or its subsidiaries, as appropriate,
in order to ensure performance. The amount and conditions of the
bond shall be determined by the public officer.
(2) The cost of remediation incurred by the City of Bridgeton or the
New Jersey Redevelopment Authority or its subsidiaries pursuant
to this subsection, as so certified by the entity incurring the cost
upon completion of the remediation, shall constitute a lien upon the
property first in time and right to any other lien, whether the other
lien was filed prior to or after the filing of any lien by the
municipality or the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority, except
§ 265-31.4 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.5
238:335
§ 265-31.6. Removal of property from list; remediation.
for municipal taxes, liens and assessments and any lien imposed
pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act, P.L. 1976,
c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq.), together with any interest
thereon. The certification of cost shall be filed and recorded as
a lien by the entity incurring the cost with the County Clerk or
Register of Deeds and Mortgages, as appropriate, in the county in
which the property is located.
C. Property maintained as abandoned property.
(1) Failure of an owner or lienholder to remove a property from the
Abandoned Property List within the period of time for appeal of
inclusion of the property on the list pursuant to Subdivision e of
Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) shall be prima
facie evidence of the intent of the owner to continue to maintain the
property as abandoned property.
(2) The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to
Subsection C(1) of this section shall be a public purpose and public
use for which the power of eminent domain may be exercised.
A. An owner may remove a property from the list of abandoned properties
prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by paying all taxes and municipal
liens due, including interest and penalties, and:
(1) By posting a certified check, money order, or a bond equal to the
cost of remediating all conditions because of which the property
has been determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of
P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) and posting a certified check,
money order, or a bond to cover the cost of any environmental
cleanup required on the property, evidenced by a certification by a
licensed engineer retained by the owner and reviewed and
approved by the public officer stating that the certified check,
money order, or bond adequately covers the cost of the cleanup; or
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of the public officer that the
conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where the public officer
finds that the owner is actively engaged in remediating the
conditions because of which the property was determined to be
abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-55), as evidenced by significant rehabilitation activity on the
property, the public officer may grant an extension of time of not
more than 120 days for the owner to complete all work, during
which time no further proceedings will be taken against the owner
or the property.
§ 265-31.5 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31.6
238:336
§ 265-31.7. Acquisition of tax sale certificate; action to foreclose;
right of redemption.
B. If the owner has posted a certified check, money order, or a bond in
order to have a property removed from the Abandoned Property List
and the conditions because of which the property was determined to be
abandoned have not been fully remediated within one year of the date
of posting a certified check, money order or bond, or, in the case of a
property which requires a remediation of any known, suspected or
threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has failed to enter into
a memorandum of agreement with the Department of Environmental
Protection or an administrative consent order, as the case may be, or if
an agreement or order is in effect but the owner has failed to perform
the remediation in conformance with the agreement or order, then the
cash or bond shall be forfeited to the municipality, which shall use a
certified check, money order, or bond and any interest which has
accrued thereon for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the
property or performing the environmental remediation. Any funds
remaining after the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or
cleaned up shall be returned to the owner.
A. When a person other than the City of Bridgeton or the New Jersey
Redevelopment Authority or its subsidiaries acquires a tax sale
certificate for a property on the Abandoned Property List at tax sale, the
purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the right of redemption
at any time at or after the sale as permitted by law and in compliance
with N.J.S.A. 54:5-86.
B. Notwithstanding Section 6 of P.L. 1948, c. 96 (N.J.S.A. 54:5-104.34),
when the City of Bridgeton is the purchaser at tax sale of any property
on the Abandoned Property List pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, or when
the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority or any of its subsidiaries
acquires the tax sale certificate pursuant to Subdivision a of Section 37
of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-56), an action to foreclose the right of
redemption may be instituted in accordance with the provisions of
Subdivision b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-77.
C. After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist
and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the Superior
Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be permitted except
where the owner:
(1) Posts a certified check, money order, or a bond equal to the cost of
remediating the conditions because of which the property was
determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c.
62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), as determined by the Court; or
(2) Demonstrates to the Court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned pursuant to Section 36
of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) have been remedied in full.
§ 265-31.6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.8
238:337
§ 265-31.8. Grounds for reopening judgment.
Once a final judgment barring the right of redemption with respect to
a property on the list of abandoned properties has been recorded, the
grounds of lack of jurisdiction or fraud in the conduct of the action or
any other legal basis for reopening judgment may be utilized; in any such
proceeding, the provisions of P.L. 1996, C. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-20 et seq.)
shall be construed liberally in favor of the purchaser, assignee or transferee
of the tax sale certificate.
§ 265-31.9. Property deemed not abandoned; certification of
abandonment.
§ 265-31.10. Transfer of possession and control of abandoned
property.
A. If an entity other than the City of Bridgeton has purchased or taken
assignment from the City of a tax sale certificate on a property that has
not been legally occupied for a period of six months, that property shall
not be placed on the Abandoned Property List pursuant to Section 36 of
P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) if 1) the owner of the certificate has
continued to pay all City of Bridgeton taxes and liens on the property in
the tax year when due; and 2) the owner of the certificate takes action
to initiate foreclosure proceedings within six months after the property
is eligible for foreclosure pursuant to either Subdivision a or
Subdivision b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, as appropriate, and diligently pursues
foreclosure proceedings in a timely fashion thereafter.
B. A property which is used on a seasonal basis shall be deemed to be
abandoned only if the property meets any two of the additional criteria
set forth in Section 4 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81).
C. A determination that a property is abandoned property under the
provision of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall not
constitute a finding that the use of the property has been abandoned for
purposes of municipal zoning or land use regulation.
D. Upon the request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate
seeking to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property
pursuant to Subdivision b of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the public officer or the
Tax Collector shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requester with a
certification that the property fulfills the definition of abandoned
according to the criteria set forth in Sections 4 and 5 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and N.J.S.A. 55:19-82).
A. A summary action or otherwise to transfer possession and control of
abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the City of Bridgeton
may be brought by the City of Bridgeton in the Superior Court in
Cumberland County. If the Court shall find that the property is
abandoned pursuant to Section 4 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81)
and the owner or party in interest has failed to submit and initiate a
§ 265-31.8 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31.10
238:338
§ 265-31.11. Filing of complaint: required information.
§ 265-31.12. Filing of complaint; notice requirements; entry upon
property by City.
rehabilitation plan, then the Court may authorize the City of Bridgeton
to take possession and control of the property and develop a
rehabilitation plan.
B. The City of Bridgeton, granted possession and control, may commence
and maintain those further proceedings for the conservation, protection
or disposal of the property or any part thereof that are required to
rehabilitate the property, necessary to recoup the cost and expenses of
rehabilitation and for the sale of the property; provided, however, that
the Court shall not direct the sale of the property if the owner applies to
the Court for reinstatement of control of the property as provided in
Section 15 of P.L. 2001 c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92).
C. Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lienholder to submit plans for
rehabilitation to the City of Bridgeton, obtain appropriate construction
permits for rehabilitation or, in the alternative, submit formal
applications for funding the cost of rehabilitation to local, state or
federal agencies providing such funding within that six-month period
shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the owner has failed to take
any action to further the rehabilitation of the property.
A. A complaint filed pursuant to Section 7 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-84) shall include:
(1) Documentation that the property is on the municipal Abandoned
Property List or a certification by the public officer that the
property is abandoned; and
(2) A statement by an individual holding appropriate professional
qualifications that there are sound reasons that the building should
be rehabilitated rather than demolished based upon the physical,
aesthetic or historical character of the building or the relationship
of the building to other buildings and lands within its immediate
vicinity.
A. Within 10 days of filing a complaint pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), the plaintiff shall file a notice of lis pendens
with the County of Cumberland Recording Officer.
B. At least 30 days before filing the complaint, the City of Bridgeton shall
serve a notice of intention to take possession of an abandoned building.
The notice shall inform the owner and interested parties that the
property has not been legally occupied for six months and of those
criteria that led to a determination of abandonment pursuant to Section
4 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81). The notice shall provide that
unless the owner or a party in interest prepares and submits a
§ 265-31.10 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.12
238:339
§ 265-31.13. Plan for rehabilitation and reuse.
rehabilitation plan to the appropriate City of Bridgeton official, the City
will seek to gain possession of the building to rehabilitate the property,
and the associated costs shall be a lien against the property, which may
be satisfied by the sale of the property, unless the owner applies to
the Court for reinstatement of control of the property as provided in
Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92). After the complaint
is filed, the complaint shall be served on the parties in interest in
accordance with the New Jersey Rules of Court.
C. After serving the notice of intent pursuant to Subsection B of this
section, the City of Bridgeton or its designee may enter upon that
property after written notice to the owner by certified mail, return
receipt requested, in order to secure, stabilize or repair the property, or
in order to inspect the property for purposes of preparing the plan to be
submitted to the Court pursuant to Section 12 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-89).
A. Any owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to Section 7
of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-84) by submitting a plan for the
rehabilitation and reuse of the property which is the subject of the
complaint and by posting a bond equal to 125% of the amount
determined by the public officer or the Court to be the projected cost of
rehabilitation. Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a
complaint shall be submitted within 60 days after the complaint has
been filed, unless the Court provides the owner with an extension of
time for good cause shown.
B. A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this section shall include, but
not be limited to:
(1) A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including documentation of
the economic feasibility of the proposed reuse, including operating
budgets or resale prices, or both, as appropriate;
(2) A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including sources
and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions of realistically
available financing, including grants and loans;
(3) A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, including milestones for performance of major steps
leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property; and
(4) Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and firms
that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design, financial
packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of the property,
C. The Court shall approve any plan that, in the judgment of the Court, is
realistic and likely to result in the expeditious rehabilitation and reuse
of the property, which is the subject of the complaint. If the Court
§ 265-31.12 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31.13
238:340
§ 265-31.14. Mortgage holder or lienholder to be designated in
possession of property.
§ 265-31.15. City to be designated in possession of property.
approves the owner's plan, then it may appoint the public officer to act
as monitor of the owner's compliance. If the owner fails to carry out
any step in the approved plan, then the City may apply to the Court to
have the owner's bond forfeited, possession of the building transferred
to the City to complete the rehabilitation plan and authorization to
use the bond proceeds for rehabilitation of the property. The owner
shall provide quarterly reports to the City on its activities and progress
toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. The owner shall
provide those reports to the Court on its activities that the Court
determines are necessary.
D. The Court may reject a plan and bond if it finds that the plan does not
represent a realistic and expeditious means of ensuring the
rehabilitation of the property or that the owner or his representatives
or agents, or both, lack the qualifications, background or other criteria
necessary to ensure that the plan will be carried out successfully.
A. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to Section 7 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-84), the
mortgage holder or lienholder may seek to be designated in possession
of the property by submitting a plan and posting a bond meeting the
same conditions as set forth in Section 10 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-87). The plan shall be submitted within 60 days after the Court
has rejected the owner's plan, unless the Court provides the mortgage
holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good cause shown. If
the Court approves any such mortgage holder or lienholder's plan, it
shall designate that party to be in possession of the property for
purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation and reuse and may appoint the
public officer to act as monitor of the party's compliance. The mortgage
holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall provide quarterly reports
to the Court and the City on its activities and progress toward
rehabilitation and reuse of the property. If the mortgage holder or
lienholder fails to carry out any material step in the approved plan, then
the public officer shall notify the Court, which may order the bond
forfeit, grant the City possession of the property, and authorize the City
to use the proceeds of the bond for rehabilitation of the property.
B. Any sums incurred or advanced for the purpose of rehabilitating the
property by a mortgage holder or lienholder granted possession of a
property pursuant to Subsection A of this section, including Court costs
and reasonable attorney's fees, may be added to the unpaid balance due
that mortgage holder or lienholder, with the interest calculated at the
same rate set forth in the note or security agreement; or, in the case of a
tax lienholder, at the statutory interest rate for subsequent liens.
§ 265-31.13 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.15
238:341
§ 265-31.16. Designation of qualified rehabilitation entity.
A. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of Section 11
of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-88), then the City may submit a plan
to the Court which conforms with the provisions of Subdivision b of
Section 10 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-87). The plan shall
designate the entity which shall implement the plan, which may be the
City or that entity designated in accordance with the provisions of
Section 13 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-90).
B. The Court shall grant the City possession of the property if it finds that:
(1) The proposed rehabilitation and reuse of the property is
appropriate and beneficial;
(2) The City is qualified to undertake the rehabilitation and reuse of
the property; and
(3) The plan submitted by the City represents a realistic and timely
plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
C. The City may take all steps necessary and appropriate to further the
rehabilitation and reuse of the property consistent with the plan
submitted to the Court. In making its findings pursuant to this
subsection, the Court may consult with qualified parties, including the
Department of Community Affairs, and, upon request by a party in
interest, may hold a hearing on the plan.
D. Where either a redevelopment plan pursuant to P.L. 1992, c. 79 (N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq.) or a neighborhood revitalization plan pursuant to
P.L. 2001, c. 415 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-490 et seq.) has been adopted or
approved by the Department of Community Affairs, as appropriate,
encompassing the property which is the subject of a complaint, the
Court shall make a further finding that the proposed rehabilitation and
reuse of the property are not inconsistent with any provision of either
plan.
A. The City may exercise its rights under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.), directly, or may designate a qualified rehabilitation
entity to act as its designee for the purpose of exercising the City's
rights where that designation will further the rehabilitation and reuse
of the property consistent with the City's plans and objectives. This
designation shall be made by resolution of the Council of the City of
Bridgeton.
B. Regardless of whether the City exercises its rights directly or
designates a qualified rehabilitation entity pursuant to this section,
while in possession of a property pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.), the City shall maintain, safeguard, and maintain
insurance on the property. Notwithstanding the City's possession of the
property, nothing in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall be
deemed to relieve the owner of the property of any civil or criminal
§ 265-31.15 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31.16
238:342
§ 265-31.17. City deemed possessor of property; borrowing of
funds; reporting and filing requirements.
liability or any duty imposed by reason of acts or omissions of the
owner.
A. If the City has been granted possession of a property pursuant to
Section 12 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-89), the City shall be
deemed to have an ownership interest in the property for the purpose of
filing plans with public agencies and boards, seeking and obtaining
construction permits and other approvals, and submitting applications
for financing or other assistance to public or private entities. For the
purposes of any state program of grants or loans, including but not
limited to programs of the Department of Community Affairs and the
New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency, possession of a
property under this subsection shall be considered legal control of the
property. Notwithstanding the granting of possession to the City,
nothing in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) shall be deemed
to relieve the owner of the property of any obligation the owner or any
other person may have for the payment of taxes or other City liens and
charges, or mortgages or liens to any party, whether those taxes,
charges or liens are incurred before or after the granting of possession.
The granting of possession shall not suspend any obligation the owner
may have as of the date of the granting of possession for payment of any
operating or maintenance expense associated with the property,
whether or not billed at the time of the granting of possession.
B. The Court may approve the borrowing of funds by the City to
rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security interest with
priority over all other liens or mortgages other than municipal liens.
Prior to granting this lien priority, the Court shall find that 1) the City
sought to obtain the necessary financing from the senior lienholder,
which declined to provide such financing on reasonable terms; 2) the
City sought to obtain a voluntary subordination from the senior
lienholder, which refused to provide such subordination; and 3) lien
priority is necessary in order to induce another lender to provide
financing on reasonable terms.
C. Where the City has been granted possession by the Court in the name of
the City, the City may seek the approval of the Court to assign its rights
to another entity, which approval shall be granted by the Court when it
finds that:
(1) The entity to which the City's rights will be assigned is a qualified
rehabilitation entity; and
(2) The assignment will further the purposes of this section.
D. Where the City has designated a qualified rehabilitation entity to act on
its behalf, the qualified rehabilitation entity shall provide quarterly
reports to the City on its activities and progress toward rehabilitation
§ 265-31.16 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.17
238:343
§ 265-31.18. Petition for reinstatement of control and possession by
owner.
and reuse of the property. The City or qualified rehabilitation entity,
as the case may be, shall provide such reports to the Court as the
Court determines to be necessary. If the Court finds that the City or its
designee have failed to take diligent action toward rehabilitation of the
property within one year from the grant of possession, then the Court
may request the City to designate another qualified rehabilitation entity
to exercise its rights, or if the City fails to do so, may terminate the
order of possession and return the property to its owner.
E. The City shall file a notice of completion with the Court, and shall also
serve a copy on the owner and any mortgage holder or lienholder, at
such time as the City has determined that no more than six months
remain to the anticipated date on which rehabilitation will be complete.
This notice shall include an affidavit of the public officer attesting that
rehabilitation can realistically be anticipated to be complete within that
time period, and a statement setting forth such actions as it plans to
undertake to ensure that reuse of the property takes place consistent
with the plan.
A. An owner may petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and
possession of the property at any time after one year from the grant of
possession, but no later than 30 days after the City has filed a notice of
completion with the Court or, in the event the notice of completion is
filed within less than one year of the grant of possession, within 30 days
after the City has filed notice.
B. The Court may allow additional time for good cause if that additional
time does not materially delay completion of the rehabilitation, place
undue hardship on the City, or affect any of the terms or conditions
under which the City has applied for or received financing for the
rehabilitation of the property.
C. Any petition for reinstatement of the owner's control and possession of
the property filed pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-92) shall:
(1) Include a plan for completion of the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property consistent with the plan previously approved by the
Court;
(2) Provide legally binding assurances that the owner will comply with
all conditions of any grant or loan secured by the City or repay
those grants or loans in full, at the discretion of the maker of the
loan or grant; and
(3) Be accompanied by payment equal to the sum of 1) all City liens
outstanding on the property; 2) all costs incurred by the City in
bringing action with respect to the property; 3) any costs incurred
§ 265-31.17 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31.18
238:344
§ 265-31.19. Obligations of owner prior to grant of petition.
§ 265-31.20. Granting of title to City; authority to sell.
If the owner fails to petition for the reinstatement of control and possession
of the property within 30 days after the entity in possession has filed a
notice of completion or in any event within two years after the initial grant
of possession, or if the owner fails to meet any conditions that may be set
by the Court in granting a reinstatement petition filed pursuant to Section
15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92), upon petition from the entity in
possession, the Court may grant the City title or authorize the City to sell
the property, subject to the provisions of Section 19 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-96).
§ 265-31.21. Vacant and abandoned property maintenance violation
penalties and fines.
by the City not covered by grants or loans to be assumed or repaid
pursuant to this section; and 4) any costs remaining to complete
rehabilitation and reuse of the property, as determined by the
public officer, which payment shall be placed in escrow with the
Clerk of the Court pending disposition of the petition.
A. Prior to the granting of a petition on the part of the owner by the Court
pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92), the
owner may be required to post a bond or other security in an amount
determined by the Court, after consultation with the public officer, as
likely to ensure that the owner will continue to maintain the property in
sound condition. That bond or other security shall be made available to
the City to make any repair on the property in the event of a Code
violation which is not corrected in timely fashion by the owner. The
bond or other security may be forfeited in full in the event that the
owner fails to comply with any requirement imposed as a condition of
the reinstatement petition filed pursuant to Section 15 of P.L. 2003, c.
210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-92).
B. The owner may seek approval of the Court to be relieved of this
requirement after five years, which shall be granted if the court finds
that the owner has maintained the property in good repair during that
period, that no material violations affecting the health and safety of the
tenants have occurred during that period, and that the owner has
remedied other violations in a timely and expeditious fashion.
A. Other than in-state or out-of-state creditors, any owner who is not in full
compliance with this article or who otherwise violates any provision of
this article or of the rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be
subject to a fine of $500 to $2,000 for each offense at the discretion of
the public officer. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under this article shall be
recoverable from the owner/creditor and shall be a lien on the property.
§ 265-31.18 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.21
238:345
For purposes of this subsection, failure to file a registration statement
in time, failure to provide correct information on the registration
statement, failure to comply with all provisions of this article, or such
other matters as may be established by the rules and regulations of the
public officer or his/her designee shall be deemed to be violations of
this article.
B. In accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35, if an out-of-state creditor that is
subject to a rule promulgated in this article is found by the City's
Municipal Court or by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in
violation of the requirement to appoint an in-state representative or
agent, such creditor shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of
the violation. However, any fines imposed on a creditor for the failure to
appoint an in-state representative or agent shall commence on the day
after the ten-day period set forth in Subdivision a(1) of Section 17 of P.L.
2008, c. 127 (N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51), for providing notice to the Municipal
Clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
mortgage has been served.
C. In accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35, if a creditor that is found by the
City's Municipal Court or by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in
violation of the requirement to correct a care, maintenance, security, or
upkeep violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this article, such
creditor shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each day of the violation.
Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. Any fines imposed pursuant to this subsection shall
commence 31 days following receipt of the notice, except if the
violation presents an imminent risk to public health and safety, as
determined by the public officer, Code Enforcement Official,
Construction Official, Fire Chief, or other appropriate City Official, as
applicable based on the code violation at issue, in which case any fines
shall commence 11 days following receipt of the notice.
D. In accordance with P.L. 2014, c. 35, c N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12s(d.), no less
than 20% of any money collected from creditors/owners/responsible
parties under this article shall be utilized by the City for Municipal Code
Enforcement purposes.
E. Owners of properties that have been deemed vacant or abandoned will
be subject to all maintenance rules described within this section that
apply to creditors. Failures to correct a care, maintenance, security, or
upkeep violation cited in a notice issued pursuant to this article, if
found by any court of competent jurisdiction, shall result in the violator
being subject to a fine pursuant to the guidelines set forth in
§ 265-31.21A. Any fines imposed pursuant to this subsection shall
commence 31 days following receipt of the notice, except if any
violation presents an imminent risk to public health and safety, as
determined by the public officer, Code Enforcement Official,
Construction Official, Fire Chief or other appropriate City Official, in
accordance with City Code, in which case any fines shall commence 11
days following receipt of notice.
§ 265-31.21 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31.22
238:346
§ 265-31.22. Procedure of City to gain title to property;
authorization to sell; proceeds.
§ 265-31.23. Distribution of proceeds.
§ 265-31.24. Authority of public officer to place lien on property;
remedies.
A. Where the City seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase the
property for fair market value on such terms as the Court shall approve,
and may place the proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court. The Court
may authorize the City to sell the building free and clear of liens, claims
and encumbrances, in which event all such liens, claims and
encumbrances shall be transferred to the proceeds of sale with the
same priority as existed prior to resale in accordance with the
provisions of this section except that municipal liens shall be paid at
settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the property shall be
distributed as set forth in Section 20 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-97).
B. The City may seek approval of the Court to sell the property to a third
party when the Court finds that such conveyance will further the
effective and timely rehabilitation and reuse of the property.
C. Upon approval by the Court, the City shall sell the property on such
terms and at such price as the court shall approve, and may place the
proceeds of sale in escrow with the Court. The Court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of sale after paying court costs in the order
of priority set forth in Section 20 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-97).
A. The proceeds paid pursuant to Subdivision c of Section 19 of P.L. 2003,
c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-96) shall be distributed in the following order of
priority:
(1) The costs and expenses of sale;
(2) Other governmental liens;
(3) Repayment of principal and interest on any borrowing or
indebtedness incurred by the City and granted priority lien status
pursuant to Subdivision a of Section 21 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-98);
(4) A reasonable development fee to the City consistent with the
standards for development fees established for rehabilitation
programs by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs or
the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency;
(5) Other valid liens and security interests, in accordance with their
priority; and
(6) The owner.
§ 265-31.22 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.24
238:347
§ 265-31.25. Court's denial of rights and remedies to lienholders
and mortgage holders.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary in P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq.), a court may in its discretion deny a lienholder or
mortgage holder of any or all rights or remedies afforded lienholders and
mortgage holders under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), if the
Court finds that the owner of a property subject to any of the provisions of
P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.) owns or controls more than a
fifty-percent interest in, or effective control of, the lienholder or mortgage
holder or that the familial or business relationship between the lienholder
or mortgage holder and the owner precludes a separate interest on the part
of the lienholder or mortgage holder.
§ 265-31.26. Recourse of City with respect to liens against real
property.
A. The public officer, with the approval of the Court, may place a lien on
the property to cover any costs of the City in connection with a
proceeding under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), incurred
prior to the grant by the Court of an order of possession under P.L.
2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), which may include costs
incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can be
rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
considered a City lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9 with the rights
and status of a City lien pursuant thereto.
B. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
Section 24 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-101), the remedies
available under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall be
available to the City with respect to any abandoned property, whether
or not the City has established an Abandoned Property List as provided
in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) and whether or not
the property has been included on any such list.
A. With respect to any lien placed against any real property pursuant to
the provisions of Section 1 or Section 3 of P.L. 1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3 or N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5) or Section 1 of P.L. 1989, c. 91 (N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3a) or any receiver's lien pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 295 (N.J.S.A.
2.A:42-114 et seq.), the City shall have recourse with respect to the lien
against any asset of the owner of the property if an individual, and
against any asset of any partner if a partnership.
B. The public officer, with the approval of the Court, may place a lien on
the property to cover any costs of the City in connection with a
proceeding under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), incurred
prior to the grant by the Court of an order of possession under P.L.
2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), which may include costs
incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can be
rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
§ 265-31.24 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31.26
238:348
§ 265-31.27. Properties eligible for tax sales; notice.
considered a City lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9 with the rights
and status of a City lien pursuant thereto.
C. With the exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to
Section 24 of P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-101), the remedies
available under P.L. 2003, c. 210 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.), shall be
available to the City with respect to any abandoned property, whether
or not the City has established an Abandoned Property List as provided
in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55) and whether or not
the property has been included on any such list.
A. The City may hold special tax sales with respect to those properties
eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which are also on an
Abandoned Property List established by the City pursuant to Section 36
of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55). If the City elects to hold a special
tax sale, it shall conduct that sale subject to following provisions:
(1) The City shall establish criteria for eligibility to bid on properties at
the sale, which may include, but shall not be limited to:
documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise
reuse the property consistent with the City's plans and regulations;
commitments by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax
lien by a date certain; and such other criteria as the City may
determine are necessary to ensure that the properties to be sold
will be rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a manner consistent
with the public interest;
(2) The City may establish minimum bid requirements for a special tax
sale that may be less than the full amount of the taxes, interest and
penalties due, the amount of such minimum bid to be at the sole
discretion of the City, in order to ensure that the properties to be
sold will be rehabilitated or otherwise reused in a manner
consistent with the public interest;
(3) The City may combine properties into bid packages, and require
that bidders place a single bid on each package in addition to bids
on individual properties within the bidding package, and the City
may reject any and all bids on individual properties that have been
included in bid packages;
(4) The City may sell properties subject to provisions that, if the
purchaser fails to carry out any commitment that has been set forth
as a condition of sale pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section or
misrepresents any material qualification that has been established
as a condition of eligibility to bid pursuant thereto, then the
properties and any interest thereto acquired by the purchaser shall
revert to the City, and any amount paid by the purchaser to the City
at the special tax sale shall be forfeited to the City;
§ 265-31.26 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.27
238:349
§ 265-31.28. Eminent domain proceedings; establishment of fair
market value.
(5) In the event there are two or more qualified bidders for any
property or bid package in a special tax sale, the City may
designate the unsuccessful but qualified bidder whose bid was
closest to the successful bid as an eligible purchaser;
(6) In the event that the purchaser of that property or bid package fails
to meet any of the conditions of sale established by the City
pursuant to this section, and the purchaser's interest in the
property or properties reverts to the City, the City may
subsequently designate the entity previously designated as an
eligible purchaser as the winning bidder for the property or
properties, and assign the tax sale certificates to that entity on the
basis of that entity's bid at the special tax sale, subject to the terms
and conditions of the special tax sale.
(7) The City shall provide notice of a special tax sale pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special terms of sale
established by the City pursuant to Subsection A(2), (3), or (4) of
this section. Nothing shall prohibit the City from holding a special
tax sale on the same day as a standard or accelerated tax sale.
A. With respect to any eminent domain proceeding carried out under
Section 37 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-56), the fair market value
of the property shall be established on the basis of an analysis which
determines independently:
(1) The cost to rehabilitate and reuse the property for such purpose as
is appropriate under existing planning and zoning regulations
governing its reuse or to demolish the existing property and
construct a new building on the site, including all costs ancillary to
rehabilitation such as, but not limited to, marketing and legal costs;
(2) The realistic market value of the reused property after
rehabilitation or new construction, taking into account the market
conditions particular to the neighborhood or subarea of the City in
which the property is located; and
(3) The extent to which the cost exceeds or does not exceed the market
value after rehabilitation, or demolition and new construction, and
the extent to which any "as is" value of the property prior to
rehabilitation can be added to the cost of rehabilitation or
demolition and new construction without the resulting combined
cost exceeding the market value as separately determined. If the
appraisal finds that the cost of rehabilitation or demolition and new
construction, as appropriate, exceeds the realistic market value
after rehabilitation or demolition and new construction, there shall
be a rebuttable presumption in all proceedings under this
§ 265-31.27 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-31.28
238:350
§ 265-31.29. Removal of property from Abandoned Property List.
If a property which an entity other than the City has purchased or taken
assignment from the City of a tax sale certificate is placed on the Abandoned
Property List, the property shall be removed from the list if the owner of the
certificate pays all the City's taxes and liens due on the property within 30
days after the property is placed on the list; provided, however, that if the
owner of the certificate fails to initiate foreclosure proceedings within six
months after the property was first placed on the list, the property shall be
restored to the Abandoned Property List.
§ 265-31.30. Request to place property on Abandoned Property List.
subsection that the fair market value of the abandoned property is
zero, and that no compensation is due the owner.
A. Any interested party may submit in writing a request to the public
officer that a property be included on the Abandoned Property List
prepared pursuant to Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55),
specifying the street address and block and lot number of the property
to be included, and the grounds for its inclusion. Within 30 days of
receipt of any such request, the public officer shall provide a written
response to the party, either indicating that the property will be added
to the list of abandoned properties or, if not, the reasons for not adding
the property to the list. For the purposes of this subsection, "interested
party" shall include any resident of the City, any owner or operator of a
business within the City or any organization representing the interests
of residents or engaged in furthering the revitalization and
improvement of the neighborhood in which the property is located.
(1) Any interested party may participate in any redetermination
hearing held by the public officer pursuant to Subdivision e of
Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55). Upon written
request by any interested party, the public officer shall provide the
party with at least 20 days' notice of any such hearing. The party
shall provide the public officer with notice at least 10 days before
the hearing of its intention to participate, and the nature of the
testimony or other information that it proposes to submit at the
hearing.
§ 265-31.28 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-31.30
238:351

ARTICLE V
Sale of Residential Property
[Adopted 3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 16-05]
§ 265-32. Certificate of occupancy required.
§ 265-33. Fees.
The fee for all residential inspections and continued certificate of occupancy
shall be as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
A. Certificate of inspection/occupancy required at sale of property.
(1) No owner or agent thereof shall hereafter sell or convey, whether
legal or equitable title, any dwelling or dwelling unit, or premises,
except vacant land, unless prior to such sale or conveyance a
certificate of inspection/certificate of occupancy has been obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall make an inspection prior to the
date of sale. The owner or agent shall cooperate with the Code
Enforcement Officer in arranging for the inspection. If the owner or
agent cooperates with the Code Enforcement Officer and if the
Code Enforcement Officer fails to inspect or to issue a certificate of
inspection as set forth herein, the sale or conveyance may proceed
without a certificate of inspection.
(3) Failure of the City to issue a certificate of inspection as set forth in
this subsection shall not affect the necessity of an owner or agent,
subsequent to a sale or transfer, from obtaining a certificate of
occupancy as required in Subsection B. Nothing in this subsection
prohibits a buyer and seller from negotiating the payment of the
fees set forth in § 149-20 of the Code of the City of Bridgeton.
(4) If, at the time of inspection, the property meets all requirements for
a certificate of occupancy indicating that the property is fit for
human habitation and otherwise complies with the applicable
provisions of the Property Maintenance Code and the Municipal
Code of the City of Bridgeton for occupancy, then a certificate of
occupancy may be issued in lieu of a certificate of inspection.
B. Certificate of occupancy required at occupancy. After sale or
conveyance of legal title and/or equitable title to property, no owner or
agent thereof shall occupy any such dwelling or dwelling unit, without
obtaining a certificate of occupancy from the Code Enforcement Officer
indicating the unit, premises or facility is fit for human habitation or
otherwise complies with the applicable provisions of the Property
Maintenance Code.
§ 265-32 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-34
238:353
§ 265-34. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 265-34 BRIDGETON CODE § 265-34
238:354
Chapter 270
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265. Solid waste — See Ch. 300.
(The definitions for this chapter are included in Article III.)
§ 265-34 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 265-34
238:355

ARTICLE I
Recycling Program
§ 270-1. Statement of intent.
It is the specific intent of this chapter to require all persons, businesses,
and institutions generating solid waste within the City of Bridgeton to
recycle all waste materials classified as recyclable materials pursuant to the
requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:26A-11.1 et seq.
§ 270-2. Collection responsibilities, applicability, and regulations.
The recycling program requires mandatory commingling of recyclable
materials in strict conformity with Municipal Code Chapters 270 and 300
and supplemental waste material disposal policies and regulations
promulgated by the Department of Public Works.
§ 270-3. Authority and responsibilities of Recycling Coordinator.
The Recycling Coordinator, under the supervision of the Director of Public
Works, shall:
A. Exercise general supervision of the recycling program, within the
requirements of this chapter, and subject to any associated preemptive
statutes and regulations as may be enacted into law.
B. Prepare written regulations that identify the acceptable collection and
disposal methods for recyclable materials.
C. Maintain, and promulgate, the official list of materials that must be
recycled.
D. At least once every six months, notify all persons occupying residential,
commercial, and institutional premises within the municipal boundaries
of local recycling opportunities and the recycling requirements of
Municipal Code Chapters 270 and 300. This requirement may be
satisfied by one, or more, of the following actions:
(1) Placing an advertisement in the official newspaper.
(2) Posting a notice where public notices are customarily posted.
(3) Supplementing official periodic notifications mailed to taxpayers.
E. Be responsible to prepare and submit an annual recycling tonnage
report pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16 et seq. as is required for an
application for a recycling tonnage grant, codified at N.J.A.C. 7:26-15.5.
F. Develop and make available a recycling exemption request form
pursuant to § 270-5.
G. Maintain recycling records pursuant to §§ 270-3E and 270-5.
§ 270-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 270-4
238:357
§ 270-4. Collection hours.
The Bridgeton City Council may limit the collection of designated recyclable
materials to specified operating hours in order to preserve peace and quiet
in neighborhoods during the hours when most residents are asleep.
§ 270-5. Recycling exemptions.
Persons occupying commercial and institutional premises within the City's
municipal boundaries may be exempted from the recycling requirements of
Municipal Code Chapters 270 and 300 provided that:
§ 270-6. Master Plan and new developments.
§ 270-7. Coordinator training and qualifications.
A. An exemption request form is completed and submitted to the
Recycling Coordinator for evaluation.
B. The Recycling Coordinator submits a report containing the results of
the evaluation, a recommendation that the exemption be granted or
denied, and the reasons for that decision.
C. The completed recycling exemption request form and the Recycling
Coordinator's evaluation report are provided to the Municipal Clerk
within 10 calendar days from the receipt of the completed exemption
request form. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
D. The exemption application is approved by the Bridgeton City Council.
A. The Bridgeton City Council shall, at least once every 36 months, require
a review of the Master Plan and Development Regulations it has
adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26A-11.4 for possible revisions to reflect
changes in federal, state, county and municipal laws, policies and
objectives concerning the collection, disposition and recycling of
designated recyclable materials.
B. A provision for a Recycling Coordinator review and comment shall be
included on all Zoning and Planning Board applications to ensure that
the appropriate waste collection, storage, and recycling considerations
are brought to the attention of the Board members.
A. The Recycling Coordinator shall have achieved professional
certification in compliance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99
et seq., the provisions of the county recycling plan, and the Municipal
Recycling Ordinance passed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.11 et seq.
B. Detailed records of all training provided to the Recycling Coordinator
shall be kept by the Coordinator, specifying names of personnel trained,
the dates when training occurred and the type and extent of training
provided.
§ 270-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 270-7
238:358
§ 270-8. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced severally by the Bridgeton
Recycling Coordinator, Department of Public Works Code Enforcement
Officials, or the Cumberland Country Department of Health, Environmental
Division, as follows:
C. All recycling training documentation shall be maintained for three
years from the date the training occurred.
A. The mandatory recycling provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in
accordance with the rules and regulations pursuant to § 270-2.
B. Inspections may consist of sorting through containers and opening of
waste bags.
C. Inspection findings (including any notices of violation) identified by
other than the Bridgeton Recycling Coordinator shall be conveyed in
writing to said Coordinator.
D. Nothing contained within this chapter shall prohibit the enforcement of
any other chapter of the Municipal Code of the City of Bridgeton.
§ 270-7 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 270-8
238:359

ARTICLE II
Violations and Penalties; Severability
§ 270-9. Violations and penalties.
§ 270-10. Severability.
In the event that it is determined, by a court of competent jurisdiction, that
any provision or section of this chapter is unconstitutional, all other sections
and provisions shall remain in effect.
A. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a violation.
B. The penalties for violations of this chapter shall follow the provisions of
Chapter 300, Article V.
C. Anyone who is convicted of violating this chapter may also be subject to
additional penalties as provided by county, state, and federal law, such
as an additional fine as a repeat offender pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
§ 270-9 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 270-10
238:361

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 270-11. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT — A property (such as an apartment building)
having more than one tenant.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated as recyclable
by the Recycling Coordinator through regulations promulgated by the
Department of Public Works.
RECYCLE — The act of commingling recyclable materials at the point of
their collection for the purpose of recycling by methods that may differ from
traditional waste disposal methods. This practice is also known as singlestream
recycling (SSR).
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person appointed by the Mayor who
shall be authorized to, among other things, enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and any rules and regulations which may be promulgated
hereunder.
§ 270-11 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 270-11
238:363
Chapter 277
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Housing permit fees — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 158.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 256, Art. II.
§ 270-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 270-11
238:364
ARTICLE I
Units of Dwelling Space
[Adopted 1-3-1984 by Ord. No. 83-10]
§ 277-1. Powers of Director.
The Director of the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement is designated
as the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article.
§ 277-2. Definitions.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Housing and Code
Enforcement of the City of Bridgeton.
UNIT OF DWELLING SPACE — Any room or rooms, or suite or apartment
thereof, whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied, or intended,
arranged or designed to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by
one or more persons, provided that this definition shall not be construed to
include:
§ 277-3. Adoption of standards.56
Any rooming house or boarding house as defined by the Rooming and
Boarding House Act of 1979, N.J.S.A. 55:13B-l et seq.
A.
Any hotel, motor hotel, motel, or established guest house which is
commonly regarded as a motor hotel or motel; however, this section is
limited to hotels, motor hotels, and motels or established guest houses
which contain at least 10 or more units of dwelling space or which have
sleeping facilities for at least 25 or more persons and are kept, used,
maintained, advertised as, or held out to be, a place where sleeping
or dwelling accommodations are available to transient or permanent
guests.
B.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, Chapter 265, Article II,
Property Maintenance Code, is hereby accepted, adopted and
established as a standard to be used as a guide in determining whether
dwellings in this municipality are safe, sanitary, and fit for human
habitation and rental, and to determine whether premises are being
maintained in such condition as to not constitute a blighting effect upon
neighboring properties nor an element leading to a progressive
deterioration and downgrading of neighboring properties with an
accompanying diminution of property values.
B. A copy of the Property Maintenance Code is annexed to this article and
three copies of the same have been placed on file in the office of the
Municipal Clerk and are available to all persons desiring to use and
examine same. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 277-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 277-4
238:365
§ 277-4. Inspections; right of access.
The Director or his representative is hereby authorized and directed to
make inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units, and premises located within the City of Bridgeton in order
that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of
the occupants of the dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose
of making such inspections, the Director or his representative is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The owner or
occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit, or the person
in charge thereof, shall give the Director or his representative free access
to such dwellings, dwelling units, or rooming units and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections, examinations and
surveys. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner
or his agent or employee thereof, access to any part of such dwelling or
dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance
with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule or regulation
adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 277-5. Service of notice of violation. [Amended 9-5-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-04; 4-1-2008 by Ord. No. 07-35]
A. Notice to owner or person or persons responsible. Except with respect
to overcrowding violations or violations of Chapter 203 of the Municipal
Code, neither of which shall require prior notice, whenever the Director
or the Director's representative determines that there has been a
violation of this article or has grounds to believe that a violation has
occurred, notice of the alleged violation shall be given to the owner,
occupant or the person or persons responsible therefor in the manner
described hereafter.
B. Form of the notice. Such notice shall be:
(1) In writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons it is being issued;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the following persons:
(a) The record title owner as listed in the office of the Tax
Assessor; or
(b) The assessed owner as listed in the office of the fax Collector;
or
(c) The occupants.
C. Method of service.
§ 277-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 277-5
238:366
§ 277-6. Persons affected by notice of violation.
The following persons shall be considered affected by the notice provided
by § 277-5 and shall be responsible for corrections of alleged violations:
§ 277-7. Hearing.
(1) A notice of violation or a summons shall be deemed to be properly
served if a copy thereof is delivered personally to the owner,
occupant or person responsible or sent by regular mail to the
owner, occupant or person responsible at their last known address.
Service shall be effective unless the notice is returned by postal
service marked, "moved," "unable to forward," "address unknown,"
or any other reason to believe that service was not effected. If the
notice is returned as not delivered, service shall be effectuated by
posting a copy of the notice of violation in a conspicuous place in or
about the structure affected by such notice.
(2) Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's
agent or upon the person responsible for the violations shall
constitute service of notice upon the owner.
A. The record title owners as listed in the office of the Tax Assessor. A
record title owner shall not be relieved of responsibility for correction
of an alleged violation by the existence of an agreement of sale unless
the agreement of sale is properly recorded in the Book of Deeds in the
records of the Cumberland County Clerk's office.
B. The assessed owners as listed in the office of the Tax Collector.
C. Any occupant of the property.
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this article, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted
a hearing before the Director, provided that such person shall request a
hearing in writing to the Director within 10 days of the date of service
of the notice.
B. Upon receipt of the written request for a hearing, the Director shall
schedule a time and place for the hearing and notify all persons affected
by the notice as provided in § 277-6, which time shall not be later than
10 days after the request. At such hearing all affected persons shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and show why the notice shall be
modified or withdrawn.
C. After the hearing as provided in Subsection B, the Director shall
sustain, modify or withdraw the notice depending upon his finding as to
whether the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations have
been complied with.
§ 277-5 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 277-7
238:367
§ 277-8. Emergencies.
Whenever the Director finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health or safety he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such emergency
and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet
the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, such
order shall be effective immediately. Any persons to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon written request to
the Director shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such
hearing and depending upon the findings, whether the provisions of this
article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been
complied with, the Director shall continue such order in effect or modify or
revoke it.
§ 277-9. Rules and regulations.
The Director is hereby authorized and empowered to make and adopt such
written rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this article; provided, however, that such
rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this
article, nor in any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Director shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations
which he may adopt in his office and in the office of the Clerk of the City of
Bridgeton.
§ 277-10. Conformance to Property Maintenance Code required.
[Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
No person shall occupy as owner occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of Chapter 265, Article II, Property
Maintenance Code, as the standard to be used in determining whether a
dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation, and to determine
whether premises are being maintained in such condition as to not
constitute blighting effect upon neighboring properties nor an element
D. If the Director shall sustain or modify the notice, it shall be deemed an
order. The finding and decision of the Director shall be summarized,
reduced to writing and served on all responsible and affected persons,
as provided in § 277-5A(4) and B.
E. If a responsible or affected person does not file a written request for a
hearing on a notice, the notice shall automatically become an order 10
days after the date of the notice.
F. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction within the time and
according to the method provided by the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 277-7 BRIDGETON CODE § 277-10
238:368
leading to a progressive deterioration and downgrading of neighboring
properties with an accompanying diminution of property values.
§ 277-11. Housing permit.
§ 277-12. Conditions for issuance of housing permit.
The housing permit referred to in § 277-11 of this article shall not be issued
by the Director unless the following conditions are satisfied:
A. No person shall rent, lease or let to any occupant or occupants, whether
or not for consideration, any unit of dwelling space unless a housing
permit has been obtained from the Director. The housing permit shall
be valid for a period of one year and shall be on a form prepared by the
Director. The housing permit shall be posted on the interior door of the
entrance to the unit of dwelling space.
B. The record title owner and all responsible persons as set forth in
§ 277-6 of this article shall be responsible to renew the housing permit
annually.
A. An application fee in the amount as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees,
Article II, Schedule of Fees, is paid to the City of Bridgeton. Said fee
shall be paid no later than March 1. If not paid by March 1, the
application fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II,
Schedule of Fees, in addition to any sanctions imposed by § 277-16. The
application fee required under this section shall apply to each housing
unit for which a permit is required. [Amended 5-5-1987 by Ord. No.
86-24; 6-7-1994 by Ord. No. 93-24; 6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 06-37;
8-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
B. Rental registration statement. [Amended 1-5-2010 by Ord. No.
09-07]
(1) The owner of the building in which a unit of dwelling space is
situated has, upon a form provided by the Director, registered said
premises, designating thereon the name, address and telephone
number of the owner and the name, address and telephone number
of an agent, who is located or residing within the County of
Cumberland and who is charged by the owner with the
responsibility for the property in an emergency involving the
property or when the owner is not available, the names and address
of the lessors of the property and the names and ages of all lessees
and/or occupants. Such form shall require the signature of the
owner.
(2) No owner of a building in which a unit of dwelling space is rented,
leased or let shall rent, lease or let such space without obtaining
the names and ages of all lessees and occupants of said unit of
dwelling space. At a change of ownership or a change of tenancy
during the registration year, the owner of a building in which a unit
§ 277-10 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 277-12
238:369
§ 277-13. Revocation of permit. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No.
03-5]
Should any investigation or inspection pursuant to § 277-4 reveal that the
unit of dwelling space does not conform in all respects with the provisions
of this article and Chapter 265, Article II, Property Maintenance Code, the
Director may proceed in accordance with §§ 277-5, 277-6 and 277-7 of this
article including notice of alleged violations, establishment of reasonable
time for correction of violations, and opportunity of affected persons to be
heard. In the event a reinspection reveals that the alleged violations have
been corrected and the unit of dwelling space continues to not conform
in all respects to the provisions of this article and the provisions of the
Property Maintenance Code, the Director, in addition to all ether remedies
provided by this order, may revoke the permit issued pursuant to § 277-11.
§ 277-14. Certificate of occupancy required.
§ 277-15. Subletting.
No tenant or occupant of any dwelling, dwelling unit, hotel, rooming house
or rooming unit shall sublease, sublet or permit use of the dwelling or
lodging unit without complying with the provisions of this article.
of dwelling space is situated shall provide an updated rental
registration statement to the City of Bridgeton, providing for the
names and ages of all lessees and/or occupants. A change of
tenancy shall also mean the addition or deletion of any person not
included in the annual registration statement. Such updated rental
registration statement shall require the signature of the owner.
(3) The Director may provide a copy of the rental registration
statement to the Police Chief, the construction officer, the Fire
Chief and the Board of Education of the City of Bridgeton. When
providing a copy of the rental registration statement to any other
person or entity, the rental registration statement shall be redacted
to remove the ages of the tenants.
C. Presentation of a current certificate of insurance as required in Article
III, §§ 277-23 through 277-27. [Added 1-5-2010 by Ord. No. 09-07]
A. This section shall be in addition to the requirement of obtaining a
housing permit as provided in § 277-11 of this article.
B. No person shall rent, lease or let to any occupant or occupants, whether
or not for consideration, any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit unless a certificate of occupancy shall first have been
obtained from the Director. Said certificate shall certify that the
building or unit is fit for human habitation and complies with the
requirements of all ordinances of the City of Bridgeton which relates to
housing. No tenant or occupant shall sublease, sublet or permit use of
dwelling or lodging units without following the above procedure.
§ 277-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 277-16
238:370
§ 277-16. Violations and penalties.
§ 277-17. Conflicting provisions.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the Property
Maintenance Code be in conflict with or inconsistent with any provision of
this article, this article shall be considered controlling.
§ 277-18. More stringent standards to prevail.
Nothing in this article or in the Code adopted hereby shall be construed to
amend, supersede, abrogate or impair any ordinance or part of ordinances
adopted by the City of Bridgeton having standards more stringent than
those adopted herein. The provisions of any and all such ordinances shall
supersede the standards set forth herein.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 277-11 or
277-12 of this article shall upon conviction thereof, be subject, for the
first offense, to a fine of not more than $100. For a second offense, a
person shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500. For a third or
subsequent offense, a person shall be punished as provided in Chapter
1, Article III, General Penalty.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any other provisions of this
article shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense
end shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 277-16 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 277-18
238:371

ARTICLE II
Certificates of Occupancy
[Adopted 4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 86-23]
§ 277-19. Certificate of occupancy required. [Amended 10-6-2003
by Ord. No. 03-5; 12-5-2006 by Ord. No. 06-17]
A. Certificate of inspection required at sale of property.
(1) No owner or agent thereof shall hereafter sell or convey, whether
legal or equitable title, any dwelling or dwelling unit, or premises,
except vacant land, unless prior to such sale or conveyance a
certificate of inspection/certificate of occupancy has been obtained
from the Code Enforcement Officer. [Amended 3-15-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-06]
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer shall make an inspection prior to the
date of sale. The owner or agent shall cooperate with the Code
Enforcement Officer in arranging for the inspection. If the owner or
agent cooperates with the Code Enforcement Officer and if the
Code Enforcement Officer fails to inspect or to issue a certificate of
inspection as set forth herein, the sale or conveyance may proceed
without a certificate of inspection. [Amended 3-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-06]
(3) Failure of the City to issue a certificate of inspection as set forth in
this subsection shall not affect the necessity of an owner or agent,
subsequent to a sale or transfer, from obtaining a certificate of
occupancy as required in Subsection B. Nothing in this subsection
prohibits a buyer and seller from negotiating the payment of the
fees set forth in § 149-20 of the Code of the City of Bridgeton.
(4) If, at the time of inspection, the property meets all requirements for
a certificate of occupancy, indicating that the property is fit for
human habitation or otherwise complies with the applicable
provisions of the Property Maintenance Code, and the Municipal
Code of the City of Bridgeton for occupancy, then a certificate of
occupancy may be issued in lieu of a certificate of inspection.
B. Certificate of occupancy required at occupancy.
(1) (Reserved)57
(2) Rental properties. No owner or agent thereof shall hereafter rent,
lease or let to any person or persons, whether or not for
consideration, any dwelling or dwelling unit, commercial, office,
industrial warehousing or storage assembly or other commercial or
recreational space or facility within any structure, building or
premises, except vacant land, without obtaining a certificate of
57.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(1), Owner-occupied, was repealed 3-15-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-06.
§ 277-19 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 277-19
238:373
§ 277-20. Fees. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
The fee for all nonresidential inspections shall be as set forth in Chapter
149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
§ 277-21. Registration of buildings containing two or more dwelling
units.
The owner of any building within the City containing two or more dwelling
units shall register the premises upon a form provided by the Division of
Housing and Code Enforcement designating thereon the name and address
of the owner, the name and address of the local resident charged with the
responsibility of the maintenance of the property and the name and address
of all lessors of the property.
§ 277-22. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
occupancy from the Code Enforcement Officer indicating the unit,
premises or facility is fit for human habitation or otherwise
complies with the applicable provisions of the Property
Maintenance Code.
C. No tenant or occupant shall sublease, sublet or permit the use of a
dwelling or lodging unit or structure, building or premises, regardless
of use without following the procedures set forth in the preceding
sections.
D. Any real estate broker and/or real estate agent rendering services to an
owner with respect to the transfer, sale or conveyance, rental, or
leasing of property pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be an
agent of the owner. In the event that the agent is charged with a
violation of this section for failure to obtain certificates of inspection
and/or occupancy prior to the transfer, sale or conveyance, rental or
leasing of property pursuant to the within sections, then it shall be an
affirmative defense to such charge that the agent has presented notice
to the owner from the agent notifying the owner of the obligation to
obtain such certificates prior to the transfer, sale or conveyance, rental
or leasing of property, provided that said notice is either sent by
certified mail, with a receipt, or the owner has affixed the owner's
signature to the notice.
§ 277-19 BRIDGETON CODE § 277-22
238:374
ARTICLE III
Demolition Insurance
[Adopted 6-21-1994 by Ord. No. 93-26]
§ 277-23. Adequate insurance coverage required.
All owners of residential properties which are rented to tenants for
residential purposes shall maintain adequate insurance coverage to insure
that the costs of demolition of such properties shall be paid pursuant to
one or more policies of insurance covering such dwellings, buildings or
residences.
§ 277-24. Notification of damage.
In the event of any occurrence, including but not limited to fire, wind,
water damage, upset or other casualty which renders any residential rental
property unfit for human habitation or which results in the condemnation
of such property or properties, the owner thereof shall notify the Division
of Housing and Code Enforcement of the City of Bridgeton of such damage
within the 10 days of the occurrence thereof.
§ 277-25. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
No owner of a residential property which is rented to others for residential
use, in whole or part, shall be issued a certificate of occupancy for such
premises until and unless evidence of adequate insurance coverage to
indemnify for the cost of demolition and let clearance for such premises has
been presented to the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement of the City
of Bridgeton.
§ 277-26. Filing of certificate of insurance with City.
Upon annual registration, the owner of any residential property which
is rented to others for residential use shall present to the Division of
Housing and Code Enforcement of the City of Bridgeton, a certificate of
insurance setting forth the limits of insurance coverage and indemnifying
the City of Bridgeton against demolition costs which may be incurred for
the demolition of such premises. The limits of such insurance shall not be
less than the assessed value of such property or properties.
§ 277-27. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 277-23 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 277-27
238:375

ARTICLE IV
Dwelling Units
[Adopted 2-21-1995 by Ord. No. 94-22]
§ 277-28. Powers of Director.
The Director of the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement is designated
as of the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this article.
§ 277-29. Definitions.
CODE — The Code adopted by the City of Bridgeton for the control and
regulation of dwellings, premises, buildings or structures within the City of
Bridgeton.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Housing and Code
Enforcement of the City of Bridgeton.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms, or suite or apartment thereof,
whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied, or intended, arranged
or designed to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or more
persons, provided that this definition shall not be construed to include:
§ 277-30. Inspections; right of access.
The Director or his representative is hereby authorized and directed to
make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, in order that he
may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants
of the dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the Director or his representative is hereby authorized to enter,
examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling,
dwelling unit and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give
the Director or his representative free access to such dwellings, dwelling
units, or rooming units and its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of such inspections, examinations and surveys. Every occupant of
a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner or his agent or employee
thereof, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit; or its premises,
at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations
as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article
Any rooming house or boarding house as defined by the Rooming and
Boarding House Act of 1979, N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq.
A.
Any hotel, motor hotel, motel, or established guest house which is
commonly regarded as a motor hotel, motel; however this section is
limited to hotels, motor hotels, and motels or established guest houses
which contain at least 10 or more units of dwelling space or which have
sleeping facilities for at least 25 or more persons and are kept, used,
maintained, advertised as, or held out to be, a place where sleeping
or dwelling accommodations are available to transient or permanent
guests.
B.
§ 277-28 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 277-30
238:377
or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 277-31. Notice of violations.
Whenever the Director or his representative determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this article, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the record title
owner and to all persons responsible therefor as provided in the Code.
§ 277-32. Emergencies.
Whenever the Director finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such emergency
and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet
the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, such
order shall be effective immediately. Any persons to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon written request to
the Director shall be afforded a hearing as set out in the appeal procedures
in the code.
§ 277-33. Rules and regulations.
The Director is hereby authorized and empowered to make and adopt such
written rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this article; provided, however, that such
rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this
article, nor in any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Director shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations
which he may adopt in his office and in the office of the Clerk of the City of
Bridgeton.
§ 277-34. Standards.
No person shall occupy as owner occupant or rent to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not conform to the provisions of the code established as the standard58
to be used in determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary and fit for
human habitation, and to determine whether premises are being maintained
in such condition as to not constitute blighting effect upon neighboring
properties nor an element leading to a progressive deterioration and
downgrading of neighboring properties with an accompanying diminution
of property values.
§ 277-35. Housing permit.
58.Editor's Note: See Article I of this chapter, § 277-3
§ 277-30 BRIDGETON CODE § 277-35
238:378
A. No person shall rent, lease or let to any occupant or occupants, whether
or not for consideration, a dwelling unit unless a housing permit has
been obtained from the Director. The housing permit shall be valid for a
period of one year and shall be on a form prepared by the Director. The
housing permit shall be posted on the interior door of the entrance to
the dwelling unit. The record title owner shall be responsible to renew
the housing permit annually.
B. Application. The housing permit shall not be issued by the Director
unless the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) An application fee in the amount of as set forth in Chapter 149,
Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees, per year is paid to the City of
Bridgeton. Said fee shall be paid no later than March 1 of each
year. If not paid by March 1, the application fee as set forth in
Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees, shall be in addition
to any sanctions imposed by § 277-39. [Amended 8-16-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-5; 8-2-2011 by Ord. No. 11-03]
(2) Rental registration statement. [Amended 1-5-2010 by Ord. No.
09-07]
(a) The owner of the building in which a unit of dwelling space is
situated has, upon a form provided by the Director, registered
said premises, designating thereon the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and the name, address and
telephone number of an agent, who is located or residing
within the County of Cumberland and who is charged by the
owner with the responsibility for the property in an emergency
involving the property or when the owner is not available, the
names and address of the lessors of the property and the
names and ages of all lessees and/or occupants. Such form
shall require the signature of the owner.
(b) No owner of a building in which a unit of dwelling space is
rented, leased or let shall rent, lease or let such space without
obtaining the names and ages of all lessees and occupants of
said unit of dwelling space. At a change of ownership or a
change of tenancy during the registration year, the owner of a
building in which a unit of dwelling space is situated shall
provide an updated rental registration statement to the City of
Bridgeton, providing for the names and ages of all lessees and/
or occupants. A change of tenancy shall also mean the addition
or deletion of any person not included in the annual
registration statement. Such updated registration statement
shall require the signature of the owner.
(c) The Director may provide a copy of the rental registration
statement to the Police Chief, the construction officer, the Fire
Chief and the Board of Education of the City of Bridgeton.
When providing a copy of the rental registration statement to
§ 277-35 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 277-35
238:379
§ 277-36. Revocation of housing permit.
Should any investigation or inspection pursuant to § 277-30 reveal that
the dwelling unit does not conform in all respects with the provisions of
this article and to the provisions of the code, the Director may proceed in
accordance with the code and establish reasonable time for correction of
violations, and an opportunity of affected persons to be heard. In the event
a reinspection reveals that the alleged violations have not been corrected
and the unit of dwelling space continues to not conform in all respects to
the provisions of this article and the provisions of the code, the Director,
in addition to all other remedies provided by this article, may revoke the
permit issued pursuant to § 277-35.
§ 277-37. Certificate of occupancy required. [Amended 4-5-2004 by
Ord. No. 03-22]
This section shall be in addition to the requirement of obtaining a housing
permit as provided in § 277-35 of this article.
any other person or entity, the rental registration statement
shall be redacted to remove the names and ages of any
children.
(3) Presentation of a current certificate of insurance as required in
Article III, §§ 277-23 through 277-27. [Added 1-5-2010 by Ord.
No. 09-07]
A. No person shall rent, lease or let to any occupant or occupants, whether
or not for consideration, any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit unless a certificate of occupancy shall first have been
obtained from the Director. Said certificate shall certify that the
building or unit is fit for human habitation and complies with the
requirements of all ordinances of the City of Bridgeton which relate to
housing. No tenant or occupant shall sublease, sublet or permit use of
dwelling or lodging units without following the above procedure.
B. Every rental unit shall be subject to inspection at least once within a
calendar year by the Housing Department to determine that such unit is
in compliance with this article and the codes of the City and shall
receive a certificate of occupancy upon successful completion of such
inspection. Every rental unit shall also be required to receive the abovedescribed
inspection upon any change in occupancy, and any rental unit
owner shall report such changes to the Housing Department and obtain
a new certificate of occupancy before allowing a change in occupancy.
In the event that a unit has been inspected within the past calendar
year, an annual inspection shall not be required under this section until
one year has passed from the date of the most recent inspection. A
change of occupancy inspection shall be good for 30 days in the event of
an additional occupancy change within 30 days of a change of
occupancy inspection, if the rental unit owner gives notice to the
Housing Department of the additional change within the thirty-day
§ 277-35 BRIDGETON CODE § 277-37
238:380
§ 277-38. Tenant compliance.
No tenant or occupant of any dwelling, dwelling units, hotel, rooming house
or rooming unit shall sublease, sublet or permit use of the dwelling or
lodging unit without complying with the provisions of this article.
§ 277-39. Violations and penalties.
§ 277-40. Lien.
The City, by resolution of the City Council of the City of Bridgeton, may
abate a nuisance, correct a defect, or put the premises in proper condition
so as to comply with the code, or any other municipal ordinance or state
law, at the cost of the owner or lessor, and expend municipal funds for
such proposes and charge the same against the premises, and the amount
thereof as determined by the City Council shall be a lien against the
premises and may be collected as any other municipal lien or by an action
at law.
period. In such cases, a new occupancy certificate shall be issued for
the new occupant without additional inspection.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of § 277-35 this
article shall upon conviction thereof, be subject, for the first offense, to
a fine of not more than $500. For a second offense, a person shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000. For a third or subsequent
offense, a person shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any other provisions of this
article shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in
Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue, may constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 277-37 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 277-40
238:381
Chapter 279
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 279-1. Purpose and intent; general requirements.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to manage the placement and number of
satellite dish antennas (SDAs) within the City of Bridgeton in a manner
that will properly safeguard the public health, safety and welfare, as
well as preserve the nature of historic properties, while complying with
the requirements of the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Federal
Communications Commission Over-the-Air Reception Devices (OTARD)
rule.59
B. The following requirements apply to SDAs that are less than one meter
(39.37 inches) in diameter.
(1) All SDA installations shall be reviewed by the Zoning Official for
compliance with the requirements of this chapter before being
installed.
(2) Permits are not required, unless the SDA installation involves a
pole (or mast) that extends more than 12 feet above the roofline or
that encroaches upon any zoning setback specified by Chapter 370.
(3) Installations visible from the street on (or in front of) structures in
the Historic Preservation District shall be approved by the Zoning
Official.
(4) Satellite dish antennas shall be placed where they are not visible
from the street unless such placement prevents reception of an
acceptable signal according to a written statement from a licensed,
authorized installer on company letterhead that includes the
installer's signature.
(5) Prohibited placement; installation of wires and cables.
(a) Satellite dish antennas shall not be placed:
[1] On fire escapes or other structures prohibited by the Fire
Code.
[2] On utility poles or light standards.
59.Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 303.
§ 277-40 BRIDGETON CODE § 279-1
238:382
§ 279-2. Violations and penalties.
[3] Within 25 feet of electrical service entry power lines.
[4] On common areas (roof, exterior walls, etc.) of an
apartment building, townhouse, condominium.
(b) Wires and cables between the antenna and any structure shall
be properly installed in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code, the BOCA National Building Code, and the
National Electrical Code, including ground cables, where
required.
(6) Satellite dish antennas shall be installed in a manner so as not to
interfere with television, radio or similar reception in adjacent and
nearby areas and shall meet all state and federal requirements.
(7) Satellite dish antennas may not be placed on any lot which does not
contain a permitted principal structure.
(8) To the greatest extent possible, all SDAs shall blend with the
immediate surrounding area, including the color of the roof when
roof mounted.
(9) No advertisements of any type are permitted on any SDA.
(10) Existing antenna installations that do not adhere to these
requirements shall be brought into compliance within 30 days of
receiving a notice of violation or shall be removed.
(11) Satellite dish antennas not in active service shall be removed
within 30 days of ending the service subscription. Proof of active
service is demonstrated by a current invoice, or active contract, for
said service.
(12) Unless a multiunit dwelling is configured such that a single SDA
provides service to multiple dwelling units, the following
requirements shall be enforced:
(a) Landlords are responsible to ensure SDAs are removed
whenever a change of tenant occurs, unless the new tenant
provides proof of subscription service within 30 days of the
lease (or occupancy) date.
(b) Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued until existing
inactive SDAs are removed.
A. Except as otherwise specifically provided within this chapter, any
person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be liable to
pay a fine of $35 for a first offense, $75 for a second offense and $150
for a third offense. Such amounts may be paid without appearance in
court unless the summons otherwise indicates that a court appearance
is necessary before the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of
§ 279-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 279-2
238:383
Chapter 281
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 254.
Bridgeton. If a court appearance is required, the Court shall impose
the general penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, for an offense/
violation. If a court appearance is required, the court may also impose
remediation and community service up to 30 days. In addition, any
person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of a violation of this
article shall pay all expenses incurred for the removal of said SDA. Each
day that a violation occurs may be considered as a separate violation of
the provisions of this chapter.
B. For purposes of determining the imposition of penalties for more than
one offense or violation:
(1) An owner of property shall have such violations and penalties
applied separately to each property owned.
(2) Such offenses and violations shall accumulate on a yearly basis
only, beginning January 1 of each year.
§ 279-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 279-2
238:384
ARTICLE I
Resale of Precious Metal, Coins and Jewelry
[Adopted 6-1-2010 by Ord. No. 09-14]
§ 281-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COINS — United States or foreign metal currency to be used as money or
historical coins, no longer in circulation, having historical or numismatic
value.
JEWELRY — Ornaments, including but not limited to items of personal
wear, made of gold, silver, or other precious metals, which may include
precious stones, including but not limited to rings, earrings, necklaces, and
bracelets.
MERCHANT — One who purchases precious metals from the public or sells
or otherwise exchanges or trades the precious metals to refiners or brokers
or makes appraisals of the precious metals or otherwise conveys, melts
down, or alters said precious metals in any form; in addition, a merchant
who purchases coins or jewelry from the public for resale or otherwise
exchanges or trades coins or jewelry to brokers or sells at auctions.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, and their alloys as defined in
N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and 51:6-1 et seq.
PURCHASE — Not only the exchange of money for precious metals, jewelry,
or coins, but the exchange or trading of any other tangible or intangible
property for precious metals, jewelry, or coins.
§ 281-2. Merchant responsibilities and requirements.
Every merchant within the City of Bridgeton shall, upon the purchase of
any precious metals, jewelry, or coins from the public, be required to do the
following:
A. Record on a numbered receipt the name, address, and telephone
number of the purchaser; the name, driver's license, address, and
telephone number of the seller or sellers; the time and date of the
transaction; the net weight in terms of pounds troy, pennyweight (troy),
or kilograms/grams of the precious metals, jewelry (and any variety or
type thereof) or coins; fineness in terms of karats for gold, and sterling
or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and 51:6-1 et
seq.
B. Supply to the Bridgeton Police Department, within two days of the date
of purchase, on a form approved by the City of Bridgeton, the
information contained in Subsection A above, plus the following:
(1) A physical description of the seller.
§ 281-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 281-2
238:385
§ 281-3. Nonapplicability.
§ 281-4. Purchases from minors.
No merchant within the City of Bridgeton shall purchase any precious
metals, jewelry, or coins from any person under the age of 18 years.
(2) The receipt number.
(3) A full description of the item or items purchased, including but not
limited to marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials and
monograms.
(4) The price paid for the item.
(5) The signature of the seller, with an identification of the individual
who was responsible for handling the transaction.
(6) A photograph of items that have been received from a seller (shall
be taken and preserved for not less than 30 days).
C. The precious metals, jewelry, or coins are to be made available for
inspection by the Bridgeton Police Department for a period of five days
from the date the information required above is received by the
Bridgeton Police Department on the approved form. The precious
metals, jewelry, or coins shall remain in the same condition as when
purchased and shall not be changed, modified, melted, or disposed of by
the purchaser until the five-day period has expired. During this five-day
period, the precious metals, jewelry, or coins shall be placed in public
view at the purchaser's place of business. If the property is such that it
would create a hardship on the merchant by holding the precious
metals, jewelry, or coins for such period, the merchant may present the
property to the Bridgeton Police Department in order that it may be
photographed and, if deemed necessary by the Bridgeton Police
Department, an investigation may be implemented. The Bridgeton
Police Department shall have the authority to grant the merchant a
waiver of the requirement under this section.
A. This chapter shall not apply to pawnbrokers whose activities are
regulated by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:22-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C.
3:16-1.1 et seq.
B. This chapter shall not apply to purchases made by jewelers or other
merchants from wholesalers or other suppliers but shall only apply to
those purchases made from the public. The merchant shall keep
records of all wholesale purchases for a period of six months from the
date of such purchase, which records shall be available for inspection
by the Bridgeton, New Jersey, Police Department.
§ 281-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 281-5
238:386
§ 281-5. Violations and penalties.
Violators of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a minimum fine of $100 or a maximum of $2,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days. Each and every violation shall be considered
a separate violation. Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions
of this chapter within one year of the date of a previous violation and
who was fined for the previous violation may be sentenced by the court to
an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed as a
repeat offender shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum
fine provided herein, and same shall be calculated separately from the fine
imposed for the violation of this chapter.
§ 281-5 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 281-5
238:387
Chapter 283
(RESERVED)
Chapter 284
RESIDENT IDENTIFICATION PROGRAM
§ 284-1. Program established.
The City of Bridgeton hereby establishes a City of Bridgeton resident
identification (ID) card program that will issue ID cards to individuals who
can prove their identity and residency, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 284-2. Administering office.
The Bridgeton Resident ID Card Program shall be administered by, and
through, the Municipal Clerk's office.
§ 284-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARE ADDRESS — The address used for mailing purposes by a government
agency, hospital, private or public shelter, nonprofit organization, or
religious institution, serving homeless individuals or survivors of domestic
violence.
CARE ADDRESS LETTER — A letter prepared by a government agency,
hospital, nonprofit organization, private or public shelter, or religious
institution, prepared on the organization's letterhead, authorizing the use
of its address for mailing purposes by an individual. The letter must dated,
and indicate that the applicant has received services from the agency within
the past 15 days.
CARE ORGANIZATION — Any government agency, hospital, private or
public shelter, nonprofit organization, or religious institution, homeless
individuals or survivors of domestic violence.
CITY — The City of Bridgeton.
CITY OF BRIDGETON RESIDENT IDENTIFICATION CARD — The
identification card issued by the City of Bridgeton. Hereinafter, this card
shall be referred to as a resident ID card.
MINOR — A person who is less than 18 years old and is not emancipated.
RESIDENT — A person who can establish that they are a current resident
of the City of Bridgeton pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person who is at least 65 years old.
§ 281-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 284-3
238:388
VETERAN — A person who has served in any United States military
organization as evidenced by an active or retired military ID card, or a Form
DD214 that indicates an honorable discharge.
§ 284-4. Resident identification cards: application; fee; term.
§ 284-5. Proof of identity and residency.
A. Resident ID cards shall be issued to any City of Bridgeton resident that
is able to meet the requirements for establishing his or her identity and
residency pursuant to § 284-5, and pay the application fee. Resident ID
application forms:
(1) Shall be processed through the Municipal Clerk's office according
to a published schedule subject to change based on available
resources and the emergent needs of the City.
(2) Can also be downloaded from the City's website.
B. Resident ID cards:
(1) Shall display the following minimum information: applicant's full
name, photograph, residential or care address, date of birth, card
issue and expiration dates.
(2) Are valid for one year from date of issuance.
C. Relocation outside the City limits shall invalidate the resident ID card,
and such card shall be returned to the City for destruction.
D. The fee for a resident ID card shall be $15 for adults and $8 for minors,
veterans, disabled and senior citizens. The same fees will apply for
renewal or replacement cards. A fee of $7 shall be required on each
occasion that requests a change to any approved application
information.
A. Proof of identity. In order to obtain a residential ID card from the City of
Bridgeton applicants must prove their identity through the identity
point system described in § 284-5C.
B. Information consistency.
(1) Names and dates of birth listed on identity documents must match.
(2) Names and addresses listed on residency documents must match.
C. Identity point system. Applicants shall be required to produce one, or
more, documents for a total of at least four points according to Table 1
below.
(1) Some combination of the applicant's identity documents must
associate his or her photograph with his or her name and date of
birth.
§ 284-3 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 284-5
238:389
(2) Every government-issued identity document provided must be an
original or certified copy with an official government seal.
(3) A four-point document must be government issued. Documents that
show a photograph, name, and date of birth issued by other
organizations shall be two-point documents.
(4) Documents that appear to be altered, forged, or deemed invalid for
any reason will be rejected.
(5) If the applicant is a minor, identity documents must be furnished on
behalf of said minor by his or her parents, legal guardian, or by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
Table 1
Acceptable Identity Documents
Document
Points Information Shown Document Examples
4 Photograph, name, and
date of birth
Passport; consular, or
permanent resident ID
card, license, visa
3 Name and date of birth Birth certificate, license
2 Photograph and name License, military ID
1 Name only Social security or EBT
card
D. Proof of residency.
(1) To establish residency an applicant must present at least two of the
following items showing both the applicant's name and a
residential address located within the City limits:
(a) Utility bill; local property tax statement, mortgage payment
receipt, bank account statement;
(b) Proof that the applicant has a minor child currently enrolled in
a school located within the City; employment pay stub; jury
summons or court order;
(c) Federal or state income tax or refund statement, an insurance
bill (homeowner's, renter's, health, life, or automobile
insurance);
(d) Care address letter confirming residency.
(2) Proof of residency documents must be dated within 45 days of the
application date.
(3) Additional document types may be considered for proof of
residency as adopted by chapter amendment.
§ 284-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 284-6
238:390
§ 284-6. ID card renewals.
Individuals who would like to renew their existing residential ID cards will
only have to prove their continued Bridgeton residency pursuant to the
provisions of § 284-5D.
§ 284-7. Acceptance of cards.
All City of Bridgeton departments shall accept the residential ID card as
proof of identity and residence for access to City services and benefits
unless such acceptance is prohibited by federal or state law or unless there
is reason to suspect fraud by the purported cardholder.
§ 284-8. Confidentiality.
§ 284-9. Disclaimer.
By providing residential ID cards for identification and access to services
provided by the City of Bridgeton, the City does not act as guarantor
or warrantor either of the information provided by the applicant for the
residential ID card or of/against acts, criminal or otherwise committed by
the individual(s) while possessing or using the residential ID card. The City
does not waive any of its protections afforded under federal, state or local
laws, including but not limited to the immunities under the New Jersey Torts
Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq., by issuing the residential ID card.
§ 284-10. Reports.
The Municipal Clerk shall submit quarterly reports to the City Council on
the status of the residential ID card program.
§ 284-11. Violations and penalties.
A. The Municipal Clerk's office shall retain completed residential ID card
application forms pursuant to N.J.S.A. Title 47, Public Records.
B. The City of Bridgeton shall make its best effort to protect the
confidentiality of all residential ID card applicants to the maximum
extent allowable by federal and state law. The City of Bridgeton shall
not disclose personal information obtained from an applicant for a
residential ID card to any individual, public, or private entity, unless
required by a court of competent jurisdiction, or authorized in writing
by the individual to whom such information pertains, or when such
individual is a minor or is otherwise not legally competent, by such
individual's parent or legal guardian; when so ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
A. Altering, duplication, reproduction, intentionally damaging, using
another person's residential ID card, or allowing the cardholder's
residential ID card to be used by another person shall result in
confiscation of the card and is in violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:28-7.
§ 284-6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 284-11
238:391
Chapter 286
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor storage of shopping carts — See Ch.
370, § 370-62D(5).
§ 286-1. Removing or abandoning carts prohibited.
No person shall remove a grocery or shopping cart from any store, shop,
market or supermarket, and leave or abandon it on any sidewalk, street,
public parking lot or other property, public or private, not owned or
controlled by the owner of the cart.
§ 286-2. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Chapter 294
SMOKING
Submission of false documents to obtain a residential ID card is a
violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:21-2.1(c) and making false statements to obtain
Bridgeton municipal identification is a violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:21-4 and
punishable by law.
B. Except as otherwise expressly provided for by Title 1, Section 1:1-9, any
person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished in accordance with the provisions of the Bridgeton
Municipal Code Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 284-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 286-2
286:392
ARTICLE I
Smoking in Public Buildings
[Adopted 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 94-2]
§ 294-1. Smoking prohibited.
Smoking shall be prohibited in all public buildings owned or occupied by
the City of Bridgeton.
§ 294-2. Signs.
The Business Administrator shall implement this article by posting signs
warning of the prohibition, and by taking any other actions necessary to
ensure compliance with this article.
§ 294-3. Smoking by employees outside buildings.
This article shall not be construed to prohibit smoking by employees of the
City of Bridgeton in areas outside buildings owned by the City of Bridgeton.
§ 294-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 294-1 SMOKING § 294-4
294:393

ARTICLE II
Smoking at Cohanzick Zoo
[Adopted 3-20-2000 by Ord. No. 99-16]
§ 294-5. Use of tobacco prohibited.60
The use of tobacco in any form at Cohanzick Zoo is prohibited.
§ 294-6. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings:
THE COHANZICK ZOO — All buildings, pavilions, habitats, parking lots,
and areas known as the "Cohanzick Zoo."
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use, including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
§ 294-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article shall be deemed to be contributing to
the maintenance of a public nuisance and shall be:
§ 294-8. Signs.
The Department of Recreation and Public Affairs is hereby directed to cause
conspicuous signs to be erected at the entrance and within the boundaries
of the Cohanzick Zoo, clearly instructing no tobacco use permitted.
§ 294-9. Liberal construction.
This article shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health,
safety and welfare of the animal residents of the Zoo.
A. Asked to stop smoking;
B. Asked to leave the premises; and
C. Be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty.
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 294-5 SMOKING § 294-9
294:395
Chapter 300
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
Recycling — See Ch. 270.
Storage of tires — See Ch. 328.
(The definitions for this chapter are included in Article VI.)
§ 294-9 BRIDGETON CODE § 294-9
294:396
ARTICLE I
Collection of Waste Material
§ 300-1. Statement of intent.
It is the specific intent of this chapter to provide for the effective
management of the various forms of waste materials generated within the
City; and, in so doing, maintain the City's appearance and cleanliness for
the benefit and safety of its residents, workers, businesses, and visitors
within the constraint of limited enforcement resources.
§ 300-2. Collection responsibilities, applicability, and regulations.
A. The City of Bridgeton shall provide for the collection, removal and
disposal of AWM from residences within the entire City of Bridgeton in
such manner as it deems necessary, subject to the limitations
established herein.
B. The City Council of the City of Bridgeton shall provide reasonable rules
and regulations in conformity with the provisions of this article as may
be necessary or expedient.
C. At its discretion, The City of Bridgeton may provide a supplemental
collection facility known as a "convenience center," where residents
may take selected waste materials for disposal. The Department of
Public Works is responsible for establishing the facility collection
schedule and controlling the types of material acceptable for collection.
D. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that property owners are
responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter.
E. Construction debris, hazardous materials, and motor vehicle parts
(excluding tires) are prohibited items and shall not be placed within any
collection container, or at the curbside.
F. The City of Bridgeton shall not be responsible for the collection of waste
material generated by any of the following:
(1) Stores or apartment house establishments of more than 10
individual apartments, mobile home parks, restaurants,
warehouses, factories or other industrial and business
establishments of any kind or description.
(2) Properties within the boundaries of the C-1 Zone, commonly known
as the "Downtown (or Central) Business District," as specified in
Chapter 370, the Zoning Code, § 370-18, Central Business District.
(3) Vacant lots or lands within the City of Bridgeton. No vacant lot or
land shall be assessed for any part of the cost thereof.
G. Multi-dwelling-unit properties having more than five, but fewer than
10, units shall have the option to participate in the City's solid waste
§ 300-1 SMOKING § 300-2
294:397
§ 300-3. Trash/recycling containers.
§ 300-4. Items requiring trash sticker.
and recycling program as specified herein, or obtain their own waste
and recycling materials disposal contractor.
(1) A minimum of four rolling trash containers shall be issued when
participating in the City's program. Additional containers may be
requested for an additional fixed fee pursuant to Article II.
(2) The provisions of § 300-2F apply whenever § 300-2G(1) does not
apply.
A. Subject to the provisions of § 300-2F and G, each household of the City
of Bridgeton shall be provided with two rolling trash containers.
(1) One container for the collection, and the disposal, of residential
waste, unless such trash or refuse items are recyclable materials,
bulky waste, white goods, tires, leaves, brush, or tree limbs, all of
which shall be collected and disposed of as further set forth in this
chapter.
(2) The second (SSR) container shall be used exclusively for the
collection and the recycling of commingled recyclable materials.
B. Any household may request additional rolling trash containers to be
provided. Each additional container shall require an additional fixed fee
pursuant to Article II.
C. Every owner, lessee, agent, occupant or other person having control of
any dwelling or residential premises covered by the terms of this article
shall:
(1) Place, keep, and make readily accessible for the collection and
removal of residential waste, the rolling trash container provided
by the City for such purpose.
(2) Commingle recyclables for collection and removal using the SSR
collection container provided by the City for such purpose pursuant
to § 300-7.
A. The disposal of bulky waste and white goods shall require a trash
sticker that shall be affixed to each item for collection in such a way
that it is readily visible from the street. Said items shall be placed out
for collection alongside authorized containers.
B. The following items shall require a trash sticker payment of a fee and
pursuant to § 300-19:
(1) Bulky waste: one sticker per item.
§ 300-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 300-4
294:398
§ 300-5. Items not requiring trash sticker.
§ 300-6. Abatement of Solid Waste Utility charges.
(a) Placed in a plastic trash bag, or other receptacle, not to exceed
40 pounds in weight.
(b) Tied together in a bundle not to exceed four feet in length and
40 pounds in weight for PVC pipe or carpet.
(2) White goods: one sticker per item.
(3) Automotive (except truck), bike, or lawn-mower tires: one sticker
per item.
C. Any receptacle other than those authorized placed at the curbside shall
have a valid sticker affixed to it. These receptacles shall be collected as
trash and will not be returned to the curbside.
A. Grass clippings placed at the curbside in thirty-gallon-maximumcapacity,
clear plastic bags, alongside residential waste.
B. Loose, or bagged leaves, small brush, branches, and tree limbs subject
to the conditions specified in Article III, § 300-21, 300-22 or 300-23, for
bagged leaves, brush, and loose leaves, respectively.
A. If a residential unit is vacant and not being utilized, and the owner of
the property has discontinued water service by paying the appropriate
water service turnoff fee, then the property owner may apply for an
abatement of the Solid Waste Utility charge for that residential unit.
(1) The applicant initiates this process by first returning to the
Department of Public Works all solid waste and SSR containers
issued for the residential unit.
(2) The applicant must then complete and file an application for the
abatement of the Solid Waste Utility charge with the City Tax
Office.
B. Upon receipt of a completed application and a certification from the
Department of Public Works that the applicant has returned all solid
waste and SSR containers, the Tax Collector shall:
(1) Abate the Solid Waste Utility charge for the entire month if such
certification is dated on or before the 15th of the month.
(2) If such certification is dated after the 15th of the month, the Tax
Collector shall abate the Solid Waste Utility charge beginning the
next calendar month.
C. If the applicant cannot return the solid waste trash container(s) issued
to his or her residential unit, a charge of $90 shall be imposed for each
solid waste and SSR container which is not returned. Upon payment of
§ 300-4 SMOKING § 300-6
294:399
§ 300-7. Recycling program.
§ 300-8. Gutter line collection and schedule.
such a charge, the Tax Collector shall abate the Solid Waste Utility
charges set forth in the preceding subsection.
D. In the event a residential unit is being utilized, or water service has
been resumed, Solid Waste Utility charges will be assessed from the
date of occupancy or restoring water service (whichever date is
earliest), and the property owner shall have a continuing duty within
seven days of either the usage of the property or the resumption of the
water service to make an application with the Tax Collector for the
issuance by the City of a rolling trash container.
E. It shall be a violation of the Municipal Code of the City of Bridgeton if a
property owner of a residential unit falsely claims abatement, or fails to
notify the City of the resumption of the usage of the property or of the
water service. Violations of § 300-6 shall be punishable pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, § 1-17, Maximum
penalty.
A. With the exception of properties specified in § 300-2F and G(2), all
recyclable materials that may accumulate within the City of Bridgeton
shall be collected, removed, and disposed of by the City.
B. In order to facilitate collection and encourage recycling, the recycling
program shall require mandatory commingling of recyclable materials
in strict conformity with the regulations to be promulgated by the
Department of Public Works.
C. Materials designated as part of the mandatory recycling program shall
be removed a minimum of weekly by the contractor(s) designated by
the City of Bridgeton.
D. Plastic bags shall not be used to contain recyclable materials or be
otherwise placed within any SSR container.
E. All recyclable materials placed at the curbside for collection become
the property of the City of Bridgeton. It shall be a violation of this article
for any person other than the selected contractor to collect such
recyclable materials. Each such collection in violation hereof from one
or more residences during the term of the program shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
A. All items to be collected pursuant to §§ 300-3, 300-4 and 300-5 shall be
placed near the gutter line so as to be easily collected from the
roadway, but not so near the gutter line or roadway as to project therein
or as to interfere with vehicles lawfully using said street or roadway.
B. Rolling trash and SSR container lids shall be closed such that the
contents are not visible.
§ 300-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 300-8
294:400
§ 300-9. Proper disposal required.
§ 300-10. Collection service by contract or otherwise.
The City Council of the City of Bridgeton may provide by contract or
otherwise for the collection and removal of AWM within the City of
Bridgeton.
§ 300-11. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this chapter, and the mandatory recycling provisions
contained herein, shall be the responsibility of the Director of Public Works
consistent with the City of Bridgeton Municipal Code.
C. Weekly, on the collection district pickup day (§ 300-20), authorized
containers, grass clippings (pursuant to § 300-5), and bulky waste may
be placed at the gutter line after 4:00 p.m. on the day before the day of
collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m. on the day of collection.
Authorized containers shall be removed from the gutter line no later
than 7:00 a.m. of the day after the collection day.
D. White goods, and not more than four tires, shall be placed for collection
at the gutter line only in the last full week of the month of the resident's
collection district pickup day (§ 300-20).
E. When not placed at the gutter line for trash collection, all trash
containers/receptacles shall be located such that they are not visible
from the street. The enforcement officer's discretion to issue a
summons for violating this subsection shall be presumptively valid
pertaining to all issues, including physical property restrictions and any
known disability of the person responsible for the removal of the
authorized container(s) from the curbside.
F. Any item requiring a trash sticker pursuant to § 300-4 shall have the
sticker applied before placing the item at the curbside for collection.
G. Prior to being placed out for collection, all waste materials to be placed
at the curbside for collection shall be drained of water.
A. Every property owner, and occupant, of a dwelling unit shall dispose of
all waste material as set forth within this chapter.
B. Nothing contained within this chapter shall prohibit the enforcement of
any other chapter of the Municipal Code of the City of Bridgeton.
C. In the event that waste materials are not disposed of properly under the
provisions of this chapter, or any related regulations promulgated by
the Director of Public Works, there shall be a rebuttable presumption
that the property owner of record shall be in violation of this chapter.
§ 300-8 SMOKING § 300-11
294:401
§ 300-12. Building, construction materials, and hazardous waste.
No UWM shall be collected or placed outside or within any trash receptacle
placed at the curbside for trash pickup.
A. The mandatory recycling provisions of this article shall be enforced by
the Director of Public Works in accordance with the established rules
and regulations prepared by said Director.
B. For the purposes of this chapter, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that waste material in front of a property emanated from
that property. Except for multi-dwelling-unit properties having more
than one tenant, the property owner of record shall be responsible for
the proper disposal of all waste materials in front of the property or
dwelling where such material is found. In all other cases, an NOPC will
be issued pursuant to § 300-36.
§ 300-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 300-12
294:402
ARTICLE II
Trash Collection Fees and Districts
§ 300-13. Authority to establish rates and regulations.
Pursuant to this chapter, as may be deemed necessary and proper, the
City Council of the City of Bridgeton shall establish rates, fees, rules and
regulations pertaining to waste collection, removal, and disposal.
§ 300-14. Authority of Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works shall exercise general supervision, subject to
such ordinances as may be passed, over municipal trash collection.
§ 300-15. City to fix flat rates.
The City Council of the City of Bridgeton shall, by resolution, fix such flat
rates for collection as the City of Bridgeton deems necessary to be charged
to the owner of the lands and premises from which such collection is made.
§ 300-16. Exclusion.
No part of the cost of the collection, removing and disposing of waste
material or other refuse within the City shall be assessed on properties
identified in § 300-2F as not subject to municipal waste collection.
§ 300-17. Responsibility for books and collections.
The City Tax Collector shall have charge of all the books of the trash
collection system and make all collections for said municipal trash
collection system and shall deposit all monies received with the City
Finance Department in such manner and at such times as directed.
§ 300-18. Quarterly payment of fees.
All such flat fees charged shall be payable quarterly to the City Collector
or other duly authorized person. If any person fails to pay said charge and
said charge remains unpaid for a period of 90 days after billing, said person
shall be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 300-19. Trash sticker.
In addition to the flat fee specified in Article II, all residents who desire
to have bulky waste or white goods picked up and disposed of shall first
be required to pay for and obtain from the City of Bridgeton Tax Office, or
authorized agent, a single-use Bridgeton trash sticker.
§ 300-13 SMOKING § 300-20
294:403
§ 300-20. Collection districts and days.
For purposes of AWM collection, the City of Bridgeton establishes five
municipal collection districts as set forth on a map on file in the Department
of Public Works office. The collection district days shall be:
A. District 1: Monday.
B. District 2: Tuesday.
C. District 3: Wednesday.
D. District 4: Thursday.
E. District 5: Friday.
§ 300-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 300-20
294:404
ARTICLE III
Collection of Leaves and Brush
§ 300-21. Bagged leaves.
From April 1 to September 30, during the first and the third full week
of each month of the resident's collection district pickup day pursuant to
§ 300-20, the City shall collect bagged leaves from public streets within the
City, provided said leaves are properly secured in clear plastic bags not to
exceed a thirty-gallon capacity. Such bags are to be placed near the gutter
line so as to be easily collected from the roadway, but not so near the gutter
line or roadway as to project therein or as to interfere with vehicles lawfully
using said street or roadway. No trash sticker is required.
§ 300-22. Small brush, tree limbs, logs, trees, roots and stumps.
§ 300-23. Loose leaves.
From October 1 to December 31, during the first and the third full week
of each month of the resident's collection district pickup day pursuant to
§ 300-20, the City shall collect loose leaves from the public streets within
the City, provided that said loose leaves are placed on the property, as close
to the curb as possible, but not closer than 10 feet to any storm drain inlet.
§ 300-24. Allowable time for placement.
The authorized time for placement of leaves, brush, or tree limbs to be
collected by the City shall be no earlier than the Saturday immediately
before the district (or appointment) collection day, and no later than 7:00
a.m. on the aforesaid collection dates.
§ 300-25. Prohibited conduct.
Leaves, brush, and tree limbs shall not be swept, raked, or otherwise be
allowed to spill or blow from private property onto the street or to come in
contact with stormwater.
A. Year round, by appointment only, the City of Bridgeton shall collect
small brush, branches and tree limbs no greater than six inches in
diameter and in minimum lengths of three feet.
(1) Appointments shall be made with (and confirmed by) the
Department of Public Works prior to placing the items at the
curbside.
(2) The small brush and tree limbs shall be placed near the gutter line,
but not so near the gutter line or roadway as to project therein or
as to interfere with vehicles lawfully using said street or roadway.
B. Tree limbs in excess of six inches in diameter, or logs, trees, roots or
stumps shall not be placed at curbside for pickup by the City. Such
placement shall be deemed a violation of this article.
§ 300-21 SMOKING § 300-25
294:405

ARTICLE IV
Solid Waste Utility
§ 300-26. Establishment.
There shall be a Solid Waste Utility, which is owned and operated by the
City of Bridgeton.
§ 300-27. Responsibilities.
The Utility shall be self-sustaining and self-liquidating, and, at the discretion
of the City Council, may make such alterations, extensions, additions and
improvements in services as shall, from time to time, be deemed necessary.
The Utility shall be responsible for all maintenance and operational costs
and expenses of the solid waste and trash collection system.
§ 300-28. Supervision.
The Director of Public Works shall exercise general supervision and have
charge of the Utility established by this article, subject to such ordinances
as may be passed or adopted from time to time by the City Council.
§ 300-29. Establishment of rates, fees, rules and regulations.
The City Council, from time to time, establishes such charges, rates, fees,
rules and regulations for the benefit of the Utility as may be deemed
necessary and proper.
§ 300-30. Financial responsibilities.
The City Tax Collector shall have charge of all the books of the Solid Waste
Utility. The Collector shall make all the collections for solid waste and trash
collection services rendered by the Utility and deposit all monies received
with the City Finance Department in such manner and at such times as the
Business Administrator shall direct.
§ 300-31. Collection of waste materials.
The City shall provide for the collection, removal, and disposal of waste
materials from City of Bridgeton residences subject to the requirement and
specifications of Article I of this chapter.
§ 300-32. Establishment of flat rate.
A. Residential units.
(1) The City shall charge a flat annual rate payable quarterly for every
residential unit for which services shall be provided by the City. For
purposes of the imposition of a flat charge, a residential unit, not
including rooming houses and boardinghouses as defined in
N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq., shall consist of any building, or part
§ 300-26 SMOKING § 300-32
294:407
§ 300-33. Deduction for senior citizens; qualifications.
thereof, that may be occupied by any person or persons or family
for residential purposes.
(2) For purposes of the imposition of a flat rate charge, a residential
unit for a rooming house and boardinghouse as defined in N.J.S.A.
55:13B-1 et seq. shall be based upon the license capacity of the
rooming house and boardinghouse. A residential unit in a rooming
house and boardinghouse shall consist of one residential unit for
every two units, or fraction thereof, of license capacity as set forth
in the license of the rooming house and boardinghouse. The
operator and/or the owner of a rooming house and boardinghouse
shall file with the Tax Collector of the City of Bridgeton a copy of
the license issued by the State of New Jersey after its annual
inspection or at any time a new license is issued, and such license
shall determine the flat rate charge for the rooming house and
boardinghouse.
B. Except as otherwise provided herein, all residential units shall pay a flat
rate of $90 per quarter per unit commencing July 1, 2006.
A. Qualifying senior citizens shall pay a flat rate of $60 per quarter per
unit commencing July 1, 2006.
B. To qualify for the deduction, a senior citizen:
(1) Must have become 65 years of age in the preceding calendar year.
(2) Reside, commencing in the prior calendar year, in a dwelling house
owned by him or her, which is a constituent part of his/her real
property, which real property must either be solely owned by the
senior citizen or owned with his/her spouse as tenants in the
entirety.
(3) Must complete a certified claim for deduction on a form prescribed
by the City and supply such proof as required by the City. A senior
citizen is eligible to apply for the senior citizen deduction on the
day after the senior citizen's 65th birthday. If the certified claim is
approved, the senior citizen deduction shall take effect at the next
quarterly billing.
C. Once a claim is approved for a senior citizen deduction, it shall not be
necessary to file a new claim annually to receive the deduction. In the
event there is a change in status because of the death of the qualifying
senior citizen, or the failure to continue residence by the senior citizen,
or because of the sale of the real property, the deduction shall
automatically cease in the immediately following quarter.
D. It shall be a violation of this article to falsely certify a claim for a
deduction. Violations of this section shall be punishable pursuant to the
§ 300-32 BRIDGETON CODE § 300-33
294:408
§ 300-34. Unpaid charges to become lien; discontinuance of service.
provisions of Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty, § 1-17, Maximum
penalty.
A. The rates charged herein shall be a lien or charge against the property
benefited therefrom. If any part of the amount due and payable in rates
remains unpaid for 30 days following the date for the payment thereof,
interest shall accrue at the rate of 8%, and shall become a lien
enforceable in the manner provided for real property tax liens in
Chapter 5, Title 54, of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
B. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the right of the City to
discontinue service to any property for the failure to pay any amount
owing within 30 days after the date the amount is due and payable, if
written notice of the proposed discontinuance of service and the
reasons therefor have been given, within at least 10 days prior to the
date of discontinuance, to the owner of record of the property. In the
event that notice is provided by mail, the notice requirements shall be
satisfied if the mailing is made to the last known address of the owner of
record and is postmarked at least 10 days prior to the date of
discontinuance. In addition to the ability of the City to place a lien on
record, the City may pursue any action at law to recover moneys due
therefor.
§ 300-33 SMOKING § 300-34
294:409

ARTICLE V
Violations and Penalties; Rebuttal
§ 300-35. Violations and penalties.
§ 300-36. Rebuttal.
For multi-dwelling-unit properties, the following process shall be used to
rebut the presumption of responsibility for violations of this chapter.
A. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be a violation.
B. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the occupant and record
owner of the property, according to the records of the City Tax
Collector, on whose property any bulky items are placed for pickup and
disposal are responsible for the improper placement of each item for
pickup in violation of this section.
C. Except as otherwise specifically provided within this chapter, any
person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to
pay a fine of $35 for a first offense, $75 for a second offense and $150
for a third offense. Such amounts may be paid without appearance in
court unless the summons otherwise indicates that a court appearance
is necessary before the Judge of the Municipal Court of the City of
Bridgeton. If a court appearance is required, the court shall, upon
conviction, impose the general penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Article
III, for an offense/violation. If a court appearance is required, the court
may also impose remediation and community service up to 30 days. In
addition, any person, firm, corporation or other entity convicted of a
violation of this article shall pay all expenses incurred for the removal of
said trash, garbage or refuse. Each day that a violation occurs may be
considered as a separate violation of the provisions of this article.
D. For purposes of determining the imposition of penalties for more than
one offense or violation:
(1) An owner of property shall have such violations and penalties
applied separately to each property owned.
(2) Such offenses and violations shall accumulate on a yearly basis
only, beginning January 1 of each year.
A. For each instance of a violation of this chapter, the property owner of
record shall be issued a notice of pending complaint (NOPC) containing
the following information: the date the offense was found, the specific
nature of the offense, and the associated property address,
accompanied by photographic evidence of the offense.
B. The property owner shall have 10 calendar days from the issue date of
the NOPC to provide the Department of Public Works the name and
address of the person responsible for the offense. The reply shall be
§ 300-35 SMOKING § 300-36
294:411
made in writing by mail (or e-mail) to the address specified in the
NOPC.
C. For each offense specified in an NOPC, a corresponding complaint shall
be issued as follows:
(1) To the person identified in the written reply to the NOPC as
responsible for the offense; or
(2) To the property owner for failure to provide the information
required within the specified time period pursuant to § 300-36B.
§ 300-36 BRIDGETON CODE § 300-36
294:412
ARTICLE VI
Definitions
§ 300-37. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE WASTE MATERIAL (AWM) — The collective term that
describes the acceptable types of refuse that will be collected by the City,
or its designated contractor(s). Specifically, AWM is residential waste, bulky
waste, white goods, yard waste, and recyclable materials.
AUTHORIZED CONTAINERS/RECEPTACLES — Only two solid waste
containers per account are authorized to be placed curbside for waste
collection:[Amended 3-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-02]
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS/DEBRIS — Any materials
from excavating, demolishing, constructing, altering, renovating or
repairing any buildings or property; as well as items used to alter, fabricate,
repair, or refurbish a structure or property, such as wood, brick, concrete,
earth, ceiling tile, plaster, drywall, sheathing, tar paper, shingles, windows,
doors, siding, etc.
BULKY HOUSEHOLD ITEMS/BULKY WASTE — Any item that is not placed
within the rolling trash container such that the lid is considered closed
(contents not visible), such as chairs, sofas, mattresses, box springs, pieces
of furniture, white goods, tires or bagged or bundled residential waste.
COMMINGLED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Commingling is the act of
mixing together all types of recyclable materials into a single container
without separating them into common material types, such as through the
use of plastic or paper bags, which would be a violation of this chapter.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS/WASTE — Any material prohibited in the solid
waste stream, such as antifreeze, batteries, electronic devices (televisions,
computers, monitors, or similar items), liquid paints, solvents, oil- and
petroleum-based liquids, pesticides, herbicides and similar (or related)
items.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT — A property (such as an apartment building)
having more than one tenant.
NOTICE OF PENDING COMPLAINT (NOPC) — A Department of Public
Works form letter that may be issued at the discretion of the Director
of Public Works for a violation of this chapter for multi-dwelling-unit
properties, requiring a written reply within a specified time period.
One ninety-six- (or thirty-five-) gallon, serialized, rolling trash container
(hereinafter referred to as a "rolling trash container"); and
A.
One ninety-six- (or thirty-five-) gallon, serialized, rolling single-stream
recyclable (SSR) container (hereinafter referred to as a "SSR
container").
B.
§ 300-37 SMOKING § 300-37
294:413
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Such materials as specified by the City of
Bridgeton through regulations promulgated by the Department of Public
Works. Typically, recyclable materials includes (but is not limited to) types
of glass, plastic, paper, and corrugated cardboard.
RESIDENTIAL WASTE/TRASH — Any unwanted, or discarded, material,
produced (or created) as a direct result of residential occupancy of a
property, that is placed within an authorized container. Residential waste
includes, but is not limited to, garbage, food containers, packing materials,
or other such refuse.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE MATERIAL (UWM) — The collective term that
describes the unacceptable types of refuse that will not be collected by the
City, or its designated contractor(s). Typically, UWM includes (but is not
limited to) building and construction materials, hazardous materials, motor
vehicle parts (excluding tires), dead animals, etc.
WASTE MATERIAL — The collective term that describes both acceptable
and unacceptable waste types.
WHITE GOODS — Bulky household appliances, such as stoves,
refrigerators, washers or dryers, dishwashers, hot-water heaters,
microwave ovens, air conditioners, etc.
YARD WASTE — The collective term that describes materials such as grass
clippings, leaves, brush, or tree limbs, etc.
§ 300-37 BRIDGETON CODE § 300-37
294:414
Chapter 304
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 167.
Solid waste — See Ch. 300.
Storm sewer systems — See Ch. 305.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 307.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 311.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 360.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 300-37 SMOKING § 300-37
294:415

ARTICLE I
Major Development
[Adopted 4-17-2007 by Ord. No. 06-2761]
§ 304-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 304-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) this article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) this article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the City of Bridgeton.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
61.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former § 304-1, Adoption of state model
ordinance, adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 03-26. The municipal storm sewer protection
ordinances which were listed in former § 304-2, Additional ordinances adopted by
reference, can now be found in the Code as follows: Pet Waste, Ch. 83, Art. II; Litter
Control, Ch. 203; Improper Disposal of waste, Ch. 305, Art. I; Wildlife Feeding, Ch. 83, Art.
III; Containerized Yard Waste, Ch. 300, Art. V; Yard Waste Collection Program, Ch. 300,
Art. VI; and Illicit Connections, Ch. 305, Art. II.
§ 304-1 SMOKING § 304-1
294:417
§ 304-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinances. The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. this article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 304-1 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-2
294:418
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the City of Bridgeton, or political subdivision of this state
§ 304-2 SMOKING § 304-2
294:419
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
§ 304-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-2
294:420
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 304-3. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 304-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
§ 304-2 SMOKING § 304-3
294:421
§ 304-4. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules. [Note: Alternative standards
shall provide at least as much protection from stormwater-related
loss of groundwater recharge, stormwater quantity and water
quality impacts of major development projects as would be
provided under the standards in N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.]
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 304-10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 304-4F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 304-4F and G may be obtained for the enlargement of
an existing public roadway or railroad or the construction or
enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
§ 304-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-4
294:422
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 304-4F and G to the maximum
extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 304-4F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 304-4F and G that were not achievable onsite.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 304-4F and
G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at § 304-4E into the design. The
applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures incorporated
into the design of the project. If the applicant contends that it is not
feasible for engineering, environmental, or safety reasons to
incorporate any nonstructural stormwater management measures
identified in Subsection E(2) below into the design of a particular
project, the applicant shall identify the strategy considered and
provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
§ 304-4 SMOKING § 304-4
294:423
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 304-4E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 304-4E(2)(i)[2] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see § 304-4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension. Examples of grates subject to this standard
include grates in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curbopening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm
sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
§ 304-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-4
294:424
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 304-4G(1) are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 304-4G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 304-4F and G
shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
§ 304-4 SMOKING § 304-4
294:425
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 304-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 304-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
§ 304-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-4
294:426
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 304-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten- and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
§ 304-4 SMOKING § 304-4
294:427
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 304-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
§ 304-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-4
294:428
of non-structural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 304-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 304-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
§ 304-4 SMOKING § 304-4
294:429
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2
TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90
Extended detention basin 40 to 60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 304-6C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60 to 80
Wet bond 50 to 90
(4) If there is more than on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site, in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 304-4F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 304-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
§ 304-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-4
294:430
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top-of-bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards For Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
§ 304-4 SMOKING § 304-4
294:431
§ 304-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and soil conservation district
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 304-4G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
§ 304-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-5
294:432
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 304-5A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at § 304-5A(1)(b). A runoff coefficient or
a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn,
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
§ 304-5 SMOKING § 304-5
294:433
§ 304-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, PO Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 304-8D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosionresistant.
Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
§ 304-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-6
294:434
§ 304-7. Sources for technical guidance.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 304-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 304-4 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 304-4 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsections A(1) and A(2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, PO Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures, such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a) 4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, PO Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
§ 304-6 SMOKING § 304-7
294:435
§ 304-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, PO Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. [Note:
The provisions of this section are not intended to preempt more
stringent municipal or county safety requirements for new or existing
stormwater management basins. Municipal and county stormwater
management plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their authority,
require existing stormwater management basins to be retrofitted to
meet one or more of the safety standards in § 304-8B(1), B(2), and B(3)
for trash racks, overflow grates, and escape provisions at outlet
structures.]
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
§ 304-7 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-8
294:436
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion-resistant, and shall be designed
to withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this paragraph, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 304-8C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See § 304-8D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 304-8 SMOKING § 304-8
294:437
§ 304-9. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at § 304-9C below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit [specify number] copies of the materials
listed in the checklist for site development stormwater plans in
accordance with § 304-9C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
§ 304-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-9
294:438
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200
feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 304-3
through 304-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
§ 304-9 SMOKING § 304-9
294:439
§ 304-10. Maintenance and repair.
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 304-4 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 304-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in § 304-9C(1) through C(6) of this article when
it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 304-1C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of § 304-10B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
§ 304-9 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-10
294:440
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility
for maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 304-10B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 304-10B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 304-10B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all preventative
and corrective maintenance for the structural stormwater
management measures incorporated into the design of the
development, including a record of all inspections and copies of all
maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 304-10B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 304-10B(2) § 304-10B(6) and B(7) above shall retain and make
available, upon request by any public entity with administrative,
health, environmental, or safety authority over the site, the
maintenance plan and the documentation required by § 304-10B(6)
and B(7) above.
(9) The requirements of § 304-10B(3) and B(4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
§ 304-10 SMOKING § 304-10
294:441
§ 304-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties: for each offense, a fine not less than $250
nor more than $500 for a first offense and not less than $500 nor more than
$1,000 for each subsequent offense or up to 90 days in jail, or both.
§ 304-12. When effective.
this article shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the ordinance by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 304-10 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-12
294:442
ARTICLE II
Maintenance of Dumpsters
[Adopted 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 10-04]
§ 304-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and to prohibit the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge
of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the City of Bridgeton and/or
the waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 304-14. Definitions; word usage.
§ 304-15. Covering of containers; prevention of leaks and
discharges.
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
City of Bridgeton or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow-removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject
to its jurisdiction.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 304-13 SMOKING § 304-15
294:443
§ 304-16. Exceptions.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 304-17. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the City of
Bridgeton, the local Board of Health and officials of the Department of
Housing of the City of Bridgeton.
§ 304-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the City of Bridgeton.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods) placed curbside for pickup.
§ 304-15 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-18
294:444
ARTICLE III
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 10-05]
§ 304-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the City of Bridgeton so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 304-20. Definitions; word usage.
§ 304-21. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
A. For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
City of Bridgeton or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs,
streams and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural
or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject
to its jurisdiction.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
§ 304-19 SMOKING § 304-21
294:445
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 304-22. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 304-21 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
§ 304-22C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 304-22 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Grates.
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle-safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning
and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
(2) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
§ 304-21 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-22
294:446
§ 304-23. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department of the City of
Bridgeton, the local Board of Health and officials of the Department of
Housing of the City of Bridgeton.
§ 304-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end-of-pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New-Jersey-Register-listed historic property.
§ 304-22 SMOKING § 304-24
294:447
Chapter 305
STORM SEWER SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 304.
§ 304-24 BRIDGETON CODE § 304-24
305:448
ARTICLE I
Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 03-26]
§ 305-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the City of Bridgeton, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 305-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains, that is owned or operated by the City of Bridgeton or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation, including rain and
snow that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 305-3. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Bridgeton
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 305-4. Exceptions to prohibition.
The following are exceptions to the prohibitions in § 305-3.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 305-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 305-4
305:449
§ 305-5. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department or other officials of
the City of Bridgeton.
§ 305-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100,
in the discretion of the Municipal Court.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater, e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters.
C. Air-conditioning condensate, excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water.
D. Irrigation water, including landscape and lawn watering runoff.
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car-washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods, e.g., shoveling and
sweeping. Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the
above situation, is limited to exterior, undercarriage and exposed
parts and does not apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 305-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 305-6
305:450
ARTICLE II
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 03-26]
§ 305-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the City of Bridgeton so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
§ 305-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as, or based on, corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater
or other industrial waste, other than stormwater, to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the City of Bridgeton, unless that discharge
is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal
Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit No. NJ0141852). Nonphysical
connections may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows or overflows
into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains, that is owned or operated by the City of Bridgeton or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product, other than heat, or finished
§ 305-7 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 305-8
305:451
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation, including rain and
snow, that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 305-9. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
City of Bridgeton, any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater or other industrial waste other than stormwater.
§ 305-10. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department or other officials of
the City of Bridgeton.
§ 305-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine not to exceed $100, in the discretion of the Municipal
Court.
§ 305-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 305-11
305:452
Chapter 307
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Street opening permit fees — See Ch. 149,
Art. II.
Subdivision street design standards — See
Ch. 311, § 311-19.
§ 305-11 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 305-11
305:453

ARTICLE I
Curbs and Gutters
[Adopted 11-4-1970 as Sec. 11-8 of the 1970 Code]
§ 307-1. Approval by City Engineer required.
Whenever streets are to be constructed or reconstructed in the City,
provisions must be made for the construction of proper curbs and gutters
as approved by the City Engineer.
§ 307-2. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
§ 307-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 307-2
305:455

ARTICLE II
Utility Service Renewal
[Adopted 7-5-1972 by Ord. No. 72-3]
§ 307-3. Notification of property owners of road reconstruction.
The Director of Public Works of the City of Bridgeton shall notify all owners
of abutting properties, as shown on the records of the Tax Assessor's office,
that a road, street, avenue or highway of the City of Bridgeton is or is about
to be reconstructed. Said notice shall further provide that said adjoining
landowners may renew utility services under said road, street, avenue or
highway within 60 days of the date of said notice by notifying the Director of
Public Works that it desires such work to be done. Said notice shall further
state that if the utility services are not renewed within the time specified
in the notice, the property owners may be subject to payments for repair of
said road, street, avenue or highway as set forth in § 305-7 of this article.
§ 307-4. Delivery of notice.
Said notice shall be sent by regular mail to the adjoining property owners
of said road, street, avenue or highway to be reconstructed at the address
shown by the records of the Tax Assessor's office.
§ 307-5. Publication of notice.
In addition, the Director of Public Works shall publish notice that said
reconstruction or improvement of roads, streets, avenues or highways is
to be completed. Said notice shall be published in a newspaper printed
and circulated in the City of Bridgeton which shall set forth the fact that
utility services may be renewed within a period of 60 days from the date of
publication of said notice on the roads, streets, avenues and highways to be
reconstructed or improved and shall state further that if utility services are
not renewed within the time specified, the property owner may be subject
to payment for repair of said road, street, avenue or highway as set forth in
§ 307-7 of this article.
§ 307-6. Failure to renew service within five years; liability for cost
of street repairs.
If any owner of abutting property on said road, street, avenue or highway
shall fail to renew his service pursuant to a notice described in §§ 307-3
through 307-5, inclusive, of this article and shall find it necessary to renew
his utility services within five years after a road, street, avenue or highway
is reconstructed or improved, he shall be liable for the total cost of making
final and permanent repairs to the excavation or opening of said road,
street, avenue or highway which final repairs shall be made by the
Department of Public Works of the City of Bridgeton or its designated
representative, and said final repairs shall put the road in such condition as
existed before the excavation or opening was made.
§ 307-3 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 307-7
305:457
§ 307-7. Payment of repair costs; failure to pay; cost to become lien.
The total cost of said repairs shall be paid by the adjoining landowners
within 30 days after said final repairs are completed upon notice from the
Department of Public Works and if the adjoining landowners shall fail to
make such payments, the costs for making final repairs to the road, street,
avenue or highway shall be certified by the Director of Public Works to the
Tax Collector of the City of Bridgeton and shall become a lien upon the real
estate adjoining said road, street, avenue or highway for which the utility is
renewed.
§ 307-8. Hardship exceptions; appeals.
If any question should arise concerning the application of this article or
if any adjoining landowner believes a hardship exists with regard to his
property and the reopening of said road, street, avenue or highway, he
may make application to the Director of Public Works for an exception to
this article. If the Director of Public Works shall find that there exists no
ground for hardship, the application shall be denied and in such event said
adjoining landowner may appeal the decision of Department of Public Works
to the City Council of the City of Bridgeton, which shall finally determine
whether a sufficient hardship exists to qualify as an exception to this article.
§ 307-7 BRIDGETON CODE § 307-8
305:458
ARTICLE III
Street Openings
[Adopted 3-5-1996 by Ord. No. 95-16]
§ 307-9. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
definitions shall have the meaning given herein:
APPLICANT — Any public or private utility company, entity, or person,
making written application to the Public Works Department of the City of
Bridgeton for an excavation or route opening permit hereunder.
EXCAVATION — The excavation, opening or any other work performed
under a permit and required to be performed under this article within a
public right-of-way.
PERMITTEE — Any person who applied for and has been granted and has
full force and effect a permit issued hereunder.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
municipality, company, or organization of any kind.
STREET — Any street, highway, alley, avenue, or any other public way
or public ground in the City of Bridgeton or under control of the City of
Bridgeton.
§ 307-10. Permit required.
A. It shall be unlawful, except in an emergency as set forth in Subsection B
for any person to engage in any of the following activities unless such
person shall first have obtained a permit therefor from the Public Works
Department of the City of Bridgeton as herein provided:
(1) To dig up, excavate, tunnel, undermine, or in any manner break up
any street or public right-of-way.
(2) To make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface
of any street or public right-of-way for any purpose.
(3) To place, deposit or leave upon any street or public right-of-way
which in any manner interferes with or disturbs the surface of such
streets or public right-of-way.
B. In the event that any sewer main, conduit or other utility installation in
or under any street, alley or public way bursts, breaks or otherwise is in
such condition as to seriously endanger persons or property, the owner
of such installation shall immediately remedy such problem and shall
immediately take all such necessary steps to make said location safe
and secure. Such owner shall not, however, begin making permanent
repairs to such street or alley until he shall have secured a permit as
hereinafter provided. Such permit shall be applied for within five
working days after such break or problem shall be made as directed by
§ 307-9 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 307-10
305:459
§ 307-11. Application procedure.
§ 307-12. Permit issuance.
the City Engineer and shall be completed as soon as practicable but no
longer than 60 days after receipt of the permit.
C. Any person failing to apply for the permit necessary to perform any of
the activities set forth in this section shall be subject to a penalty as set
forth in § 307-17 of this article.
A. A written application for the issuance of an excavation permit shall be
submitted to the Director of Public Works. The application shall state
the name and address of the applicant, the location and dimensions of
the excavation, the purpose of the excavation, the estimated date of the
commencement, completion and restoration of the excavation, which in
no case will exceed a period of six months from date of application, and
such other data as may reasonably be required by the Director of Public
Works. The Director of Public Works may authorize an extension of said
six-month time period if there is justifiable cause, i.e., weather
conditions, strike or other unforeseen circumstances. All road opening
permit applications shall also be submitted by the applicant to the City
Engineer of the City of Bridgeton for comment and approval.
B. An applicant has the additional responsibility of obtaining a separate
permit in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:2-73 et seq. when the proposed
excavation is located within 200 feet of a gas pipeline, and all permits
issued by the Director of Public Works are subject to the issuance of
said separate permit. Applicants are further responsible for contacting
all ether utilities to determine whether any property or facilities of the
utilities are located in the vicinity of the proposed excavation site, and if
so, applicants are obligated to comply with statutes or regulations
pertaining thereto.
A. Upon application and payment of the fees and deposits for which
provision is hereinafter made, the Director of Public Works, in his
discretion, may issue or deny a permit to excavate or open the surface
of any street or public right-of-way owned or controlled by the City of
Bridgeton, within two weeks of receipt.
B. No permit shall be issued for any street or right-of-way for a period of
five years after completion of any construction or reconstruction to it
except in an emergency situation, at the discretion of the Director of
Public Works.
C. No permit shall be issued for any road which has bean overlaid with
bituminous concrete for a period of five years after completion of said
overlay except in an emergency situation, or at the discretion of the
Director of Public Works, or the Mayor as provided in § 307-16 of this
article.
§ 307-10 BRIDGETON CODE § 307-12
305:460
§ 307-13. Notice to Department of Public Works; weekend and
holiday work.
The applicant shall give twenty-four-hour notice to the Department of Public
Works, prior to making any road openings, except in cases of emergency
as provided in § 307-10B. No opening shall be commenced on Saturday,
Sunday or a holiday except in cases of emergency. Inspections for openings
on such days shall be paid for by the applicant at a rate set by the City.
§ 307-14. Conditions of permit.
§ 307-15. Fees and bond requirements.
D. In nonemergency situations, the City Council of the City of Bridgeton,
by resolution, or the Mayor, pursuant to § 307-16 of this article, may
waive the five-year restriction mentioned previously.
E. The Director of Public Works has the discretionary power, in the case of
City streets which carry exceptionally heavy volumes of traffic, to forbid
an opening or tearing up or excavating such road except in the event of
an emergency situation.
A. Transferability. Every permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is
issued and shall not be transferable.
B. Commencement of work. Work under a permit shall commence within
six months as set forth in § 307-11A. If above is not commenced within
that time the permit shall automatically terminate unless extended in
writing by the Director of Public Works.
C. Possession of permit. A copy of the permit, together with a copy of the
plan endorsed with the approval of the Director of Public Works, must
be available for inspection at the work site and shall be exhibited on
demand to any duly authorized employee of the City or to any police
officer of the City of Bridgeton.
D. Revocation of permit. The Director of Public Works may revoke a permit
for any of the following reasons:
(1) Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
rules, regulations, laws or ordinances.
(2) Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
(3) Carrying on work under the permit in a manner which endangers
life or property, or which creates any condition which is unhealthy,
unsanitary, or constitutes a nuisance.
E. Modification of permit conditions. In a special case the City Council
may, by resolution, impose special conditions to which the issuance of
the permit may be subject or may decide that any provision of this
article shall not apply or shall be altered.
§ 307-12 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 307-15
305:461
§ 307-16. Opening newly paved street; penalty charge.
If by special permission of the Mayor or designee a permit is issued to open
any paved or improved street surface less than five years old, a penalty
charge shall be made for the opening, except that the penalty shall be
waived in the event the work is of an emergency nature. The penalty charge
shall be equal to 2% of the cost of restoring the opening for each unelapsed
month or fraction thereof for the five-year restriction period.
Example: Opening made with 55 months left on moratorium:
Cost of opening: $975
Penalty fee: (2% x 55 months) x $975 = $1,072.50
Total permit fee: $1,072.50
Application fee: 20.00
_________
$1,092.50
A. Fees must be paid when application is made and shall be as set forth in
Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees. In lieu of a security
deposit in accordance with the Schedule of Fees, the applicant may
deposit a sum as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of
Fees, in cash with the Municipal Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-20]
B. Performance bond.
(1) No permit shall be issued hereunder prior to the submission of a
performance bond in the amount as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees,
Article II, Schedule of Fees. This performance bond shall serve to
guarantee that the road openings will be properly closed and that
the road, street, or highway will be satisfactorily reconstructed.
(2) In the alternative, a certified check in the same amount shall be
provided with the application.
C. Maintenance bond. A maintenance bond shall be posted prior to the
release of the performance bond. The maintenance bond shall be equal
to 10% of the performance bond. This maintenance bond will remain in
effect for a period of two years. This bond may be in the form of a
security bond, cashier's check or certified check.
D. A permittee shall maintain adequate liability insurance protection in an
amount and form satisfactory to the City Solicitor of the City of
Bridgeton and provide adequate proof thereof.
E. Any utility company may provide a yearly performance bond in an
amount agreed to by the City Engineer of the City of Bridgeton
sufficient to cover all anticipated street openings during the succeeding
thirteen-month period.
§ 307-15 BRIDGETON CODE § 307-17
305:462
§ 307-17. Violations and penalties.
A. The penalty prescribed for any violation of this article or any section
thereof shall be as provided in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
Each day's continued violation shall constitute a separate offense.
B. The municipality may withhold issuance of future permits if the
applicant has failed to restore prior street openings in compliance with
this article.
§ 307-17 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 307-17
305:463

ARTICLE IV
Placement of Equipment and Apparatus in Public Rights-of-Way
[Adopted 8-4-2003 by Ord. No. 03-1]
§ 307-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EQUIPMENT and APPARATUS — Any item or items, whether permanent or
mobile, that require for their use the congregation of one or more persons
in and about the immediate area of the item or items. This definition is
intended to include, but is not limited to, basketball hoops, hockey goals and
other similar sports equipment and apparatus.
§ 307-19. Prohibited uses.
No equipment or apparatus shall be placed by any person in a public rightof-
way or on private property in the vicinity of any public right-of-way such
that the use of the equipment or apparatus would tend to require any user
to be in and about the public right-of-way.
§ 307-20. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating the above provision shall be subject to a warning
for the first violation, a fine of $100 for the second violation and a fine
not to exceed $250 for each subsequent offense, and such equipment
shall be subject to forfeiture to the City upon order of the court.
B. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person or persons who
have violated this provision are those who control the private property
on which the equipment or apparatus is situated or if the equipment or
apparatus is in a public right-of-way; or those who control the private
property closest to the equipment or apparatus.
§ 307-18 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 307-20
305:465

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk and Curb Maintenance
[Adopted 3-5-2013 by Ord. No. 12-23]
§ 307-21. Responsibility of property owner. [Amended 12-18-2018
by Ord. No. 18-26]
In the particular case of sidewalks and curbs, it shall be the duty and
responsibility of the owner of property on which and along which sidewalks
and curbs are located to keep such sidewalks and curbs in a proper
condition and good repair, free of obstruction, debris, or other unsafe
conditions, as well as maintain all trees adjacent to such sidewalks.
However, such duty and responsibility shall not extend to the owners within
the Central Business District which area shall include:
A. Laurel Street from Washington Street to East Broad Street;
B. East Commerce Street from Pearl Street to Atlantic Street; and
C. East Broad Street from Pearl Street to the Cohansey River.
§ 307-21 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 307-21
305:467
Chapter 311
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Escrow fees — See Ch. 149, Art. I.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 167.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 307.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 360.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 307-21 BRIDGETON CODE § 307-21
305:468
ARTICLE I
Title; Purpose; Approving Agency62
§ 311-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Bridgeton."
§ 311-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the City of Bridgeton in order to
promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the
municipality. It shall be administered to insure the orderly growth and
development, the conservation, protection and proper use of land and
adequate provision for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 311-3. Approving agency.
The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the City
Council of the City of Bridgeton upon recommendation of the Planning
Board.
62.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 90-25, adopted 6-18-1991, established official forms of
applications for subdivisions and site plans. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3, this
ordinance also designated the City Director of Planning as the administrative officer
responsible for reviewing applications for completeness and issuing said declarations as
appropriate. The checklists are on file in the Office of Planning.
§ 311-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-3
305:469

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 311-4. General interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words or terms shall, for
the purpose of these regulations, have the meanings indicated:
§ 311-5. Specific words and phrases.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way privately owned providing secondary
vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties.
APPLICANT (DEVELOPER, SUBDIVIDER, LANDOWNER) — An owner or
his legally appointed representative who has filed an application for
development, including his heirs, successors and assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — An application for approval of a
subdivision plat or other development for which approval may be required
under this chapter.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The City Council of the City of Bridgeton.
BLOCK — An area bounded by three or more streets.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
minimum required distance between any building to be erected, and the
adjacent street right-of-way, or front lot line.
CARTWAY (ROADWAY) — The portion of a street right-of-way, paved or
unpaved, intended for vehicular use.
CITY — The City of Bridgeton.
CITY AGENCY — Any duly authorized agency, board, commission or
committee representing the City Council of the City of Bridgeton.
CITY COUNCIL — The duly elected governing body of the City of Bridgeton.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street center lines.
A. Words in the present tense include the future tense.
B. Words in the plural shall include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural.
C. "Building" includes structure, and shall be construed as if followed by
the words "or part thereof."
D. "Shall" and "will" are mandatory and directive; "should" and "may" are
permissive.
§ 311-4 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-5
305:471
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL — The approval granted by the Planning Board
to a minor subdivision, conditional only upon the approval of the County
Planning Board.
COUNTY — The County of Cumberland, State of New Jersey.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the County of
Cumberland, State of New Jersey.
CROSSWALK (INTERIOR WALK) — A publicly or privately owned right-ofway
for pedestrian use extending from a street into a block or across a block
to another street.
CUT — An excavation. The difference between a point on the original
ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also,
the material removed in excavation.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter
imposing minimum standards in the layout by which a subdivision is
developed and further regulating material, dimension or engineering
specifications.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of
an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land and/or such landowner's legally appointed
representative. (See "applicant").
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or any mining,
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which permission
may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development of a planned
residential development, planned unit development, and residential cluster
development, including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use,
location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or
density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open
space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan"
when used in these regulations shall mean the written and graphic
materials referred to in this definition.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto,
adopted by City Council.
§ 311-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-5
305:472
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer, or other
structure designed, intended, or constructed for the purpose of diverting
surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets, public rights-ofway,
parks, recreational areas, or any part of any subdivision or contiguous
land areas.
DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all present and existing surface and
subsurface drainage conditions as described by grades, contours and
topography with proposed methods and facilities to collect and convey said
drainage.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in accordance
with Chapter One of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes.
DRIVEWAY — A minor vehicular right-of-way providing access between a
street and a parking area or garage within a lot or property.
DWELLING — A building, any portion of which is used or intended to be
used exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — Any portion of a building used or intended to be used
by one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit
with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use
of private land for a public or quasi-public purpose, and within which the
owner of the property shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall
have the right to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent
with the rights of the grantee.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the State of New
Jersey, duly appointed as the Engineer of the City or Planning Board.
ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN — The harmonious relating of proposed
structures to the terrain and to the existing buildings in the vicinity that
have a visual relationship to the proposed buildings, structures and open
spaces in a development.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated, or bulldozed. Also, the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface. It
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. The difference in elevation
§ 311-5 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-5
305:473
between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher
elevation of the final grade. The material used to make fill.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the City Council taken on a
preliminary plan after all conditions, engineering plans and other
requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guaranteed properly posted for their
completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees
within 90 days of final approval.
FLOODPLAIN — The area along a natural watercourse which may from time
to time be overflowed by water therefrom.
FUTURE RIGHT-OF-WAY —
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of Bridgeton.
HALF OR PARTIAL STREET — A street, generally parallel with and adjacent
to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than required for
improvement and use as a street in accordance with this chapter.
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET — Any street for which the City, county, or
state has maintenance responsibility and which is paved with an approved
hardtop surface.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions, installations, and changes
required to render land suitable for the use intended, including grading,
paving, curbing, street lights and signs, fire hydrants, water mains, electric
service, gas service, sanitary sewers, storm drains, sidewalks, crosswalks,
driveways, culverts, and street shade trees.
IMPROVEMENTS SPECIFICATIONS — Regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter imposing minimum standards for the construction of the
required improvements such as curbs, sidewalks, sewers, and the like.
INTERIOR WALK — Same as crosswalk.
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the surface
and also refers to the fee simple title and any lesser interest in land.
LANDOWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation, trust or other legal entity, having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided or developed to commence
and maintain proceedings to subdivide and/or develop the same under this
chapter.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land to be used, sold, leased,
developed or built upon as a unit which may be established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and is duly recorded on the Official Tax Maps
of the City of Bridgeton and/or the County of Cumberland, New Jersey.
The right-of-way width required for the expansion of existing streets to
accommodate anticipated future traffic loads.
A.
A right-of-way established to provide future access to or through
undeveloped land.
B.
§ 311-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-5
305:474
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot (as shown
on a subdivision plat or development), excluding space within all streets
and within all permanent drainage easements, but including the areas of all
other easements.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the City for the maintenance of any improvements required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MARKER — A wood or metal stake placed to designate the boundary and
corners of lots in the subdivision of land for the purpose of reference in land
and property survey and to facilitate the sale of lots.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the City which has been duly
adopted by the Planning Board.
MAYOR — The elected official who serves as the chief executive of the City.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land into three or fewer lots that
does not involve:
MONUMENT — A concrete, stone, or other permanent object placed to
designate boundary lines, corners of property, rights-of-way of streets and
utilities, for the purpose of reference in land and property survey.
MUNICIPAL (MUNICIPALITY) — Of or pertinent to the City of Bridgeton.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 or
any prior act authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall be deemed to be
conclusive with respect to the location and width of the streets, public parks
and playgrounds, and drainage right-of-way shown thereon.63
OFF-SITE — The area of land or water outside the lot lines of a lot but within
a subdivision plat.
Residential cluster, planned residential development or planned unit
development;
A.
B. Any new street or reconstruction of an existing street;
C. Improvement of an existing street, including paving;
D. Extension of municipal services;
E. Frontage on an arterial or collector street;
F. Adverse affect to the development of the remaining parcel;
G. Adverse affect to adjoining properties; or
Conflict with the Master Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance or any
portion of this chapter.
H.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 311-5 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-5
305:475
OFF-TRACT — The area of land or water outside a subdivision plat.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space. Such areas may be improved
with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and
other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the natural
openness of the land.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of notice, any
applicant for development, the owners of the subject property and all
owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice under this
chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be in lieu of a
requirement that certain improvements be made before the Planning Board
approves a plat, including performance bonds, escrow agreements, and
other similar collateral or surety agreements.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, unincorporated association,
cooperative, and a partnership as well as an individual.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with specified
minimum continuous acreage to be developed as a single entity according
to a plan containing one or more residential clusters, which may include
appropriate commercial, or public or quasi-public uses primarily for the
benefit of the residential development.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity according to a plan,
containing one or more residential clusters or planned unit residential
developments and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial or
industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential
uses as shall be specified in this chapter.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Bridgeton, New
Jersey.
PLAT — The map or maps of a subdivision.
SKETCH PLAT — A plat of sufficient accuracy and detail to be used for
the purpose of discussion and classification of a subdivision as provided
for in § 311-10 of this chapter.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A plat of sufficient accuracy and detail, as
provided for in § 311-11 of this chapter, to be used for the purpose of
review by the Planning Board, and the granting of preliminary approval
of a major subdivision.
B.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which
is presented to the City Council for final approval in accordance with
these regulations, and which, if approved, shall be filed with the County
Recording Officer.
C.
§ 311-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-5
305:476
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The approval granted by the Planning Board
to a preliminary plat for a major subdivision.
PROFILE LINE — The profile of the center line of the finished surface of the
street, which shall be midway between the sidelines of the street.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public areas include:
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for
the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the City, municipal agency, board of education, state or county
agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
RESERVE STRIP — A narrow parcel of ground separating a street from
other adjacent properties.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units in which the
individual lots have a common or public open space area as an
appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area.
RESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER — Any individual maintaining a voting
address in the City, within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision, owning
real estate in his own or joint names. A tenancy in common or any other
means of joint ownership shall be considered as an individual; however,
the signature of any single joint owner shall be considered as binding the
others.
RESUBDIVISION —
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot extending between, and having frontage
on, an arterial street and a minor street, and with vehicular access solely
from the latter.
A. Public parks, playgrounds and other recreational areas;
B. Other public open spaces;
C. Scenic and historic sites; and
D. Sites for schools and other public buildings.
The further division of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously
made and approved or recorded according to law; or
A.
The alterations of any streets or the establishment of any new streets
within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
B.
§ 311-5 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-5
305:477
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, alley, crosswalk, or for other public purposes.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, wind, gravity or other natural means as a product
of erosion.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of street, measured along the center line,
which is continuously visible from any point three feet above the center line.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
SLOPE — The face of an embankment or cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of whatever origin
that overlies bedrock and can be readily excavated.
SOIL STABILIZATION — Chemical or structural treatment designed to
increase or maintain the stability of a mass of soil or otherwise to improve
its engineering properties.
STATE AGENCY — A state department, board, commission, division,
bureau, soil conservation district established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-7 et
seq.64 or other agency created by the State of New Jersey.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or City roadway, or which
is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or which is
approved by official action as provided by this chapter, or which is shown on
a plan duly filed and recorded in the office of the County Recording Officer
prior to the appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board
of the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street
lines. For the purpose of this chapter, streets shall be classified as follows:
A. The existing and proposed topography of the lot;
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, landscaping,
structures and signs, lighting, screening devices; and
B.
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this chapter.
C.
64.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 4:24-7 et seq. was repealed by L. 1977, c. 264.
§ 311-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-5
305:478
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, copartnership or corporation (or agent
authorized thereby) which undertakes the subdivision and/or development
of land, as defined by these regulations, as the owner, equitable owner (or
agent authorized thereby) of the land being subdivided. (See "applicant.")
SUBDIVISION —
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — Three members of the Planning Board
appointed by the Chairman, with the approval of the Planning Board, who
are empowered to approve and classify minor subdivisions by unanimous
affirmative vote. The Subdivision Committee shall assume any additional
duties relating to land subdivision which may be conferred upon this
Committee by the Planning Board.
Arterial streets are those streets which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
A.
Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to
the major system of arterial streets, including the principal entrance
streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within
such a development. Collector streets may require a limitation or
control of access from abutting property.
B.
Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
Marginal access streets are streets which are parallel to and adjacent
to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
Service streets (alleys) are minor ways which are used primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or the side or properties otherwise
abutting on a street.
E.
The classification of streets may change from time to time, and the
classification shall be assumed to be as indicated on the Official Map
and/or the thoroughfare plan of the City.
F.
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development. The following
shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this chapter,
if no new streets are created:
Division of land for agricultural purposes where all resulting
parcels are five acres or larger in size;
(1)
(2) of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
(3) Divisions of property upon court order; and
Conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument.
(4)
A.
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 311-5 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-5
305:479
SURFACE DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all present and proposed
grades and facilities for stormwater drainage.
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the State of New Jersey.
SWALE — A low lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to
carry surface water runoff.
TOPSOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus debris.
TRACT — A parcel or portion or other division of land which is, in whole or
in part, proposed for subdivision, composed of a portion of one lot, or one
or more contiguous lots in the same ownership.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water, river, brook, creek, or a channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATER FACILITY — Any waterworks, water supply works, water
distribution systems, or part thereof designed, intended or constructed to
provide or distribute potable water.
§ 311-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-5
305:480
ARTICLE III
Procedures
§ 311-6. Preapplication consultation.
§ 311-6.1. General development plan submission procedures.
[Added 7-3-2007 by Ord. No. 07-2]
A. Planning Board. Copies of this chapter shall be available upon request
to any person desiring to subdivide a parcel of land. If shall be the right
of any applicant to request a meeting with the Planning Board to review
his development concepts and/or the applicability of the regulations of
this chapter.
B. Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District. Prior to the
preparation and filing of an application and sketch plan with the
Planning Board and City Engineer, the applicant shall consult the
Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation District concerning
plans for erosion and sediment control and to obtain a report on the soil
characteristics of the site so that the Planning Board may determine the
type and degree of development the site may accommodate because of
the limitation of soils as related to basement and foundation
construction, street and parking area construction and grading
condition.
C. Department of Public Works. Prior to the preparation and filing of an
application and sketch plan with the Planning Board and City Engineer,
the applicant shall consult with the Department of Public Works in
regard to the feasibility of connecting to its water and sewer lines. A
signed statement, which in effect assures that sewerage treatment and
water supply are available and that connection to their facilities is
feasible and adequate to meet the demands of the proposed
subdivision, shall be obtained from the Department of Public Works.
D. Legal status of preapplication review. Such data and concept plans as
may be submitted during preapplication consultation shall be
considered to be submitted for informal and confidential discussion
between the subdivider and the Planning Board and shall not constitute
a formal filing with the City.
A. Purpose and applicability.
(1) The purpose of this section is to permit and encourage the
submission of conceptual general development plans that present a
comprehensive plan for a proposed mixed-use development. The
general development plan is intended to prompt an integrated
approach to site planning that relates to the existing development
patterns in the City.
(2) A developer of a parcel or parcels of land totaling more than 50
acres in size for which the developer is seeking approval of a
§ 311-6 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-6.1
305:481
planned development may submit a general development plan to
the Planning Board prior to the submission of preliminary
subdivision or site plans to the Planning Board.
(3) The general development plan shall set forth the proposed and
permitted number of dwelling units and the residential density, and
the amount of nonresidential floor space for the proposed
development in its entirety according to a schedule which sets forth
the timing of the various sections of the development.
(4) The general development plan shall be designed to promote and
encourage the conservation of natural features and the efficient
use of resources in subdivision and site design while remaining
responsive to market demands for residential and nonresidential
development. To the extent possible, a general development plan
should be designed to reduce infrastructure and service costs over
the long term and to provide a pedestrian-friendly environment.
B. Required submission items. The general development plan submission
shall include the following:
(1) A general land use plan indicating the tract area and general
location of land uses to be included in the planned development at a
scale not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet. The total
number of proposed dwelling units and the amount of
nonresidential floor area to be provided and the proposed land area
to be devoted to residential and nonresidential uses shall be set
forth.
(2) The proposed types of nonresidential uses to be included in the
planned development shall be set forth, and the land area to be
occupied by each use shall be estimated, including the area to be
devoted to parking and stormwater management, for the proposed
uses.
(3) A circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including the relationship to public
transportation and facilities for pedestrian access, within the
planned development and any proposed improvements to the
existing transportation system outside the planned development.
(4) An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land areas to be set aside for
conservation and recreational purposes and a general description
of improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for
the operation and maintenance of parks and recreational lands.
The open space plan should include a calculation of the total area
that will be available for public or semipublic use.
(5) A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed
location of sewer and water lines, and information regarding the
available capacity for utility facilities. Additionally, storm drainage
§ 311-6.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-6.1
305:482
facilities, proposed methods for handling solid waste disposal, and
a plan for the operation and maintenance of proposed utilities shall
be included.
(6) A general stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed
method of controlling and managing stormwater on the site;
stormwater calculations may be deferred to preliminary
subdivision or site plan application.
(7) An environmental inventory including a general description of the
vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate
and cultural resources of the site, existing man-made structures or
features and the probable impact of the development on the
environmental attributes of the site.
(8) A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of
supporting community facilities which may include but not be
limited to educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries,
hospitals, firehouses and police stations.
(9) A housing plan outlining the number and type of housing units to be
provided and the manner in which any affordable housing
obligation will be fulfilled by the development, if applicable.
(10) A local service plan indicating those public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which may include but not be
limited to water, sewer, gas/electric and solid waste disposal.
(11) A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal
services to be generated by the planned development and any other
financial impacts to be faced by the municipality or the school
districts as a result of the completion of the planned development.
The fiscal impact report shall also include a projection of property
tax revenues which will accrue to the county, municipality and
school district according to the timing schedule provided.
(12) A proposed timing schedule for the phasing of the project if it is
anticipated that the development will be completed over a number
of years, including any terms or conditions which are intended to
protect the interests of the public and of the residents who occupy
any section of the planned development prior to the completion of
the development in its entirety.
(13) A municipal development agreement, which shall mean a written
agreement between a municipality and a developer relating to the
development.
C. Required findings by the Planning Board. Prior to approval of a general
development plan, the Planning Board shall make the following facts
and conclusions.
§ 311-6.1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-6.1
305:483
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the Zoning Ordinance standards that may be specific to a planned
development.65
(2) That proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common
open space are reliable, and that the amount, location and purpose
of the common open space are adequate.
(3) That provisions through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed
to be established.
(5) In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
(6) That the proposal is responsive to the natural features of the site
and is designed in a manner that preserves valuable site
characteristics identified in the environmental inventory.
(7) That the proposal advances the principles of smart growth by
providing opportunities for vehicular and pedestrian
interconnectivity, where feasible, by encouraging the efficient use
of land, and by safeguarding the character of existing stable
neighborhoods.
D. Approval process and duration.
(1) The Planning Board shall grant or deny general development plan
approval within 95 days after submission of a complete application
to the administrative officer.
(2) The term of the effect of the general development plan approval
shall be determined by the Planning Board using the guidelines set
forth below, except that the term of the approval shall not exceed
20 years from the day upon which the developer receives final
approval of the first section of the planned development. In making
its determination regarding the duration of the approval of the
development plan, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
(a) The number of dwelling units or amount of nonresidential floor
area to be constructed.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 370, Zoning.
§ 311-6.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-6.1
305:484
(b) Prevailing economic conditions.
(c) The timing schedule to be followed and likelihood of its
fulfillment.
(d) The developer's capability of completing the development.
(e) The contents of the general development plan and any
conditions which the Planning Board attaches thereto.
(3) In the event that the developer seeks to modify the proposed timing
schedule, such modification shall require the approval of the
Planning Board. The Planning Board shall, in deciding whether or
not to grant approval of the modification, take into consideration
prevailing market and economic conditions, anticipated actual
needs for residential units and nonresidential space within the City
and the region, and the availability and capacity of public facilities
to accommodate the proposed development.
(4) Except as provided hereunder, once a general development plan
has been approved by the Planning Board, it may be amended or
revised only upon application by the developer and approval of the
Planning Board. The exceptions are listed below:
(a) If a variation in land uses or increase in density or floor area
ratio is proposed in response to a negative decision of or a
condition of development approval imposed by the N.J.
Department of Environmental Protection, and there is a valid
environmental reason for such decision, the variation shall be
approved by the Planning Board if the developer can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the
variation being proposed is a direct result of a determination
by the Department of Environmental Protection.
(b) Planning Board approval is not required if the developer seeks
to reduce the number of residential dwellings or reduce the
amount of nonresidential floor space by no more than 15%
without otherwise violating the terms and conditions of the
general development plan approval.
(5) Completion, failure to apply and termination of approval.
(a) In the event that a developer who has general development
plan approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the
planned development which is the subject of that general
development plan approval within five years of the date upon
which the general development plan has been approved by the
Planning Board, the municipality shall have cause to terminate
the approval.
(b) If a developer does not complete any section of the
development within one year of the date provided for in the
§ 311-6.1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-6.1
305:485
§ 311-7. Submission of sketch plat.
approved plan, or if at any time the municipality has cause
to believe that the developer is not fulfilling his obligations
pursuant to the approved plan, the City shall notify the
developer by certified mail, and the developer shall have 10
days within which to give evidence that he is fulfilling his
obligation pursuant to the plan. The City thereafter shall
conduct a hearing to determine whether or not the developer
is in violation of the approved plan. If after such hearing the
City finds good cause to terminate the approval, it shall provide
written notice of same to the developer and the approval shall
be terminated 30 days thereafter.
(c) In the event that a development which is the subject of a
general development plan is completed before the end of the
term of the approval, the approval shall terminate with the
completion of the development.
A. Submission. The applicant shall submit an application and 12 black and
white copies of a sketch plat and pertinent data to the City Engineer at
least 14 days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting, for
purposes of discussion and classification.
B. City Engineer review. The City Engineer shall review the application
and sketch plat and shall submit a written report to the Secretary of the
Planning Board within 10 days of receipt by the Engineer of the
application. The report shall assess the impact of the proposed
subdivision upon existing streets, the public utility systems and
drainage, and shall include any recommendations as appropriate for
street improvements, utility installations, grading, flood control,
erosion and sediment control.
C. Planning Board review. The Planning Board shall act upon a properly
submitted sketch plat within 45 days of the regularly scheduled
meeting by taking one of the following actions:
(1) The Planning Board may classify the application as a minor
subdivision and conditionally approve it subject only to County
Planning Board approval, by either a unanimous affirmative vote of
the Subdivision Committee or by a majority vote of the full Board;
(2) The Planning Board may, by majority vote, disapprove the
application and may request additional information; or
(3) The Planning Board may, by majority vote, classify an application as
a major subdivision.
D. Approval as a minor subdivision. If classified as a minor subdivision and
no flood hazard exists:
§ 311-6.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-7
305:486
(1) A notation to that effect shall be made on the sketch plat, and the
sketch plat shall be signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board
and by the City Engineer. No further Planning Board or City
Council approval shall be required.
(2) The City Engineer shall furnish four copies of the sketch plat and
one copy of the application form to the County Planning Board.
(3) Upon notice of County Planning Board approval, or if the County
Planning Board does not submit a report after 30 days from the
submission of the plat to the County Planning Board, the City
Engineer shall furnish copies of the sketch plat to the following:
(a) One copy to the Municipal Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-20]
(b) One copy to the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement.
(c) One copy to the Tax Assessor.
(d) One copy to the Tax Collector.
(e) One copy to the Board of Health.
(4) Either a deed description or plat map drawn in compliance with the
Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.)66 shall
be filed by the applicant with the County Recording Officer within
90 days from the date of return of the approved sketch plat.
E. Disapproval by Planning Board. If approval is denied by the Planning
Board, the City Engineer shall return the sketch plat together with a
letter from the Chairman of the Planning Board stating the reasons for
denial and listing any additional actions, information or documentation
which will be required of the applicant prior to further consideration by
the Planning Board.
F. Disapproval by County Planning Board. If, within 30 days of submission
of the conditionally approved minor subdivision application to the
County Planning Board, said Board submits a written report which
disapproves the application, the Secretary of the Planning Board shall
forward a copy of the County Planning Board report to the applicant.
The applicant may then withdraw his application or resubmit his
application as modified to satisfy County Planning Board requirements,
in accordance with the regulations of Subsection A of this section.
G. Classification as a major subdivision. If classified as a major
subdivision, a notation to that effect shall be made on the sketch plat
which shall be returned by the City Engineer to the applicant for
compliance with the procedural requirements of §§ 311-8 and 311-9 of
this chapter.
66.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.7 to 46:23-9.16 were repealed by L.2011, c. 217, § 2,
effective 5-1-2012.
§ 311-7 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-7
305:487
§ 311-8. Submission of preliminary plat for preliminary approval.
H. Additional requirements for development in a floodplain. If the
proposed subdivision is located in an area which is wholly or partly in a
flood hazard zone, the following additional information shall be
submitted by the applicant before the submission of preliminary plans
and data in the case of major subdivisions and prior to submission to the
County Planning Board in the case of minor subdivisions:
(1) The applicant shall prepare a contour map of the proposed area
with such contour intervals as the City Engineer shall determine to
be necessary and shall prepare plans for drainage or for flood
control devices or plans to raise the level of land above the
floodplain, satisfactory to the City Engineer whenever the Planning
Board shall consider that such are necessary. No plat shall be
approved for which the Planning Board finds that drainage or flood
control protection is necessary until the City Engineer shall
approve the plans for drainage, flood control, or for raising the
level of land above the floodplain.
(2) Land subject to flooding and deemed to be topographically
unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for
such other uses as may increase danger of health, life or property,
or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the
subdivision or land development shall be set aside on the plat for
such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional
inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
(3) To insure that residents will have sufficient flood-free land upon
which to build a house, the Planning Board may require elevations
and flood profiles. Each lot shall contain a building site which shall
be completely free of the danger of floodwaters on the basis of
available information.
(4) The Planning Board shall not approve streets subject to inundation
or flooding. All streets must be adequately located outside the
floodplain setback line.
A. Submission. At least two weeks prior to the regularly scheduled
Planning Board meeting at which consideration is desired, all
applicants desiring preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall
submit to the City Engineer the following:
(1) Fourteen black-on-white prints of the preliminary plat meeting the
specifications for plat details enumerated in this chapter.
(2) Fourteen application forms for tentative approval.
(3) A fee in conformance with § 311-44 of this chapter.
B. Distribution of preliminary plat. Immediately upon receipt of the
documentation required under Subsection A of this section, the City
§ 311-7 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-8
305:488
Engineer shall forward copies of the preliminary plat and application
for preliminary approval as follows:
(1) Two copies to the Secretary of the Planning Board.
(2) One copy to the Municipal Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-20]
(3) One copy to the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement.
(4) One copy to the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment.
(5) One copy to the Tax Assessor.
(6) One copy to the Tax Collector.
(7) One copy to the Board of Health.
(8) Four copies to the Secretary of the Cumberland County Planning
Board.
(9) Two copies retained by the City Engineer.
C. City Engineer review. The City Engineer shall, within 10 days of receipt
of the preliminary plat, forward to the Secretary of the Planning Board
a written report stating the adequacy of all proposed improvements,
including but not limited to streets, utilities, grading, drainage, flood
control, erosion control and sediment control, together with any
recommendations for improvement or modification.
D. Planning Board review.
(1) If an application is found by the Planning Board to be defective, the
developer shall be notified thereof within 30 days of submission of
such application or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
(2) If the Planning Board required any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been
the subject of a hearing, an amended plat shall be submitted and
proceeded upon, as in the case of the original plat. The Planning
Board shall, if the proposed subdivision complies with this chapter
and is consistent with proper planning, grant preliminary approval
of the plat.
(3) The Planning Board shall not act upon the preliminary plat prior to
the expiration of the thirty-day period within which the County
Planning Board may review the preliminary plat pursuant to the
County and Regional Planning Enabling Act, N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.2 (L.
1968, c. 285). Failure of the County Planning Board to submit a
report within the thirty-day review period shall be construed to
constitute approval.
(4) The Planning Board shall recommend preliminary approval to a
preliminary plat conditional upon changes, alterations or
§ 311-8 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-8
305:489
modifications. Any such changes, alterations or modifications as
required by the Planning Board shall be construed as disapproval
of the preliminary plat.
(5) Upon the proper submission to the City Engineer of a preliminary
plat, the Planning Board shall recommend approval or disapproval
within 45 days of the date of submission or within such further time
as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning
Board shall be deemed to have recommended preliminary approval
of the plat.
E. Disapproval of preliminary plat.
(1) If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the plat shall be returned to
the applicant together with two copies of the County Planning
Board report if the County Planning Board disapproved the plat,
and/or two copies of a letter from the Chairman of the Planning
Board stating the reasons for disapproval if the City Planning Board
recommends disapproval.
(2) Copies of disapproval reports shall be forwarded by the Secretary
of the Planning Board to all persons or agencies who were sent
copies of the preliminary plat pursuant to Subsection B.
(3) The applicant may resubmit the preliminary plat for preliminary
approval, in which case he shall do so in accordance with the
requirements of Subsection A of this section, after modifying the
plat to conform with the requirements of the disapproval report
and/or letter.
F. Preliminary approval granted.
(1) If the Planning Board acts favorably on the preliminary plat, a
notation to that effect shall be made on the plat signed by the
Chairman of the Planning Board and the City Engineer and it shall
be referred to City Council for final action.
(2) The Secretary of the Planning Board shall notify in writing all
persons or agencies to whom copies of the plat were sent under
Subsection B of the action taken by the Planning Board.
(3) City Council shall act within 20 days. Its action shall be noted on
the plat, signed by the Mayor, and the plat returned to the
subdivider for compliance with final approval requirements.
G. Effect of preliminary approval. Preliminary approval shall confer upon
the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date
of the preliminary approval: [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
(1) That the general terms and conditions, including but not limited to
use requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs
and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements on which preliminary approval was granted shall not
§ 311-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-8
305:490
§ 311-9. Submission of final plat for final approval.
be changed; except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the City of Bridgeton from modifying by ordinance such
general terms and conditions as relate to public health and safety;
(2) That the applicant may submit on or before the expiration date of
preliminary approval the whole or any part or parts of said plat for
final approval; and
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the City Council, upon
recommendation of the Planning Board, may grant extensions on
such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one
year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that,
if the Subdivision Ordinance Design Standards have been revised,
such revised standards may govern.
A. Submission.
(1) The final plat shall be submitted to the City Engineer for
forwarding to the Planning Board for final approval within 18
months from the date of preliminary approval. The City Engineer
shall immediately notify the Secretary of the Planning Board upon
receipt of a final plat and shall forward the required copies of the
final plat to the County Planning Board.
(2) The final plat submission shall include the original tracing, three
translucent copies, eight black and white prints, one cloth copy
duplicate print and four copies of the application forms for final
approval.
(3) Unless the preliminary plat is approved without changes, the final
plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications required
by the Planning Board.
(4) The original tracing, two translucent tracing cloth copies, four
black-on-white prints and three copies of the application form for
final approval shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning
Board by the City Engineer at least five days prior to the date of a
regular Planning Board meeting, together with additional
documentation as required under Article IV of this chapter.
(5) Four black-on-white prints, one translucent copy, one cloth
duplicate print and one copy of the application form for final
approval shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Cumberland
County Planning Board pursuant to Subsection A(1) above.
B. City Engineer review.
(1) The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement from the City
Engineer that he has received a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed
§ 311-8 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-9
305:491
and those to be installed, and that the subdivider has complied with
one or both of the following:
(a) Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations; or
(b) A performance guarantee has been posted with the Municipal
Clerk in sufficient amount to assure the completion of required
improvements. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(2) Compliance with Subsection B(1)(b) above shall not relieve the
applicant of his responsibility to install such improvements as may
be required by the County Planning Board or in posting guarantees
therefor as provided by the Cumberland County Subdivision
Review and Approval Resolution.
C. Planning Board review.
(1) The Planning Board shall act upon the final plat within 45 days
after the date of submission for final approval to the City Engineer.
(2) Failure of the Planning Board to act within the allotted time or a
mutually agreed upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable
approval, and the City Engineer shall issue a certificate to that
effect.
(3) The Planning Board shall not act upon a final plat until the County
Planning Board has submitted a report to the Secretary of the
Planning Board or until 30 days have elapsed since submission of
the final plat to the County Planning Board.
D. Disapproval of final plat. If, for any reason, the final plat shall be
recommended for disapproval by the Planning Board, two copies of a
Planning Board resolution disapproving the plat stating the reasons for
disapproval shall be returned to the applicant, together with the final
plat.
E. Approval of final plat.
(1) If the final plat is recommended for approval by the Planning
Board, a notation to that effect shall be made on the plat and it shall
be signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board and the City
Engineer.
(2) The signatures of the Chairman and City Engineer shall not be
affixed until the developer has posted the guarantees required
pursuant to Subsection G of this chapter.
(3) If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Planning
Board, appeal in writing to City Council may be taken within 10
days after the date of the action of the Planning Board. A hearing
thereon shall be held on notice to all parties in interest, who shall
be afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such hearing the City
§ 311-9 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-9
305:492
Council may affirm or reverse the action of the Planning Board
by a recorded vote of majority of the total members thereof. The
findings and reasons for the disposition of the appeal shall be
stated on the records of City Council, and the applying party shall
be given a copy.
(4) Upon final approval by the Planning Board or City Council, as the
case may be, the applicant shall provide 10 additional black and
white prints of the final plat which shall be filed by the applicant
with the following:
(a) Municipal Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(b) City Engineer.
(c) Division of Housing and Code Enforcement.
(d) Board of Adjustment.
(e) Board of Health.
(f) Tax Assessor.
(g) Tax Collector.
(h) County Planning Board.
(i) County Recording Officer.
F. Granting of building permits. No building permit shall be issued without
proof of filing as provided by this section.
G. Guarantees required prior to filing of final plat.
(1) Before recording of final subdivision plats, the Planning Board shall
require and accept, in accordance with the standards adopted by
ordinance for the purpose of assuring the installation and
maintenance of improvements, the following:
(a) The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the City
in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation for
any or all of the following improvements it may deem
necessary or appropriate: streets, grading, pavement, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade trees, surveyors'
monuments, as shown on the final map and required by the
Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.)67,
water mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other
means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control
and sedimentation control devices and public improvements of
open space; and
67.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.7 to 46:23-9.16 were repealed by L.2011, c. 217, § 2,
effective 5-1-2012.
§ 311-9 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-9
305:493
(b) Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with City
Council for a period not to exceed two years after final
acceptance of the improvement, in an amount not to exceed
15% of the cost of the improvement. In the event that other
governmental agencies or public utilities automatically will
own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are
covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to
another governmental agency, no performance or maintenance
guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by the City for
such utilities or improvements.
(2) The amount of any performance guarantee may be reduced by City
Council, by resolution, when portions of the improvements have
been certified by the City Engineer to have been completed. The
time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by said
body by resolution.
(3) If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and
surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the City for the reasonable
cost of the improvements not completed, and the City may, either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such
improvements.
(4) When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify City Council in writing, by certified or
registered mail addressed in care of the Municipal Clerk, of the
completion of said improvements and shall send a copy thereof to
the City Engineer. Thereupon the City Engineer shall inspect all of
the improvements and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with
City Council, indicating either approval, partial approval, or
rejection of the improvements with a statement of reasons for any
rejection. If partial approval is indicated, the cost of the
improvements rejected shall be set forth. [Amended 9-19-2017
by Ord. No. 17-20]
(5) City Council shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements, on the basis of the report of the City Engineer, and
shall notify the obligor in writing, by certified or registered mail, of
the contents of said report and the action of said approving
authority with relation thereto, not later than 60 days after receipt
of the notice from the obligor of the completion of the
improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall
be released from all liability pursuant to its performance
guarantee, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure
provision of the improvements not yet approved. Failure of City
Council to send or provide such notification to the obligor within 60
days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the improvements,
and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability,
pursuant to such performance guarantee.
§ 311-9 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-9
305:494
(6) If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the City
Council may require the obligor to complete such improvements
and, upon completion, the same procedure of notification, as set
forth in this section, shall be followed.
(7) The obligor shall reimburse the City for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the City Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements.
H. Recording of final approval.
(1) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 90 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer. The City Council upon recommendation of the Planning
Board may for good cause shown extend the period for recording
for an additional period not to exceed 180 days from the date of the
signing of the plat.
(2) No plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording Officer
until it has been approved by the City Council as indicated on the
instrument by the signatures of the Planning Board Chairman, City
Engineer and President of City Council, or a certificate has been
issued pursuant to Subsection C(2) of this section.
I. Effect of final approval.
(1) After final approval of a plat has been duly recorded pursuant to
Subsection H above, the zoning requirements applicable to the
preliminary approval first granted and all other rights conferred
upon the developer pursuant to § 311-8G of this chapter, whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval. If the developer has followed
the standards prescribed for final approval, the City Council upon
recommendation by the Planning Board may extend such period of
protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter,
the granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval pursuant to § 311-8 of this chapter.
(2) In the case of a planned unit development or planned residential
development or residential cluster development of 50 acres or
more or subdivision of 150 acres or more, the City Council may
grant the rights referred to in Subsection I(1) above for a
reasonable period of time, longer than two years, but not more than
four years, if mutually agreed upon. The developer may apply for
thereafter, and the City Council may thereafter grant, an extension
of final approval for an additional reasonable period of time
mutually agreed upon.
§ 311-9 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-9
305:495

ARTICLE IV
Plat Details
§ 311-10. Sketch plat.
Minimum plat details required for review by Planning Board:
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
B. A sketch plat which shall be based on tax map information or some
other similarly accurate base at a scale not less than 100 feet to the
inch, shall show the entire tract on one sheet, and include the following
information:
(1) Graphic scale and North arrow.
(2) A title block shall be located in the lower right-hand corner of the
sketch plat and shall include the following information:
(a) The words "sketch plat."
(b) Name of the subdivision.
(c) The words "situated in the City of Bridgeton, Cumberland
County, New Jersey."
(d) Name and address of the applicant and/or owner.
(e) Scale in terms of number of feet to the inch, i.e., one inch to
100 feet.
(f) Date.
(g) Name and title of person preparing the plat.
(3) An information block shall be located above the title block on the
right-hand side of the sketch plat and shall include the following
information:
(a) Acreage of the entire tract.
(b) Acreage of the area being subdivided.
(c) Number of new lots being created.
(d) Zoning district or districts in which the tract is located.
(4) An approval block shall be located in the upper right-hand corner of
the sketch plat and shall include the following:
(a) Approval as a minor subdivision.
§ 311-10 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-10
305:497
(Signature) (Date)
Chairman, Bridgeton Planning Board
(Signature) (Date)
City Engineer
No further City action necessary.
(b) Approved as a sketch plat for a major subdivision.
(Signature) (Date)
Chairman, Bridgeton Planning Board
(Signature) (Date)
City Engineer
Applicant may proceed with preliminary plat preparation.
(5) The location and clear indication of that portion of the tract which
is to be subdivided in relation to the entire tract.
(6) Existing lot lines of record within the proposed subdivision and
within 200 feet therefrom.
(7) Proposed lot lines. All proposed lot lines and existing lot lines to be
eliminated by the proposed subdivision shall be clearly indicated.
(8) Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers, together with the names of
the owners of all abutting property as disclosed by the most recent
municipal tax records.
(9) All existing structures and natural features such as wooded areas
and rock formations within the tract to be subdivided and on
adjoining parcels.
(10) All existing and proposed streets or roads within or adjoining the
proposed subdivision with the right-of-way widths clearly
indicated.
(11) The location and width of all existing and proposed utility
easements in the area to be subdivided. The actual and/or proposed
purpose shall be clearly indicated.
(12) The location, size and direction of flow of all streams, brooks,
drainage structures and drainage ditches in the area to be
subdivided and within 200 feet of the subdivision.
C. Additional requirements for minor subdivisions. If the sketch plat is
classified by the Planning Board as a minor subdivision, the following
information shall be required prior to approval:
§ 311-10 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-10
305:498
§ 311-11. Preliminary plat.
Minimum plat details required for review by Planning Board:
(1) A certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date,
and that any local improvement assessments against the tract
being subdivided have been paid in full or that such local
improvement assessments have been apportioned among the lots of
the subdivision upon the application of the subdivider, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:7-1 et seq., and in the event of such apportionment, that
such local improvement assessments are paid to date.
(2) A statement from the Department of Public Works which in effect
assures that sewerage treatment and water supply are or will be
available and that connection to their facilities is feasible; or
(3) When utility layouts do not show feasible connections to existing or
proposed utility systems, the developer shall have percolation tests
made and shall show the location and results of such tests on the
plat, and any proposed individual water supply or sewage disposal
system must be indicated and accompanied by the approval of the
appropriate local, county and state health agencies.
(4) Plans for erosion and sediment control.
(5) A report from the Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation
District on the soil characteristics of the site in sufficient detail to
enable the Planning Board to determine the type and degree of
development the site may accommodate because of the limitation
of soils as related to basement and foundation construction, street
and parking area construction and grading condition.
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and the proposed street
pattern in the area to be subdivided and the relationship of the tract to
the surrounding area.
B. A preliminary plat which shall be clearly and legibly drawn or
reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. The plat
shall be designed in compliance with the provisions of Article VI of this
chapter and shall show or be accompanied by the following information:
(1) Graphic scale and North arrow indicating true North.
(2) A title block shall be located in the lower right-hand corner of the
preliminary plat and shall include the following information:
(a) The words "preliminary plat — not to be recorded."
(b) Name of the subdivision.
(c) The words "situated in the City of Bridgeton, Cumberland
County, New Jersey."
§ 311-10 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-11
305:499
(d) Name and address of record owner or owners.
(e) Name and address of the subdivider.
(f) Scale in terms of number of feet to the inch, i.e., one inch to
100 feet.
(g) Date.
(h) Name, address and title of person preparing the plat.
(3) An information block shall be located above the title block on the
right-hand side of the preliminary plat and shall include the
following information:
(a) Acreage of the entire tract to the nearest tenth of an acre.
(b) Acreage of the area being subdivided to the nearest tenth of an
acre.
(c) Number of new lots being created.
(d) Zoning district or districts in which the tract is located.
(e) Reference meridian.
(f) Contour reference datum.
(g) City Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(4) An approval block shall be located in the upper right-hand corner of
a sketch plat and shall include the following:
(a) Approved as a preliminary plat for a major subdivision.
(Signature) (Date)
Chairman, Bridgeton Planning Board
(Signature) (Date)
City Engineer
(Signature) (Date)
Mayor
Applicant may proceed with final plat preparation.
(5) The following existing conditions shall be clearly and accurately
shown:
(a) The location of existing property lines, streets, buildings,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drainpipes,
easements, utility lines both underground and overhead, rock
§ 311-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-11
305:500
formations, wooded areas, trees over five inches in diameter,
and other natural features.
[1] Existing buildings and other structures to be retained shall
be clearly differentiated from those which are to be
removed.
(b) Zoning district boundaries if the tract to be subdivided is
located in more than one district.
(c) Contours at two-foot intervals. All contour lines shall be
referenced to the US Coast and Geodetic datum or datum
approved by the City Engineer.
[1] Upon recommendation of the City Engineer, contours on
steep slopes may be shown at five-foot intervals or some
other appropriate interval.
(d) Test borings to indicate depth to rock shall be shown at the
discretion of the Planning Board pursuant to Subsection
C(3)(a) of this chapter.
(e) The boundaries of the floodplains of all watercourses within or
adjacent to the subdivision.
[1] Profile of stream beds located within the subdivision and
300 feet upstream and downstream from proposed
property limits of development.
(f) Cross sections of watercourses at an appropriate scale
showing extent of floodplain, top of bank, normal water level
and bottom elevation at the following locations:
[1] At any point where a watercourse crosses a boundary of
the subdivision;
[2] Immediately upstream and downstream of any point of
juncture of two or more watercourses;
[3] At a maximum of three-hundred-foot intervals along all
watercourses which run through or adjacent to the
subdivision.
(g) The location and extent of drainage and conservation
easements and stream encroachment lines.
(h) The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing
lakes or ponds within or adjacent to the subdivision.
(i) When required by the Cumberland County Planning Board,
pursuant to the Cumberland County Subdivision Review and
Approval Resolution, the following shall be shown:
§ 311-11 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-11
305:501
[1] The total acreage in the drainage basin of any watercourse
running through or adjacent to a subdivision in the area
upstream of the subdivision.
[2] The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest
downstream drainage structure and the acreage in the
subdivision which drains to the structure.
(6) The preliminary plat shall clearly and accurately show the following
proposals which shall conform to the design standards of this
chapter:
(a) The location of proposed property lines, building setback lines
from all streets and tentative location of proposed buildings.
(b) The location of and center line profiles and cross sections of
proposed streets within the subdivision and existing streets
and highways abutting the subdivision. The typical cross
section of streets shall clearly indicate the type and width of
pavement and location of curb, location of sidewalks and shade
tree planting strips. At intersections, any existing or proposed
sight triangles and the radius of curblines shall be clearly
indicated.
(c) The location of proposed culverts and bridges. In addition to
the watercourse cross sections required by Subsection B(5)(f)
of this section, cross sections will be required at fifty-foot
intervals for a distance of 300 feet upstream and downstream
of any proposed culvert or bridge within or adjacent to the
subdivision.
(d) A tentative grading plan showing proposed contours at twofoot
intervals or at some other interval if approved by the City
Engineer. Such grading plan shall also show the tentative
elevation of all proposed property corners.
(e) Plans for erosion and sediment control.
(f) The location, extent and water level elevation of all proposed
lakes or ponds within or adjacent to the subdivision.
(g) When ditches, streams, brooks or watercourses are to be
altered, improved, or relocated, the method of stabilizing
slopes and measures to control erosion and siltation, as well as
typical ditch sections and profiles, shall be shown.
(h) Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water,
gas, and electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or
any proposed utility systems.
[1] Plans and computations for storm drainage systems shall
include all existing and proposed storm sewer lines within
or adjacent to the subdivision showing size and profile of
§ 311-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-11
305:502
the lines, direction of flow and the location of each
manhole and inlet and the location and extent of any
proposed dry wells, groundwater recharge basins,
retention basins or other water conservation devices.
[2] Plans for connecting to existing or proposed sanitary
sewer facilities shall show location, size and slope of all
sanitary sewer lines, location of existing or proposed
pumping stations and connections to existing facilities.
[3] When a public sewage disposal system is not available, the
developer shall have percolation tests made and shall
show the location and results of such tests on the
preliminary plat.
[4] Plans for water distribution shall show the size and
location of all existing and proposed water mains in the
subdivision and adjacent to it.
[5] The location of any other underground utilities and the
easements to accommodate them shall be clearly indicated
on the plan.
(i) Identification of lands to be dedicated or reserved for public
use.
(j) Plans for the preservation of all existing natural features.
(k) Plans for modification, addition or any other alteration to
existing man-made features.
(l) If the preliminary plat covers only a portion of the applicant's
entire holdings, the prospective future street system for the
entire tract shall be indicated.
C. Documentation to accompany preliminary plat. The following
documentation shall accompany the submission of the preliminary plat:
(1) When a brook or stream is proposed for alteration, improvement, or
relocation or when a drainage structure is proposed on a running
stream, with a drainage area of 1/2 square mile or greater,
evidence of submission of the improvements to the New Jersey
Division of Water Resources shall accompany the subdivision.
(2) A statement from the Department of Public Works which in effect
assures that sewerage treatment and water supply are or will be
available and that connection to their facilities is feasible; or, when
utility layouts do not show feasible connections to existing or
proposed utility systems, the developer shall have percolation tests
made and shall show the location and results of such tests on the
plat, and any proposed individual water supply or sewage disposal
system must be indicated and accompanied by the approval of the
appropriate local, county and state health agencies.
§ 311-11 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-11
305:503
§ 311-12. Final plat.
(3) A report from the Cumberland County Soil and Water Conservation
District on the soil characteristics of the site in sufficient detail to
enable the Planning Board to determine the type and degree of
development the site may accommodate because of the limitation
of soils as related to basement and foundation construction, street
and parking area construction and grading condition.
(a) If the City Engineer finds that such report does not enable him
to make necessary determinations, he may request that the
developer take test borings and show the results of such tests
on the preliminary plat.
(4) A copy of any existing and proposed protective covenants or deed
restrictions applying to the land being subdivided shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat.
(5) Certification by the person preparing the plat as to the accuracy of
the plat details.
A. Minimum plat details required for review by Planning Board. A final
plat which shall be drawn in ink or tracing cloth at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 100 feet and in compliance with all the provisions
of the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). The
final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following:
(1) Graphic scale and North arrow indicating true North.
(2) A title block shall be located in the lower right-hand corner of the
sketch plat and shall include the following information:
(a) The words "final plat."
(b) Name of the subdivision.
(c) The words "situated in the City of Bridgeton, Cumberland
County, New Jersey."
(d) Name and address of the record owner or owners.
(e) Name and address of the subdivider.
(f) Scale in terms of number of feet to the inch, i.e., one inch to
100 feet.
(g) Date.
(h) Name, address and title of person preparing the plat.
(3) An approval block shall be located in the upper right-hand corner of
the final plat and shall include the following:
§ 311-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-12
305:504
(a) Approved as a final plat for recording. [Amended 9-19-2017
by Ord. No. 17-20]
(Signature) (Date)
Chairman, Bridgeton Planning Board
(Signature) (Date)
City Engineer
(Signature) (Date)
President of City Council
(Signature) (Date)
ATTEST: Municipal Clerk
(4) A block for filing information shall be located on the right-hand side
of the plat below the approval block and shall contain the following:
Recorded (Date)
Book No. Page No.
(Signature and title)
Cumberland County Recording Officer
(5) Tract boundary lines, lot lines and other site lines and minimum
setback lines on all lots and other sites.
(a) All lot lines and other site lines shall be accurately
dimensioned and accurate bearings or deflection angles, and
radii, arcs and central angles of all curves shall be accurately
shown.
(b) The proposed use of sites or lots other than residential shall be
clearly noted.
(6) All street right-of-way lines and the following:
(a) The names of all streets shall be clearly shown.
(b) Clear sight triangles at all intersections, including additional
right-of-way or easements for county roads.
(c) Cross sections and profiles of streets.
(7) Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
(8) Contours at two-foot intervals or some other interval approved by
the City Engineer.
§ 311-12 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-12
305:505
(9) Drainage easements and encroachment lines, utility easements and
other rights-of-way, and land to be reserved or dedicated to public
use.
(a) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated.
(10) Each block shall be numbered and the lots within each block shall
be numbered consecutively beginning with number one.
(11) Location and description of all monuments.
(12) Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
(13) Appropriate plans, profiles, and other details as required by the
City Engineer to supplement the proposals of the preliminary plat
for all required improvements.
(14) Where the proposals for any required improvements differ from the
proposals shown on the preliminary plat, complete plans and
profiles shall be submitted in sufficient detail to meet the
requirements of the City Engineer.
(15) Detailed plans and specifications for all proposed culverts and
bridges which may become structures under county jurisdiction or
improvements to existing county culverts or bridges shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to meet the requirements of the
County Engineer.
B. Documentation to accompany final plat. The following documentation
shall accompany the final plat:
(1) Certification by engineer or surveyor as to accuracy of details of
plat.
(2) Certification that the applicant is the agent or owner of the land, or
that the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(3) Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date,
and that any local improvement assessments against the tract
being subdivided have been paid in full or that such local
improvement assessments have been apportioned among the lots of
the subdivision upon the application of the subdivider, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:7-1 et seq., and in the event of such apportionment, that
such local improvement assessments are paid to date.
(4) Plans and specifications required by Subsection A(15) above, if any,
shall be accompanied by the permit of the Division of Water
Resources indicating its approval of the proposed facility.
(5) Written report from the City Engineer stating:
§ 311-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-12
305:506
(a) That all improvements, as indicated on the final plat, are in
conformance with the proposals of the approved preliminary
plat.
(b) That he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation identifying those portions already
installed and those to be installed and that the subdivider has
complied with one or both of the following:
[1] Installed all improvements in accordance with the
requirements of these regulations; or
[2] A performance guarantee has been posted with the
Municipal Clerk in sufficient amount to assure the
completion of all required improvements within a twelvemonth
period. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(c) In those instances where improvements have been installed,
that the Engineer has received proper as-built drawings.
(6) When final approval is requested for an area which is less than the
full area for which preliminary approval was given, the applicant
shall submit a key map at a scale of not less than one inch equals
200 feet which clearly and accurately shows the entire subdivision
for which preliminary approval was granted, including all proposed
streets and property lines, and that portion for which final approval
is being requested.
(7) A letter from the postmaster stating that proposed street names in
the subdivision do not duplicate names in use and are acceptable.
(8) When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of the
City, county or state, approval shall be certified.
§ 311-12 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-12
305:507

ARTICLE V
Improvements
§ 311-13. Required improvements by subdivider.
A. The subdivider shall be required to provide and install the
improvements listed in § 311-14 below as a condition for final approval
for recording the final plat, or the subdivider may post performance
guarantee in lieu thereof pursuant to § 311-9G of this chapter.
(1) Prior to final approval, if the applicant has not installed all
improvements meeting the requirements of this chapter, he shall
have filed with the City a performance guarantee sufficient in the
amount to cover 120% of the cost of all such improvements or
uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by the City Engineer,
and assuring the installation of such uncompleted improvements on
or before an agreed date. Such performance guarantee may be in
the form of a performance bond which shall be issued by a bonding
or surety company approved by City Council; a certified check,
returnable to the subdivider after full compliance; or any other type
of surety approved by the City Solicitor.
(2) The performance guarantee shall be approved by the City Solicitor
as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance guarantee
shall run for a period to be fixed by the Planning Board but, in no
case, for a term of more than three years. However, with the
consent of the owner and the surety, if there be one, the City
Council may by resolution extend the term of such performance
guarantee for an additional period not to exceed one year. Prior to
the release of the performance bond, the developer shall provide
as-built details indicating the improvements as constructed and as
approved by the City Engineer.
B. All required improvements shall be installed or constructed in
accordance with the design standards set forth in Article VI of this
chapter or in accordance with standards and specifications adopted by
appropriate county or state agency or such other governmental agency
or utility commission as may have jurisdiction over a particular
improvement.
(1) When there is a conflict between the standards set forth in this
chapter and those adopted by other governmental agencies, the
more strict standards shall apply, and the subdivider shall install
the improvements as though the more strict standards were a part
of this chapter.
(2) Standards set forth in this chapter are considered to be minimum
standards. However, nothing contained herein shall be construed
as prohibiting the subdivider from installing improvements
meeting higher standards than the minimum requirements.
§ 311-13 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-14
305:509
§ 311-14. Installation of improvements.
The following improvements shall be installed or provided by the subdivider
in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer and the Planning
Board:
A. Streets.
(1) Graded and gravelled roadbed and cartway wearing surface on all
new streets within and adjacent to the subdivision.
(2) Existing streets which do not meet the requirements of this chapter
with regard to width or type of construction shall be widened and
brought into conformity on that portion of the street within or
adjoining the subdivision.
(3) Curbs and gutters on all streets.
(4) Street trees where required by the Planning Board.
(5) Street name signs at all street intersections.
(6) Streetlighting.
B. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of all streets.
(2) Crosswalks and other pedestrianways where required by the
Planning Board.
C. Utility and drainage easements. Where it is practical, utility easements
shall be located at the rear of the subdivision lots.
D. Utilities.
(1) All electric, telephone and communication service lines and main
lines shall be placed underground.
(2) Water mains, fire hydrants and water distribution system.
(3) Sanitary sewer system.
(4) No underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved by the City Engineer.
E. Surface drainage and flood control facilities.
(1) The subdivision shall be provided with such storm drains, culverts,
drainageways, or other works as are necessary to collect and
dispose of surface and storm water originating on or flowing across
the subdivision, in order to prevent inundation and damage to
streets, lots, and buildings.
§ 311-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-14
305:510
§ 311-15. Inspection and approval of improvements.
(2) All drainage problems shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer and are subject to his approval in accordance with
accepted engineering methods.
F. Erosion and sedimentation control. All subdivision plans shall include
adequate provision for erosion and sediment control, both during
construction and after completion of construction.
G. Topsoil protection.
(1) No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil.
(2) Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas
of the subdivision.
H. Recreation and open space.
I. Planted buffer areas. Planted buffer areas shall be provided where the
Planning Board determines that buffer planting is necessary to protect
the general welfare of the public.
J. Compensatory planting. The subdivider shall replace natural growth of
trees and shrubs removed in the process of developing the subdivision
as directed by the Planning Board.
K. Monuments. Surveyor's monuments shall be placed in accordance with
the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.).
L. Off-site improvements.
A. Inspection.
(1) All improvements shall be subject to inspection and approval by the
City Engineer, who shall be notified by the developer at least 24
hours prior to the start of construction.
(2) All improvements are subject to inspection during construction and
upon completion.
B. Approval.
(1) No improvement shall be approved by the City Engineer until he
has received accurate as-built drawings, detailed description of
location, and the completion date of the improvement as it was
actually constructed.
(2) No utility shall be covered until approval is given by the City
Engineer.
§ 311-14 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-15
305:511
(3) No street base or surface shall be installed until any utility
improvement located thereunder has been inspected and approved
by the City Engineer.
(4) Approval of improvements by the City Engineer does not relieve the
subdivider of his responsibility to obtain approval from county,
state or other government agency or such public utility commission
as may have jurisdiction over the improvement.
§ 311-15 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-15
305:512
ARTICLE VI
Design Standards
§ 311-16. Application.
§ 311-17. General requirements.
§ 311-18. Land and use requirements.
A. The standards and requirements contained herein shall apply to each
subdivision or portion thereof.
B. Where county, state or other government agency imposes requirements
in conflict with those contained herein, the most restrictive
requirements shall apply.
A. The layout or arrangement of the subdivision shall not be inconsistent
with Chapter 370, Zoning.
B. The subdivision plan shall conform to design standards that will
encourage good development patterns within the City.
C. Where either or both an Official Map or Master Plan has or have been
adopted, the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions
shown thereon.
D. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map
shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats.
A. Proposed land uses shall conform to Chapter 370, Zoning.
B. Land shall be suited to the purposes for which it is to be subdivided.
C. Land subject to hazards to life, health or property shall not be
subdivided for residential purposes until all such hazards have been
eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards have
been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards against such hazards
are provided by the subdivision plat.
D. Subdivisions shall be coordinated with existing nearby neighborhoods
so that the City as a whole may develop harmoniously.
E. Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in the
subdivision and to adjacent unsubdivided territory.
F. Streets giving such access shall be improved to the limits of the
subdivisions.
G. Landlocked areas shall not be created.
H. No land included in a subdivision shall be on a lot of such size that does
not conform to the lot size provisions of Chapter 370, Zoning.
§ 311-16 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-19
305:513
§ 311-19. Streets.
A. Street patterns.
(1) Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or
parts thereof as have been officially adopted by the City.
(2) Proposed streets shall further conform to such county and state
road and highway plans as have been adopted and filed as
prescribed by law.
(3) Streets shall be logically related to the topography so as to produce
usable lots and reasonable grades.
(4) Streets in and bordering a subdivision or land development shall be
coordinated and of such widths and grades and in such locations
necessary to accommodate prospective traffic and facilitate fire
protection and access for fire-fighting equipment to buildings.
(5) New streets shall be coordinated so as to compose a convenient
system, provided that no street of a width greater than 50 feet
within the right-of-way line may be required unless said street
already has been shown on the Master Plan at the greater width, or
already has been shown in greater width on the Official Map or is
shown on the Cumberland County Highway Plan in greater width.
(6) The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate
extensions of existing streets.
(7) Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage through traffic, but
provision for street connections into and from adjacent areas will
be required.
(8) Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal
service road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting or
some other means of separation of through and local traffic as the
Planning Board may determine appropriate.
(9) Subdivisions that adjoin and include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or
the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate
additional width along either one or both sides of said road. If the
subdivision is along one side only 1/2 of the required extra width
shall be dedicated.
(10)New streets shall be laid out to continue existing streets at equal or
greater width, as regard to cartway and right-of-way where such
continuations are reasonable and practicable.
(11) Continuation of existing streets shall be known by the same name.
Names for new streets shall not duplicate or closely resemble
names of existing streets and shall be approved by the postmaster.
§ 311-19 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-19
305:514
(12) New half or partial streets will not be permitted.
(13) Reserve strips designed to prevent access to new streets shall be
prohibited.
(14) Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except as stubs to permit
future street extension into adjoining tracts, or when designated as
a cul-de-sac street.
(a) Cul-de-sac streets, permanently designed as such, shall not
exceed 600 feet in length and shall not provide access to more
than 20 dwelling units.
(b) Cul-de-sac streets shall be provided at the closed end with a
paved turnaround or apron having an outside road diameter of
at least 80 feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet.
(c) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future
extension of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way
to the adjoining properties.
(15) Where a subdivision abuts a railroad right-of-way, streets crossing
the railroad shall be kept to a minimum and shall be located to
facilitate grade separation.
(16) Subdivisions shall be so designed that no more than 55% of the
total area of the subdivision shall be devoted to street rights-of-way.
B. Street widths. Minimum street right-of-way and cartway (roadway)
widths shall be as follows:
(1) Minor streets and marginal access roads.
(a) Fifty-foot right-of-way.
(b) Thirty-two-foot cartway.
(2) Collector streets.
(a) Sixty-foot right-of-way.
(b) Thirty-six-foot cartway.
(3) Arterial streets.
(a) Eighty-foot right-of-way.
(b) Forty-eight-foot cartway.
(4) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial development shall be determined on an
individual basis and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment.
§ 311-19 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-19
305:515
C. Street alignment.
(1) When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one
point by more than 10º and not more than 45º, they shall be
connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
(2) Centering radii for horizontal curves shall ensure adequate sight
distance.
(3) A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
(4) Clear sight distances shall be maintained along the center lines of
streets as follows:
(a) Minor streets: 200 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 300 feet.
(c) Arterial streets: 500 feet.
D. Street grades.
(1) Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades
on other streets shall not exceed 10%.
(2) No street shall have a minimum grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
(3) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade exceeding 1% and
shall be designed in relation to the extent of grade change, and to
provide the following sight distances:
(a) Minor street: 200 feet.
(b) Collector street: 300 feet.
(c) Arterial street: 500 feet.
(4) At the approach to an intersection and when the grade exceeds 7%,
a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than 4% grade
for a distance of 40 feet measured from the nearest right-of-way
line of the intersecting street.
(5) The center line grade on a cul-de-sac shall not exceed 4%.
(6) Combination of minimum radius horizontal curves with maximum
street grades will not be permitted.
E. Street intersections.
(1) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than
60º.
§ 311-19 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-19
305:516
(2) Multiple intersections involving junction of more than two streets
shall be avoided.
(3) Clear sight triangles of 25 feet measured along the right-of-way
from their point of junction shall be provided at all intersections,
and no building, planting, or other obstruction shall be permitted
within such sight triangles, which exceed two feet above the center
line of the street.
(4) At proposed intersections, where traffic intersects with a collector
or arterial street, the traffic to be controlled by a stop sign must
have sufficient sight distance to enable the stopped vehicle to cross
the collector, secondary or major traffic street. Based upon level
conditions, and nearly right-angle intersections.
(a) The minimum sight distance provided for a stopped vehicle in
crossing a two-lane facility shall be 400 feet.
(b) The minimum sight distance provided for a stopped vehicle in
crossing a four-lane facility shall be 450 feet.
(5) To the fullest extent possible, intersections with major traffic
streets shall be located not less than 800 feet apart, measured from
center line to center line.
(6) Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of
125 feet between their center lines.
(7) Maximum grades within any intersection shall not exceed 1%, and
approaches to an intersection shall follow a straight course for 100
feet.
(8) Curb radii at intersections shall be according to the following
schedule of minimum lengths:
(a) Minor streets: 25 feet.
(b) Collector streets: 30 feet.
(c) Arterial streets: 35 feet.
(d) Where streets of different categories intersect, the
requirements for the more important one shall hold.
(9) The right-of-way radii at intersections shall be at least 15 feet.
(10) At intersections, the street right-of-way line shall be parallel to the
curbline.
F. Curbs and gutters.
(1) Curbs and gutters shall be provided for the full length of all streets.
§ 311-19 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-19
305:517
(2) Curbs and gutters will be provided on both sides of all streets
except:
(a) On minor and collector streets which are coterminal with the
subdivision boundary, curbs and gutters need not be
constructed on the side of said streets adjacent to undeveloped
tracts. However, stabilized shoulders or rolled edges will be
required to protect the cartway edge.
(3) Combination curb and gutter construction may be used.
G. Street trees.
(1) Street shade trees shall be planted within the street right-of-way so
that they are spaced at a distance no greater than 40 feet between
trees and placed so that they do not interfere with sidewalks or
utilities.
(2) Street trees shall not be less than 2 1/2 inches in diameter at time
of planting.
(3) Street trees shall be one of the following types:
(a) Pin oak.
(b) Willow oak.
(c) Columnar Norway maple.
(d) Red maple.
(e) Sweet gum.
(f) Thornless honey locust.
(g) Japanese pagoda tree.
H. Street name signs.
(1) Street name signs shall be placed at each street intersection.
(2) Street name signs shall be four-way signs of such materials, size,
height and location as specified by the City Engineer.
I. Streetlighting.
(1) Installation.
(a) Streetlighting shall be installed by the subdivider in
accordance with the electric utility company specifications; or
(b) Streetlighting may be installed by the electric utility company;
however, the subdivider shall apply to the electric utility
company for streetlight installation in sufficient time so that
said lighting is installed and operable prior to final plat
approval.
§ 311-19 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-19
305:518
§ 311-20. Alleys, private roads and driveways.
(2) No building or lot may be sold and no building may be rented, sold
or occupied until streetlighting has been installed.
A. Alleys.
(1) Alleys are prohibited in residential developments except where
employed to avoid direct driveway access to arterial streets, and by
permission of the Planning Board.
(2) Where permitted, alleys in residential developments shall have a
minimum width of 20 feet and curbed with a minimum paved
surface of 15 feet. Where alleys serve dwellings only on one side, a
paved alley surface of not less than 12 feet may be permitted.
(3) Alleys shall be required in commercial and industrial districts,
except where other adequate provision is made for off-street
loading and parking consistent with the use proposed. Where
required, alleys in commercial or industrial districts shall have a
minimum paved width of 22 feet.
(4) Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited.
(5) Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be
prohibited.
(6) Alleys, where deemed necessary to facilitate circulation or are
required, shall be offered for dedication.
B. Private roads.
(1) Private roads shall be constructed in accordance with regulations
governing minor streets and in accordance with City specifications
for public streets.
(2) Private roads will be permitted only by contractual agreement with
the City.
(3) Such contract shall provide that:
(a) If the developer or owner does not properly maintain and
repair the private road(s), the City shall contract for such
maintenance and repair as deemed necessary by the City
Engineer and shall charge the developer or owner the cost of
such contract plus 10% of same for handling; or
(b) The City Engineer shall cause the Department of Public Works
to maintain and/or repair the private road(s), and the City shall
charge the developer or owner 1 1/2 times (150%) the cost of
materials and labor.
C. Driveways.
§ 311-19 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-20
305:519
§ 311-21. Pedestrian walkways.
§ 311-22. Utility and drainage easements.
(1) Driveways shall be located at least 40 feet from street intersections
as measured from the street right-of-way line.
(2) Driveway grade shall not exceed 6%.
(3) Curb cuts for driveways shall be not less than 12 feet wide.
(4) Curb cuts shall not exceed 18 feet in width except where the
driveway serves two lots, in which case a twenty-four-foot curb cut
will be permitted.
(5) Curb height shall be at least one inch high above the gutter at
driveway entrances.
A. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks shall be installed on one or both sides of streets.
(2) Sidewalks shall be located within the street right-of-way abutting
the front property lines.
(3) Sidewalks shall be separated from street cartways by a median
strip which shall be planted with a permanent ground cover.
(4) Sidewalk width shall not be less than four feet. Greater width may
be required in high density residential developments and
commercial areas.
(5) Sidewalks shall be constructed with grade and continuous across
driveways.
B. Crosswalks.
(1) Pedestrian crosswalks shall be required in blocks that exceed 1,000
feet in length.
(2) Pedestrian crosswalks may be required to schools and other public
buildings in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board in
order to assure adequate access to all sides of the public building in
question.
(3) Crosswalks shall have a minimum right-of-way or easement of 15
feet.
(4) The minimum width for a crosswalk shall be six feet. A greater
width may be required by the Planning Board in order to facilitate
pedestrian traffic and/or to adequately accommodate emergency
vehicles.
§ 311-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-22
305:520
§ 311-23. Utilities.
A. Easements with a minimum width of 20 feet shall be provided for
common utilities and drainage when provided in or over undedicated
land.
B. Utility easements shall be located in consultation with the utility
companies or municipal departments concerned and shall be, to the
extent possible, located at the rear of lots.
C. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be centered on or
adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
D. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the line of such watercourse and of such width as will
be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
A. Electric, telephone and communications services.
(1) All electric, telephone and communication service facilities both
main and service lines shall be provided by underground cables,
installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices
of the utility or other companies providing such services, except
where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Board
that the underground installation herein required is not feasible
because of the physical condition of the lands involved.
(2) All main underground cables which are within the right-of-way of a
street shall be located as specified by the City Engineer.
(3) Lines from the utility and/or communication service connection
boxes or cables to individual buildings shall be placed
underground.
(4) New subdivision serving less than five dwellings or lots or other
uses need not utilize underground service, provided:
(a) The subdivision is not adjacent to one being served by
underground utilities.
(b) Connecting service lines must be placed underground because
they will be placed through a subdivision being served by
underground utilities.
B. Water supply.
(1) All new subdivisions shall utilize the public water distribution
system for the water supply where geographical location and
accessibility make this possible.
(2) When indicated by the Department of Public Works that public
water supply will not be available for up to five years, private water
§ 311-22 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-23
305:521
§ 311-24. Surface drainage and flood control facilities.
supply may be used if permitted by the Planning Board upon
approval of the City Engineer and the Health Officer.
(a) Where private water supply systems must be used as the
principal source of water in a new subdivision, each lot shall be
of a size and shape to allow safe location of a well on every lot,
and the applicant must produce a certificate of nonavailability
of public water supply system from the Department of Public
Works.
(b) Where certification of individual on-site water supply systems
is required by the State Health Department, a copy of this
certification will be required by the Planning Board.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be installed at the developer's expense as an
integral part of any public water supply system.
(a) Fire hydrants shall be placed no more than 100 feet apart. Fire
hydrants shall be located so that their distance from the
projection of any building frontage to the curb is not more than
600 feet measured along the curb.
(b) In commercial and industrial areas, the Department of Public
Safety shall determine the location of hydrants.
C. Sanitary sewer system.
(1) The developer or land subdivider shall provide a complete system
of sanitary sewers including laterals to curbline which shall be laid
usually in the center of streets in accordance with plans, meeting
the requirements of the City Engineer and the Department of
Public Works.
(2) Eight-inch terra cotta pipe is required as a minimum, but under
special conditions, larger sizes of pipe and/or pipe constructed of
cast iron or other approved materials may be required.
(3) At the completion, the developer shall supply to the Department of
Public Works two sets of plans on linen showing details, location of
manholes and laterals from measurements made during the course
of construction.
A. Surface drainage.
(1) All lots shall be graded so that surface water drains away from the
proposed buildings.
(2) Swales shall be provided to prevent the encroachment of surface
water from one lot to another.
§ 311-23 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-24
305:522
(a) To the extent possible, swales shall be centered on side and
rear lot lines.
(3) Lots which provide one or more on-lot utilities shall be graded so
that surface water drains away from wells and/or septic tanks, and
seepage pits if provided.
B. Flood control facilities.
(1) Storm sewers, culverts, and related installations shall be provided
to permit unimpeded flow of natural watercourses, to drain all low
points along streets and to intercept stormwater runoff along
streets at intervals reasonably related to the extent and grade of
the entire area drainage, and shall be designed for two inches per
hour rainfall with 100% runoff.
(2) In the design of storm sewerage installations, special consideration
shall be given to avoidance of problems which may arise from
concentration of stormwater runoff over adjacent properties.
(3) The slope of the crown of minor and collector streets shall be 1/4
inch per foot.
(4) Storm sewers, as required, shall be placed in front of the curb when
located in a street right-of-way. When located in undedicated land,
they shall be placed within an easement not less than 20 feet wide,
as approved by the City Engineer. Open ditches shall be avoided.
(5) Storm sewers shall have a minimum diameter of 15 inches and a
minimum grade of 1/2%. Changes in alignment shall be by straight
sections connected by inlets or manholes.
(6) Manholes shall be not more than 300 feet apart on sizes up to 24
inches and not more than 450 feet apart on greater sizes. Inlets
may be substituted for manholes on approval by the City Engineer.
(7) Inlets and manhole covers and frames shall conform to the City
standards. At street intersections, inlets shall be placed in the
tangent and not in the curved portion of the curbing.
(8) Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge water directly over a
sidewalk, driveway or parking area, but shall connect with the
gutter or storm sewer.
(9) Bridges and culverts shall have ample waterway to carry expected
flows.
(a) Culverts shall be provided with wing walls and constructed for
the full width of the right-of-way.
(b) Bridges shall be provided with a paved flow line and with deep
aprons and wing walls at each end.
§ 311-24 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-24
305:523
§ 311-25. Erosion and sedimentation control.
§ 311-26. Topsoil protection.
(c) Bridges shall be constructed no narrower than the cartway of
the road they serve; and, in addition, sidewalks on one or both
sides shall be required.
(10) Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to remove the
anticipated increase in runoff that will occur when all undeveloped
adjacent property at a higher elevation is fully developed.
A. Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be done
in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
B. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
C. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall
be kept within practical limits.
D. Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization
measure shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
construction or other land disturbance.
E. Drainage provisions shall accommodate all increased runoff resulting
from modifications of soil and surface conditions during and after
development or disturbance. Such provisions shall be in addition to the
requirements of § 311-24 of this chapter.
F. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site wherever possible
to facilitate groundwater recharge.
G. Sediment shall be retained on site.
H. Diversions, sediment basins, and similar required structures shall be
installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
I. All necessary temporary erosion and sedimentation controls shall be
maintained by the developer until they are permanently stabilized as
determined by the City Engineer or replaced by permanent installation.
A. Topsoil should be examined to determine whether the quantity and
quality justifies stripping and stockpiling.
B. Stripping shall be confined to the immediate construction area.
C. Lime may be added before stripping to bring the soil ph to 6.5.
D. Stockpiles of topsoil should be situated so as not to obstruct natural
drainage or cause off-site environmental damage.
E. Stockpiles shall be protected from wind and water erosion by seeding
or mulching.
§ 311-24 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-26
305:524
§ 311-27. Recreation and open space.
(1) Mulch shall be anchored by an acceptable method.
F. Prior to redistribution of topsoil, the subsoil shall be graded and any
necessary erosion control measure taken.
(1) Retaining walls should be used whenever the slope of final grade
exceeds a ratio of 1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical.
G. Topsoil shall be redistributed uniformly to a depth of six inches.
H. Immediately upon redistribution, topsoil shall be stabilized by seeding,
sodding or planting.
A. Recreation.
(1) In subdivisions which provide or are intended to provide housing
facilities for more than 50 families, suitable open areas shall be
required for recreation. Standards to be provided shall be as
follows:
(a) Fifty to 300 families: 1 1/2 acres per 100 families.
(b) Over 300 families: 4 1/2 acres plus 1/4 acre per 100 families.
(c) Playgrounds for active sports shall be not less than 2 3/4 acres.
(2) The location, form and design of such areas shall be approved by
the Planning Board.
(3) Areas set aside for recreational purposes shall be reasonably
compact parcels, placed to serve all parts of the subdivision
accessible from a public street, and not excessively irregular in
terrain.
B. Open space.
(1) Natural features such as wooded areas, brooks, hilltops and views
shall be preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision
containing such features.
(2) Areas of any subdivision which fall within the floodplain zone as
delineated by Chapter 370, Zoning, shall be preserved as open
space.
C. The method of preserving such areas for recreational open space,
whether by easement, deed restriction, dedication or other means, shall
be approved by the Planning Board with the advice of legal counsel.
D. In special circumstances, where due to the location and design
requirements of the subdivision it is not feasible, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, to set aside such area or areas for open space, the
§ 311-26 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-27
305:525
§ 311-28. Planted buffer areas and landscaping.
applicant shall make a payment in lieu of the provision of such open
space land to the City.
(1) Such payments shall be placed in a special recreational open space
land fund to be utilized solely for the purchase of public
recreational open space.
(2) The amount of the payment shall be equal to the reasonable
purchase price of an area of land equal in size and character to land
which would otherwise be provided within the subdivision itself in
compliance with the regulations of this chapter.
A. Planted buffer areas.
(1) In the instance where the Planning Board determines that buffer
planting is necessary to protect the general welfare of the public,
buffer areas shall be installed to provide a year-round visual screen
of such width, height and location as approved by the Planning
Board.
(2) The size, variety and planting design of the buffer area shall be as
approved by the Planning Board and the City Engineer.
B. Landscaping requirements.
(1) The yard areas and other areas not used for buildings, parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks, and other paved areas shall be planted with
vegetative material as shown on the landscape plan which shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for approval. Such plantings shall
contain not less than the following minimum plant material:
(a) Not less than 30% of the total area of the tract shall be water,
or lawn area planted in grass or ground cover.
(b) Not less than 5% of the total area of the tract shall be planted
in shrubbery. Such shrubbery shall be not less than 1 1/2 feet
in height, and each bed of such shrubbery area shall be planted
with shrubbery spaced according to generally accepted
standards.
(c) Not less than one tree for each 3,000 square feet of the total
area of the tract shall be planted. Each tree shall be not less
than two inches to 2 1/2 inches in diameter and of a species
approved by the Planning Board. The following is a list of some
acceptable trees for such planting:
Botanical Name
Acer platanoides Norway maple
Acer saccharum Sugar maple
Fraxlnus Americana White ash
§ 311-27 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-28
305:526
§ 311-29. Compensatory planting.
§ 311-30. Monuments.
§ 311-31. Off-site improvements.
Fraxinus Pennsylvania lanceolata Green ash
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Thornless honey locust
Liquidamber styraciflua Sweet gum
Plantanus acerifolia Oriental plane tree
Platanus occidentialis American plane tree
Quercus borealis Northern red oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet oak
Tilia cordata Little leaf European linden
Tilia tomentosa Silver linden
Ulmus Americana American elm
Gingko biloba Maiden hair tree
Quercus alba White oak
Quercus palustris Pin oak
(2) Hedges, fences and walls or other obstructions shall not be placed
or planted in the right-of-way of any street.
A. No trees with a caliper of five inches or greater shall be removed from
the property in the process of subdividing, grading or installing
improvements. Where, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such
removal is unavoidable, the applicant shall install an equal number of
trees in such location and of such size and variety as the Planning Board
shall direct.
B. Notwithstanding the five-inch caliper limitation, no substantial area of
smaller trees or shrub cover shall be removed without the provision of
comparable replacement as approved by the Planning Board.
A. Surveyors' monuments shall be placed to facilitate full surveying
control of each block and lot and all areas of proposed dedication or
public easement.
B. All corners of every lot are to be marked.
C. Monuments shall not be placed in the ground until final grading is
completed.
A. In the instance where improvements outside the boundaries of the
subdivision are necessary to ensure adequate access or the adequate
provision of other necessary utilities or facilities, plans for such off-site
§ 311-28 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-31
305:527
§ 311-32. Blocks.
§ 311-33. Lots.
improvements shall accompany the preliminary plat and, if required by
the City Engineer, the final plat.
B. Such off-site improvements shall be installed by the City, and the costs
of installation shall be allocated by City ordinance on the basis of
proportional benefits.
A. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with regard
to:
(1) Provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type proposed.
(2) Provision of lots which will meet Zoning Ordinance requirements
for the area.
(3) Topography.
(4) Provision for convenient access, circulation control and safety of
street traffic.
B. Blocks shall have a maximum length of 1,600 feet and, so far as
practicable, a minimum length of 500 feet.
(1) In the design of blocks longer than 1,100 feet, special consideration
shall be given to the requirements of satisfactory fire protection.
(2) In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be
required in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board.
C. Residential blocks shall be of sufficient depth to accommodate two tiers
of lots, except where through lots with services by local or minors street
are required along an arterial street, in which case the minimum depth
of such through lots shall be 150 feet.
D. In order to encourage up-to-date site planning and design in residential
subdivisions, the Planning Board may allow exceptions to the provisions
of this section where such modifications of these requirements will
result in a safe healthful neighborhood environment.
E. Blocks for commercial, industrial and group housing areas may vary
from the elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the
use requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for
employees and customers shall be provided along with safe and
convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off-street
loading shall also be provided with similar access. Extension of streets,
railroad access rights-of-way, and utilities shall be provided. The
amount of parking space shall be as required by Chapter 370, Zoning.
§ 311-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-33
305:528
A. Lot dimensions and areas shall be not less than required by Chapter
370, Zoning, and shall further conform to the following requirements
designed to abate health hazards:
(1) Where both water supply and sanitary sewage disposal are
provided by individual on-lot facilities, lots shall have a minimum
area of 18,000 square feet and a minimum width, measured at the
building line, of 125 feet.
(2) Where either water supply or sanitary sewage disposal, but not
both, are provided by individual on-lot facilities, lots shall have a
minimum area of 15,000 square feet and a minimum width,
measured at the building line, of 80 feet.
(3) Where installation of capped sanitary sewer main and house
connections are to be installed at the time of subdivision, and
where studies of the Department of Public Works indicate that
construction or extension of sanitary trunk sewers to serve the
property subdivided appears probable within five years, the
Planning Board may permit lots smaller than outlined above,
provided that soil and drainage data submitted with the plan
indicates that the temporary on-lot facilities will function properly.
(4) Where either or both water supply and sanitary sewage disposal
are provided by individual on-site facilities, the Planning Board will
require that the adequacy of the proposed facilities for each lot in
the subdivision be certified by the Department of Public Works and/
or State Department of Health and the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
(5) All lots where on-lot sewage disposal facilities are proposed
utilizing tile fields must be of a size and shape to accommodate the
required length of tile field at a safe distance and at a lower
elevation than the proposed building.
B. Lots shall be conveniently shaped, and the depth of lots shall generally
not exceed their width by more than 2 1/2 times.
C. Each lot shall front on an approved collector, minor or marginal access
street.
D. No lot may front directly on an arterial street.
E. When reverse frontage lots are employed on an arterial street, they
shall provide a rear yard with a minimum depth of 75 feet, measured in
the shortest distance from the proposed dwelling unit to the ultimate
right-of-way.
F. Double or reverse frontage lots are permitted only where the lot is
adjacent to a major traffic street.
§ 311-33 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-33
305:529
§ 311-34. Material and construction standards.
G. Lots abutting a railroad right-of-way shall provide a rear yard with a
minimum depth of 75 feet, measured in the shortest distance from the
proposed dwelling unit to the railroad right-of-way.
H. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
I. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock and/or clay formations, flood
conditions or similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after
adequate investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
J. At least two paved off-street parking spaces back of the front building
line with access to a street or alley shall be provided for each dwelling
unit.
(1) Where such access is to be a collector street, adequate turnaround
space shall be provided on the lot.
(2) Access to parking shall not be directly from an arterial street.
K. Depth and width of parcels laid out or reserved for nonresidential use
shall be adequate for the use proposed and sufficient to provide
satisfactory space for off-street parking and unloading.
L. Lot lines wherever possible shall follow municipal boundary lines rather
than cross them.
M. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street
lines.
N. If remnants of land exist after subdividing, they shall be incorporated in
existing or proposed lots, or dedicated to public use if acceptable to the
City.
O. House numbers shall be assigned to each lot by the City Engineer and,
wherever possible, shall be identical to final house numbers.68
P. There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet, measured in the shortest
distance, between each proposed dwelling unit and any petroleum
transmission lines, petroleum product or natural gas transmission lines
which may traverse the subdivision.
A. Material and construction standards for streets, curbs and gutters,
storm and sanitary sewers, and sidewalks shall conform to the City
standards; and construction and installation of all facilities shall
conform to City specifications and be subject to inspection by the City
Engineer and/or other appropriate City officials, except:
68.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 98, Buildings, Numbering of.
§ 311-33 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-34
305:530
(1) County-maintained streets, bridges and drainage facilities shall
conform to Cumberland County specifications.
(2) State-maintained streets and other facilities shall conform to
specifications set forth by the State Department of Transportation.
B. The installation of all sewer, water, streetlights, and other utilities shall
be in strict accordance with the engineering standards and
specifications of the City Engineer, Department of Public Works and
utility or other companies subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utility
Commission, in which case the standards established for such utility
shall prevail.
C. Standards for erosion and sediment control shall be equivalent to the
standards for soil erosion and sediment control adopted by the New
Jersey Soil Conservation Committee and administered by the
Cumberland County Soil Conservation District or exceed if deemed
necessary by the City Engineer.
(1) If the City Engineer finds existing conditions not as stated in the
applicant's erosion and sediment control plan, he may refuse to
approve further work and may require necessary erosion and
sedimentation control measures to be promptly installed or seek
such other injunctive relief as allowed by this chapter.
D. Where there are no City or other government agency specifications,
improvements shall be constructed in accordance with specifications
furnished by the City Engineer.
§ 311-34 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-34
305:531

ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 311-35. Enforcement.69
Inspection of actual construction under any approved subdivision plat shall
be the sole responsibility of the City, which may undertake any reasonable
measures to provide adequate inspection of all projects.
§ 311-36. Approval of subdivision required prior to sale of lot or
issuance of building permit.
No lot in a subdivision may be sold nor a building permit issued unless the
subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board and recorded by the
County Recording Officer.
§ 311-37. Compliance with other ordinances, regulations and
standards.
A. Chapter 370, Zoning. It is the intent of this chapter that regulations
contained herein conform to the applicable provisions of Chapter 370,
Zoning. If in effect there is no Zoning Ordinance as in the case of the
courts of the State of New Jersey invalidating the Zoning Ordinance or
an article, section or subsection thereof or the annexation to City of
lands adjacent to it, this chapter shall be amended to include such
standards and regulations as deemed necessary by the Planning Board
and City Council to assure that development within the City shall
conform to the duly adopted Master Plan.
B. Master Plan and Official Map. Where the Master Plan or the Official
Map provides for the reservation of designated streets, public
drainageways, flood control basins, and public areas within the
proposed subdivision, before approving a subdivision, the Planning
Board may further require that such streets, ways, basins or areas be
shown on the plat in locations and sizes suitable to their intended uses.
(1) The Planning Board may reserve the location and extent of such
streets, ways, basins or areas shown on the plat for a period of one
year after the approval of the final plat or within such further time
as may be agreed to by the developer.
(a) Unless during such period or extension thereof the City shall
have entered into a contract to purchase or institute
condemnation proceedings according to law for the fee or a
lesser interest in the land comprising such streets, ways,
basins or areas, the developer shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such
land for private use in accordance with applicable development
regulations.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 311-35 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-37
305:533
(b) This provision shall not apply to the streets and roads, flood
control basins or public drainageways necessitated by the
subdivision or development and required for final approval of
any plat.
(2) The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for actual loss
found to be caused by such temporary reservation and deprivation
of use. In such instance, just compensation shall be deemed to be
the fair market value of an option to purchase the land in question
for the period of reservation. Where the land in question or an
interest therein is acquired for public use, the developer shall be
compensated for the fair market value of the land or interest
therein, so taken or acquired, and for the reasonable cost of
engineering services incurred in connection with obtaining
subdivision approval as to such land.
C. State, county and/or regional development agency standards.
(1) Where there are state regulations governing development in
critical or floodplain areas and such regulations provide stricter
standards than this chapter or Chapter 370, Zoning; and/or where
the critical or floodplain area is more extensive than shown on the
City of Bridgeton Zoning Map, the state regulations shall apply as
though they were duly adopted and contained herein.
(2) Where state or county agencies or departments or a regional
development agency provide stricter regulations for water,
sewerage, road or other improvements than this chapter, such
regulations or requirements shall apply as though they were duly
adopted and contained herein.
(3) Standards established by the Public Utility Commission for utilities
under its jurisdiction shall apply except where standards,
regulations and requirements of this chapter are stricter; then,
such regulations contained herein shall apply.
D. Condominium, cooperative apartments and horizontal property regime
acts.
(1) This chapter and all development regulations pursuant thereto
shall be construed and applied with reference to the nature and use
of the condominium and cooperative apartment without regard to
the form of ownership.
(2) No development regulation or requirement contained herein
concerning the use, location, placement or construction of
buildings or other improvements for condominiums or cooperative
apartments that is not equally applicable to all buildings and
improvements of the same kind not now or thereafter under the
condominium or cooperative apartment corporate form of
ownership shall be required.
§ 311-37 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-37
305:534
§ 311-38. Contractual development.
(3) No approval pursuant to this chapter shall be required as a
condition precedent to the recording of a condominium master
deed or the sale of any unit therein except as shall also be required
for the use or development of the lands described in the master
deed in the same manner had such lands not been under the
condominium form of ownership.
A. Contribution for off-site water, sewer, drainage and street
improvements. The City Council may, by ordinance, adopt regulations
requiring a developer, as a condition for approval of a subdivision, to
pay his pro rata share of the cost of providing only reasonable and
necessary street improvements and water sewerage and drainage
facilities, and easements thereof, located outside the property limits of
the subdivision but necessitated or required by construction or
improvements within such subdivision.
(1) Such regulations shall be based on circulation and comprehensive
utility service plans as indicated by the Master Plan and the Official
Map; and shall establish fair and reasonable standards to
determine the proportionate or pro rata amount of the cost of such
facilities that shall be borne by each developer within a related and
common area, which standards shall not be altered subsequent to
preliminary plat approval.
(2) Where a developer pays the amount determined as his pro rata
share under protest, he shall institute legal action within one year
of such payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial
determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of such
amount.
B. Open space organization. Where, pursuant to § 311-27C of this chapter,
required open space is not dedicated to the City, an easement is not
provided or deed restrictions are not imposed on individual lots, the
Planning Board may require that an open space organization be
established for the ownership and maintenance of any open space for
the benefit of the residents of the development.
(1) Such organization shall enter into an agreement with City Council,
which agreement shall be in a form and contain provisions
acceptable to the City Council, except that such agreement shall
include the following provisions:
(a) Such organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose
of any open space, by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain
the open space for the benefit of such development, and
thereafter such organization shall not be dissolved or dispose
of any of its open space without first offering to dedicate the
same to the City.
§ 311-37 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-38
305:535
(b) In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the
open space in reasonable order and condition, the Planning
Board may serve written notice upon such organization or
upon the residents and owners of the development setting
forth the manner in which the organization has failed to
maintain the open space in reasonable condition, and said
notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of
maintenance be cured within 30 days thereof, and shall state
the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held
within 15 days of the notice.
[1] At such hearing, the Planning Board may modify the terms
of the original notice as to deficiencies and may give a
reasonable extension of time, not to exceed 60 days, within
which they shall be cured.
[2] If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modification thereof shall not be cured within said 30 days
or any permitted extension thereof, the City, in order to
preserve the open space and maintain the same for a
period of one year, may enter upon and maintain such
land. Said entry and maintenance shall not vest in the
public any rights to use the open space except when the
same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the residents
and owners.
[3] Before the expiration of said year, the Planning Board
shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance
of the open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days'
written notice to such organization and to the residents
and owners of the development, to be held by the Planning
Board, at which hearing such organization and the
residents and owners of the development shall show cause
why such maintenance by the City shall not, at the election
of City Council, continue for a succeeding year.
[4] If the Planning Board shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain such open space
in reasonable condition, the municipality shall cease to
maintain said open space at the end of said year.
[5] If the Planning Board shall determine such organization is
not ready and able to maintain said open space in a
reasonable condition, City Council may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said open space during the next
succeeding year, subject to a similar hearing and
determination in each year thereafter.
§ 311-38 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-38
305:536
§ 311-39. Deviations from compliance to subdivision regulations.
[6] The decision of the Planning Board in any such case shall
constitute final administrative decision subject to judicial
review.
(c) The cost of such maintenance by the City shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the development that
have a right of enjoyment of the open space and shall become a
lien and tax on said properties and be added to and be a part of
the taxes to be levied and assessed thereon, and enforced and
collected with interest by the same officers and in the same
manner as other taxes.
C. Phased development completion. The subdivider or developer may
submit a final plat which proposes construction over a period of years
contingent upon approval by the Planning Board and upon written
agreement with City Council. Such agreement shall:
(1) Be in a form acceptable to the City Solicitor.
(2) Be accompanied by both performance and maintenance guarantees
in the form prescribed by the City Solicitor.
(a) Guarantees provided for the first and subsequent phases shall
be in force until the completion of the final phase and for as
long thereafter as agreed upon by the developer and City
Council.
(b) No street or other improvement will be accepted by the City for
dedication until after completion of the final phase.
(3) Include a complete schedule of all work to be accomplished during
each phase.
(4) Include clauses which will ensure the protection of the interests of
the public and of the residents and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development.
A. Deviation from final development plan. The subdivision or land
development shall be developed in substantial accordance with the final
plat; provided that the Planning Board, after public hearing, may permit
a deviation from the final plat if caused by substantial change of
conditions beyond the control of the developer since the date of final
approval, and the deviation would not substantially alter the character
of the development or substantially impair the intent and purpose of the
Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
B. Planned developments. The Planning Board may accept and review
tentative and final development plans for planned unit developments,
planned unit residential developments, residential cluster
developments, planned commercial developments and planned
§ 311-38 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-39
305:537
industrial developments in lieu of the subdivision plats and other plans,
information and documentation required by this chapter.
(1) Prior to submittal of a tentative plan for a planned development for
Planning Board approval, the developer shall request a
preapplication consultation with the Planning Board and shall
conform to the requirements of § 311-6 of this chapter.
(a) At the preapplication consultation, the Planning Board shall
advise the developer as to the manner in which the provisions
for planned developments specified in Chapter 370, Zoning,
differ from the standards otherwise applicable to subdivision
as prescribed by this chapter.
(b) At the preapplication consultation, the developer shall present
sufficient plans and details for the Planning Board to determine
that a planned development would be a more appropriate type
of development for the site than a standard subdivision.
(2) Approval of a tentative plan for a planned development shall have
the same force and effect as the approval of a preliminary plat for a
standard subdivision and shall confer on the developer the same
rights.
(3) Approval of a final development plan for a planned development
shall have the same force and effect as the approval of a final plat
for a standard subdivision, and shall confer on the developer the
same rights, and shall be the instrument of filing of record with the
County Recording Officer.
(4) Prior to approval of such planned developments, the Planning
Board shall find the following facts and conclusions:
(a) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conform to the standards set forth in Chapter 370, Zoning;
(b) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the
common open space, and the adequacy of the amount, location
and purpose of the common open space, are reliable and
adequate;
(c) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development adequately provides for public services, control
over vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light
and air, recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate;
(d) That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse effect or input upon the area in which it
is proposed to be established; and
(e) In the case of a proposed development which proposes
construction over a period of years, that the terms and
§ 311-39 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-39
305:538
§ 311-40. Variance or exception.
conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and of
the residents and owners of the proposed development in the
total completion of the development are adequate.
C. Exemption of certain facilities of public utilities. This chapter or
regulation made under authority thereof shall not apply to land or
structures used or to be used by public utilities in furnishing light, heat,
power or communication service if, upon a petition of the public utility,
the Board of Public Utility Commissioners, after a public hearing,
decides that the present or proposed situation of the proposed use of
the land or structures in question is reasonably necessary for the
service, convenience or welfare of the public and conforms insofar as
possible with the state development plan and County and City Master
Plans.
(1) The City, the County Planning Board and the Division of State and
Regional Planning shall have personal notice of such hearing as
provided in § 311-43 of this chapter and shall be afforded the
opportunity to be heard at such hearing.
(2) If a party in interest is aggrieved by the action of a City, county or
state agency through said agency's exercise of its powers under
this chapter with respect to any action in which the public utility
has an interest, an appeal to the Board of State Public Utility
Commissioners of the State of New Jersey may be taken within 30
days after such action without appeal to the City Council pursuant
to this chapter unless the party in interest so chooses.
(a) In such case appeal to the Public Utility Commissioners may be
taken within 30 days after action by the City Council.
(3) A hearing on the appeal of a public utility to the Public Utility
Commissioners shall be had on notice to the agency from which the
appeal is taken and to all parties primarily concerned, all of whom
shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard.
(4) If, after such hearing, the Board of Public Utility Commissioners
shall find that the present or proposed use by the public utility of
the land described in the petition is necessary for the service,
convenience or welfare of the public, the public utility may proceed
in accordance with such decision of the Board of Public Utility
Commissioners, any regulation made under the authority of this
chapter notwithstanding.
(5) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict the right of
any interested person to obtain a review of the action of the
Planning Board or of the Board of Public Utility Commissioners by
any court of competent jurisdiction according to law.
§ 311-39 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-40
305:539
§ 311-41. Violations and penalties; civil actions.
A. The Planning Board, when reviewing applications for preliminary or
final approval, shall have the power:
(1) To grant such exceptions from the requirements of this chapter as
may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement of one or more
provisions of this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question;
(2) To grant a variance for one lot per subdivision from the applicable
lot area and dimensional requirements of Chapter 370, Zoning, as
may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of
such requirements if their literal enforcement is impracticable or
will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question without the developer being required to
make further application to the Board of Adjustment;
(3) To grant variances from the requirements of Chapter 370, Zoning,
to the same extent and with the same power as the Board of
Adjustment except for lot area and lot dimensional requirements
without the developers being required to make further application
to the Board of Adjustment;
(4) To grant a permit for a building in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway to the same extent and with the same power as
the Board of Adjustment without the developer being required to
make further application to the Board of Adjustment; and
(5) To review conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review
for plat approval without the developer being requested to make
further application to the Planning Board, or the Planning Board
being required to hold further hearings.
B. If a variance permit for a building or conditional use is requested by the
developer pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on the plat
shall include reference to the application for the variance, use permit or
conditional use.
A. If, before favorable referral and final approval have been obtained, any
person transfers or sells or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land
which forms a part of a subdivision on which, by ordinance, the
Planning Board is required to act, such person shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed $1,000, and each parcel, plot or lot so disposed of shall be
deemed a separate violation.
B. Civil actions.
(1) In addition to the foregoing, if the streets and other improvements
in the subdivision are not such that a structure on said land in the
§ 311-40 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-41
305:540
§ 311-42. Certificates showing approval.
subdivision would meet requirements for a building permit under
existing City ordinances, the City may institute and maintain a civil
action:
(a) For injunctive relief.
(b) To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to
such a contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not
been issued in accordance with § 311-42 of this chapter.
(2) In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be
entitled to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the
subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the
subdivider or his assigns or successors, to secure the return of any
deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search
fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such
action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument or transfer, sale or conveyance of said
land, or within six years if unrecorded.
A. The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, or which
formed part of such a subdivision three years preceding the effective
date of this chapter, may apply in writing to the Municipal Clerk of the
City of Bridgeton for the issuance of a certificate certifying whether or
not such subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board or City
Council. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(1) Such application shall contain a diagram showing the location and
dimension of the land to be covered by the certificate and the name
of the owner thereof.
B. The Municipal Clerk shall make and issue such certificate within 15
days after the receipt of such written application and the fees therefor.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(1) Said officer shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged,
in a binder as a permanent record of his office.
C. Each such certificate shall be designed a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land," and shall certify:
(1) Whether there exists in the City of Bridgeton a duly established
Planning Board and whether there is an ordinance controlling
subdivision of land;
(2) Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board, and, if so,
the date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof,
§ 311-41 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-42
305:541
§ 311-43. Public hearings.
showing that subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly
existing subdivision.
D. The Municipal Clerk shall be entitled to demand and receive for such
certificate issued by him a reasonable fee not in excess of those
provided in N.J.S.A. 54:5-14 and 54:5-15. [Amended 9-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-20]
(1) The fees so collected by such official shall be paid by him to the
City.
E. Right of owner of land covered by certificate.
(1) Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an
interest in the lands covered by any such certificate of approval of a
subdivision in reliance upon the information therein contained shall
hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action which could
be prosecuted or maintained by the City pursuant to the provisions
of § 311-42 of this chapter.
(2) If the Municipal Clerk fails to issue the same within 15 days after
receipt of an application and the fees therefor, any person
acquiring an interest in the lands described in such application
shall hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action which
could be prosecuted or maintained by the City pursuant to § 311-42
of this chapter. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
A. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing with public notice on
each application for development governed by the regulations and
requirements of this chapter, on any amendment to this chapter, and on
any development regulation which may supplement this chapter except:
(1) Minor subdivisions pursuant to § 311-7D of this chapter;
(2) Final approval pursuant to § 311-9 of this chapter; and
(3) Final approval pursuant to § 311-39B(3) of this chapter.
B. If a variance permit for a building, a variance from a provision of
Chapter 370, Zoning, or a conditional use is requested by the developer,
pursuant to § 311-40 of this chapter, as part of the application for
subdivision or land development, notice of hearing on the plat shall
include reference to such variance or conditional use.
C. The Planning Board shall make the rules governing such hearings. Any
maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be
on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days in advance of
the hearing during normal business hours in the office of the Municipal
Clerk. The applicant may produce other documents, records, or
testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the
§ 311-42 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-43
305:542
previously filed maps and documents. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-20]
D. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate
shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L. 1953, c.
38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
E. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
F. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Planning Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
G. The Planning Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
(1) The Planning Board shall furnish a transcript on request to any
person at his expense.
H. Each decision on any application for development shall be in writing
and shall include findings of facts and conclusions based thereon.
I. Copies of the decision shall be mailed within 10 days of the date of
decision to the applicant or if represented then to his attorney, without
separate charge, and to all who request same for a reasonable fee.
(1) A copy of the decision shall be filed by the Planning Board in the
office of the Municipal Clerk or as otherwise provided herein.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(2) The Planning Board shall make a copy of its decision available to
members of the public for a reasonable fee and available for public
inspection at its office during reasonable hours.
(3) The City shall, or the applicant may in lieu thereof, publish in the
official newspaper of the City, or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City, a brief notice of the result.
(a) The City may make a reasonable charge for its publication of
the result.
J. Notices of hearings by the Planning Board held pursuant to this chapter
shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the
matters to be considered and, if the matter involves particular property
or properties, an identification thereof by street address, if any, or by
§ 311-43 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-43
305:543
reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the City Tax Assessor's or Collector's office, and the
location and times at which any maps and documents for which
approval is sought are available pursuant to Subsection C.
(1) The City shall, or the applicant may in lieu thereof, give public
notice of a hearing by publication in the official newspaper of the
City, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the City, not less
than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to the date fixed for the
hearing.
(2) The City shall, or the applicant may in lieu thereof, give personal
notice of all hearings on an application for development to the
owners of all real property as shown on the said current tax
duplicate located within 200 feet in all directions of subject
property located within and without the City, not less than 10 nor
more than 30 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing.
(a) Personal notice shall be given by:
[1] Serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on
the said current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the
property;
[2] Leaving a copy thereof at the usual place of abode of the
owner or his agent in charge of the property with a person
of suitable age or discretion; or
[3] Mailing a copy thereof by certified or registered mail to
the property owner at his address as shown on the said
current tax duplicate.
(b) Personal notice to a partnership owner may be made by service
upon any partner.
(c) Personal notice to a corporate owner may be made by service
upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other person
authorized to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
(d) Upon the written request of an applicant, the administrative
officer of a municipality shall, within seven days, make and
certify a list from said current tax duplicates of persons to
whom the applicant is required to give personal notice. The
applicant shall be entitled to rely upon the information
contained in such list.
[1] A fee as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Art. II, Schedule of
Fees, shall be charged for such list.
(3) Notice of all hearings on adoption of amendment to or of a
development regulation affecting this chapter or on applications for
development involving property location within 200 feet of an
adjoining municipality shall be given to the municipal clerk of the
§ 311-43 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-43
305:544
§ 311-44. Fees. [Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 03-5]
Fees shall be as provided in Chapter 149, Fees, Article I, Escrow Fees.
adjoining municipality, sending notice thereof by certified or
registered mail not less than 10 nor more than 30 days prior to the
date fixed for the hearing.
(4) Notice shall be given to the Division of State and Regional Planning
of all hearings on an application for development of property, any
part of which is located within an area designated on an official
state map pursuant to Section 101 of the Community Planning Law
or as a critical area pursuant to Section 104 of the Community
Planning Law, or which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units, by
sending the Division notice thereof by certified or registered mail
not less than 20 nor more than 40 days prior to the date fixed for
the hearing.
(a) A copy of any maps or documents required to be on file with
the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Subsection C shall be enclosed
with the notice of the hearing to the Division on an application
for development. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(5) Notice shall be given to the County Planning Board when:
(a) The development under hearing affects lands adjoining county
roads or other county lands, or lands lying within 200 feet of
the City boundary or proposed facilities or public lands shown
on the Cumberland County Master Plan or Official County
Map.
(b) An amendment to this chapter or a development regulation
which will affect this chapter is proposed.
(6) Such notice shall be given to the County Planning Board at least 10
days prior to the public hearing thereon by personal delivery or
registered mail of a copy of the official notice of public hearing.
(a) In the case of an amendment to or the adoption of a
development ordinance or regulation affecting this chapter,
five copies of the same shall be delivered with said notice, and
such amendment or ordinance or regulation shall not be
effective until five copies thereof have been filed with the
County Planning Board.
§ 311-43 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 311-44
305:545
Chapter 317
TAXATION
§ 311-44 BRIDGETON CODE § 311-44
305:546
ARTICLE I
Five-Year Real Estate Tax Exemption
[Adopted 5-3-1994 by Ord. No. 93-22]
§ 317-1. Definitions.
The definition of the terms used in this article shall be the same as they
appear in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3 and therefore are:
ABATEMENT — That portion of the assessed value of a property as it
existed prior to construction, improvement or conversion of a building or
structure thereon, which is exempted from taxation pursuant to this article.
AREA IN NEED OF REHABILITATION — A portion or all of a municipality
which has been determined to be an area in need of rehabilitation or
redevelopment pursuant to the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, P.L.
1992, c. 194 (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.).[Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-5]
ASSESSOR — The officer of a taxing district charged with the duty of
assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof
used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of material or
manufactured products, or for research, office, industrial, commercial,
retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing purposes, or
for any combination thereof, which the governing body determines will tend
to maintain or provide gainful employment within the municipality, assist in
the economic development of the municipality, maintain or increase the tax
base of the municipality and maintain or diversify and expand commerce
within the municipality. It shall not include any structure or part thereof
used or to be used by any business relocated from another qualifying
municipality.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.
CONDOMINIUM — A property created or recorded as a condominium
pursuant to the Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c 257 (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et
seq.).
CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a new dwelling, multiple dwelling, or
commercial or industrial structure, or the enlargement of the volume of an
existing multiple dwelling or commercial or industrial structure by more
than 30%, but shall not mean the conversion of an existing building or
structure to another use.
CONVERSION or CONVERSION ALTERATION — The alteration or
renovation of a nonresidential building or structure, or hotel, motel, motor
hotel, or guesthouse, in such manner as to convert the building or structure
from its previous use to use as a dwelling or multiple dwelling.
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association, wherein the holder
of a share or membership interest thereof is entitled to possess and occupy
§ 317-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 317-1
305:547
for dwelling purposes a house, apartment, or other unit of housing owned
by the corporation or association, or to purchase a unit of housing owned by
the corporation or association.
COST — When used with respect to abatements for dwelling or multiple
dwellings, only the cost or fair market value of direct labor and materials
used in improving a multiple dwelling, or of converting another building
or structure to a multiple dwelling, or of constructing a dwelling, or of
converting another building or structure to a dwelling, including any
architectural, engineering, and contractor's fees associated therewith, as
the owner of the property shall cause to be certified to the governing body
by an independent and qualified architect, following the completion of the
project.
DWELLING — A building or part of a building used, to be used or held
for use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located on
the same premises, together with the land upon which such building or
buildings are erected and which may be necessary for the fair enjoyment
thereof, but shall not mean any building or part of a building, defined as
a "multiple dwelling" pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.). A dwelling shall include, as
they are separately conveyed to individual owners, individual residences
within a cooperative, if purchased separately by the occupants thereof,
and individual residences within a horizontal property regime or a
condominium, but shall not include general common elements or common
elements of such horizontal property regime or condominium as defined
pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168 (N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1
et seq.), of the Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c. 257 (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.),
or of a cooperative, if the residential units are owned separately.
EXEMPTION — That portion of the Assessor's full and true value of any
improvements, conversion alteration, or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to this article.
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — A property submitted to a horizontal
property regime pursuant to the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168
(N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.).
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, alteration
or repair which produces a physical change in an existing building or
structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness of
the building or structure as a place for human habitation or work, and
which does not change its permitted use. In the case of a multiple dwelling,
it includes only improvements which affect common areas or elements, or
three or more dwelling units within the multiple dwelling. In the case of a
multiple dwelling or commercial or industrial structure, it shall not include
ordinary painting, repairs and replacement of maintenance items, or an
enlargement of the volume of an existing structure by more than 30%. In
no case shall it include the repair of fire or other damage to a property for
which payment of a claim was received by any person from an insurance
company at any time during the three-year period immediately preceding
the filing of an application pursuant to this article.
§ 317-1 BRIDGETON CODE § 317-1
305:548
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building or structure meeting the definition
of "multiple dwelling" set forth in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.), and means for the purpose of
improvement or construction the general common elements and common
elements of a condominium, a cooperative, or a horizontal property regime.
§ 317-2. Exemption from taxation of improvements to dwellings;
new residential dwellings. [Amended 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 06-11]
§ 317-3. Exemption and abatement of taxation for improvements to
commercial or industrial structures.
An exemption from taxation of improvements to commercial or industrial
structures shall be allowed so that in determining the value of real property,
the municipality shall regard up to the Assessor's full and true value of
the improvements as not increasing the value of the property for a period
of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the
A. Exemption from taxation of improvements to dwellings. Exemptions
from taxation of improvements to dwellings shall be allowed so that in
determining the value of the real property the municipality shall regard
the true value of improvements made to each such dwelling unit
primarily and directly affected by the improvement as not increasing
the value of such property for a period of five years except pursuant to a
written agreement between the owner of such property and the City of
Bridgeton in accordance with the provisions of § 317-6, and provided
further that the payment of taxes with respect to the election of a fiveyear
period of exemption shall be phased in accordance with § 317-6C.
After the full fifth tax year, the value of such improvements shall be
assessed and taxed at 100% of the taxes otherwise due for the sixth full
tax year and each year thereafter. During the exemption period, the
assessment of the property shall not be less than the assessment
thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is
damage to the dwelling through the action of the elements sufficient to
warrant a reduction.
B. New residential dwellings. Exemptions from taxation of a newly
constructed residential dwelling shall be allowed so that in determining
the value of real property, the municipality shall allow exemptions from
taxation in accordance with a written agreement pursuant to § 317-6 of
this article. In the event that a phased-in taxation of the assessed value
of new residential construction is agreed to in accordance with
§ 317-6C, then, in such event, taxes shall be due as stated therein. The
sixth full tax year following the granting of a tax exemption the property
shall be taxed at 100% of the taxes otherwise due. During the
exemption period, the assessment on the property shall not be less than
the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the completion of
the construction of the new dwelling unless there has been damage to
the dwelling due to action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction.
§ 317-1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 317-3
305:549
improvements are made is increased thereby. During the exemption period,
the assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment
thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements unless there is
damage to the structure through action of the elements sufficient to warrant
a reduction.
§ 317-4. Exemption or abatement from taxation for construction of
commercial or industrial structures.
Exemptions and/or abatements from taxation for construction of
commercial or industrial structures shall be allowed as set out in N.J.S.A.
40A:21-8 and in accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9 through
40A:21-12.
§ 317-5. Application requirements.
Applicants for tax exemption and abatement for construction of commercial
or industrial structures shall provide City Council with an application
setting forth:
A. A general description of a project for which exemption and abatement is
sought;
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
C. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
D. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project;
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption and abatement on
the project, and a description of the benefits to be realized by the
applicant if a tax agreement is granted;
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
G. A statement showing:
(1) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site;
(2) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of the agreement; and
(3) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first full year following the termination of the tax
agreement;
H. If the project is a commercial or industrial structure, a description of
any lease agreements between the applicant and proposed users of the
project, and a history and description of the users' businesses;
§ 317-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 317-5
305:550
§ 317-6. Written agreement; formulas.
Upon adoption of an ordinance authorizing a tax agreement for a particular
project, the City may enter into a written agreement with the applicant for
the exemption and abatement of local real property taxes. The agreement
shall provide for the applicant to pay to the municipality in lieu of full
property tax payments an amount annually to be computed by one, but in
no case a combination, of the following formulas:
I. If the project is a multiple dwelling, a description of the number and
types of dwelling units to be provided, a description of the common
elements or general common elements, and a statement of the
proposed initial rentals or sales prices of the dwelling units according
to type and of any rental lease or resale restrictions to apply to the
dwellings' units respecting low- or moderate-income housing; and
J. Such other pertinent information as the governing body may require.
A. Cost basis. The agreement may provide for the applicant to pay to the
municipality in lieu of full property tax payments an amount equal to
20% of the cost of the project. For the purposes of the agreement, "the
cost of the project" means only the cost or fair market value of direct
labor and all materials used in the construction, expansion, or
rehabilitation of all buildings, structures, and facilities at the project
site, including the costs, if any, of land acquisition and land preparation,
provision of access roads, utilities, drainage facilities, and parking
facilities, together with architectural, engineering, legal surveying,
testing and contractor's fees associated with the project; which the
applicant shall cause to be certified and verified to the governing body
by an independent and qualified architect, following the completion of
the project.
B. Gross revenue basis. The agreement may provide for the applicant to
pay to the municipality in lieu of full property tax payments an amount
annually equal to 15% of the annual gross revenues from the project.
For the purposes of the agreement, "annual gross revenues" means the
total annual gross rental and other income payable to the owner of the
project from the project. If in any leasing, any real estate taxes or
assessments on property included in the project, any premiums for fire
or other insurance on or concerning property included in the project, or
any operating or maintenance expenses ordinarily paid by the landlord,
are to be paid by the tenant, then those payments shall be computed
and deemed to be part of the rent and shall be included in the annual
gross revenue. The tax agreement shall establish the method of
computing the revenues and may establish a method of arbitration by
which either the landlord or tenant may dispute the amount of
payments so included in the annual gross revenue.
C. Tax phase-in basis. The agreement may provide for the applicant to pay
to the municipality in lieu of full property tax payments an amount
§ 317-5 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 317-6
305:551
§ 317-7. Duration of tax agreements.
§ 317-8. Tax payments due upon disqualification of property owner
prior to termination of agreement; termination of agreement.
equal to a percentage of taxes otherwise due, according to the following
schedule:
(1) In the first full tax year after completion, no payment in lieu of
taxes otherwise due.
(2) In the second tax year, an amount not less than 20% of taxes
otherwise due.
(3) In the third tax year, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due.
(4) In the fourth tax year, an amount not less than 60% of taxes
otherwise due.
(5) In the fifth tax year, an amount not less than 80% of taxes otherwise
due.
A. All tax agreements entered into by the City pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:21-9 through 40A:21-12 shall be in effect for no more than five full
tax years next following the date of completion of the project.
B. That percentage which the payment in lieu of taxes for a property bears
to the property tax which would have been paid had an exemption and
abatement not been granted for the property under the agreement shall
be applied to the valuation of the property to determine the reduced
valuation of the property to be included in the valuation of the
municipality for determining equalization for county tax apportionment
and school aid during the term of the tax agreements covering the
properties, and at the termination of an agreement for a property the
reduced valuation procedure required under this section shall no longer
apply.
C. Within 30 days after the execution of a tax agreement, a municipality
shall forward a copy of the agreement to the Director of the Division of
Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs.
A. If, during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement, the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable
from the property owner as if no exemption and abatement had been
granted. The City shall notify the property owner and Tax Collector
forthwith, and the Tax Collector shall within 15 days thereof notify the
owner of the property of the amount of taxes due. However, with
respect to the disposal of the property, where it is determined that the
new owner of the property will continue to use the property pursuant to
§ 317-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 317-8
305:552
§ 317-9. Determination of tax due upon completion of improvement,
conversion or construction.
The Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement, conversion or construction, the true
taxable value thereof. Except for projects subject to tax agreement,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:2l-9 through 40A:21-12, the amount of tax to be
paid for the first full tax year following completion shall be based on the
assessed valuation of the property for the previous year, plus any portion
of the assessed valuation of the improvement, conversion or construction
not allowed an exemption pursuant to this article. Subject to the provisions
of this article, the property shall continue to be treated in the appropriate
manner for each of the five full tax years subsequent to the original
determination by the Assessor.
§ 317-10. Additional improvement, conversion or construction;
eligibility for exemption and abatement.
An additional improvement, conversion or construction, completed on a
property granted a previous exemption or abatement pursuant to this
article during the period in which such previous exemption or abatement is
in effect shall be qualified for an exemption, or exemption and abatement,
just as if such property had not received a previous exemption or
abatement. In such case, the additional improvement, conversion or
construction shall be considered as separate for the purposes of calculating
exemptions and abatements pursuant to this article, except that the
assessed value of any previous improvement, conversion or construction
shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to that improvement,
conversion, alteration or construction for the purpose of determining the
assessed valuation of the property from which any additional abatement is
to be subtracted.
§ 317-11. Ineligibility of property for which property taxes or
penalties are due.
No exemption or abatement shall be granted, or tax agreement entered
into, pursuant to this article with respect to any property for which property
taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which penalties for
nonpayment of taxes are due.
the conditions which qualified the property, no tax shall be due, the
exemption and the abatement shall continue, and the agreement shall
remain in effect.
B. At the termination of a tax agreement, a project shall be subject to all
applicable real property taxes as provided by state law and regulation
and local ordinance, but nothing herein shall prohibit a project, at the
termination of an agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the full
benefits or any other tax preferences provided by law.
§ 317-8 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 317-12
305:553
§ 317-12. Application to be filed within 30 days; approval; recording
as part of tax records.
§ 317-13. Property taxes subject to exemption and abatement
provisions.
The exemption and abatement of real property taxes provided pursuant
to this article shall apply to property taxes levied for municipal purposes,
school purposes, county government purposes and for the purposes of
funding any other property tax exemptions or abatements.
§ 317-14. Notice to taxpayers of adoption of ordinance.
The City of Bridgeton, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-20, shall include the
notice in the mailing of annual property tax bills to each owner of a dwelling
located in an area in which exemptions, or exemptions and abatements, may
be allowed pursuant to this article during the first year following adoption
of this article.
§ 317-15. Annual report; total amounts of tax exempted and abated.
A. No exemption or abatement shall be granted pursuant to this article
except upon written application therefor filed with and approved by the
Assessor of the taxing district wherein the improvement, conversion,
alteration or construction is made. Every application shall be on a form
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the Department
of the Treasury, and provided for the use of claimants by the City of
Bridgeton, and shall be filed with the Assessor within 30 days, including
Saturdays and Sundays, following the completion of the improvement,
conversion, alteration or construction.
B. Every application for exemption, or exemption and abatement, within
the City of Bridgeton which is filed within the time specified, shall be
approved and allowed by the Assessor to the degree that the application
is consistent with the provisions of this article or tax agreement,
provided that the improvement, conversion, alteration or construction
for which the application is made qualifies as an improvement, a
conversion, alteration or construction pursuant to the provisions of this
article and the tax agreement, if any.
C. The granting of an exemption, or exemption and abatement, or tax
agreement shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official
tax records of the taxing district, which record shall contain a notice of
the termination date thereof.
A. The City of Bridgeton shall report, on or before October of each year, to
the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs and to the Director of the Division of
Taxation in the Department of the Treasury the total amount of real
property taxes exempted and the total amount abated within the City in
the current tax year for each of the following:
§ 317-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 317-15
305:554
§ 317-16. Prior ordinances repealed.
Ordinance Nos. 83-78, 78-35, 78-13 and 81-12, and all amendments thereto,
be and the same are hereby repealed. However, no exemption or abatement
granted pursuant to the foregoing ordinances shall be affected or
terminated by virtue of this repeal, but shall remain in effect for the time
and under the terms granted as if the ordinance authorizing the exemption
or abatement had not been so repealed.70
(1) Improvements of dwellings;
(2) Construction of dwellings;
(3) Improvements and conversions of multiple dwellings;
(4) Improvements of commercial or industrial structures;
(5) Construction of multiple dwellings under tax agreements; and
(6) Construction of commercial or industrial structures under tax
agreements.
B. In the case of Subsection A(5) and (6) above, the report shall state
instead the total amount of payments made in lieu of taxes according to
each formula utilized by the City, and the difference between that total
amount and the total amount of real property taxes which would have
been paid on the project had the tax agreement not been in effect for
the current tax year.
70.Editor's Note: Original Section 17, Effective Date and Filing of Applications, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted 10-6-203 by Ord. No. 03-5.
§ 317-15 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 317-16
305:555

ARTICLE II
Urban Enterprise Zone Residential Tax Abatement
[Adopted 3-20-2007 by Ord. No. 06-25]
§ 317-17. Definitions.
The following definitions shall be applicable in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.140:
ABATEMENT — An exemption from real property taxes provided for the
purposes of encouraging residential construction conversion, improvement
and redevelopment pursuant to this article.
ASSESSOR — The Municipal Tax Assessor appointed pursuant to the
provisions of Chapter 9 of Title 40A of the New Jersey statutes.
AVERAGE RATIO — The certified average ratio used for determining the
common level range for each taxing district pursuant to P.L. 1973, c. 123
(N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a et seq.) as prepared by the Director of the Division of
Taxation for the preceding tax year.
COMPLETED — With respect to a parcel of qualified property or the
completion of that property, substantially ready for the use for which it is
intended and its occupancy as a principal residence.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of real property ownership provided for under
the Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c. 257 (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.).
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association wherein the holder
of a share or membership interest thereof is entitled to possess and occupy
for dwelling purposes a house, apartment, or other unit of housing owned by
the corporation or association, or to purchase a unit of housing constructed
or erected by the corporation or association.
COST — When used with respect to construction, or to an improvement
or conversion alteration, only the cost or fair market value of labor and
materials used in constructing or improving qualified residential property,
or in converting another building or structure to qualified residential
property, including any architectural, engineering, and contractors' fees
associated with the construction, improvement or conversion, as the owner
of the property shall cause to be certified to the governing body by an
independent and qualified architect, following the completion of the project.
EQUALIZED TAXES OTHERWISE DUE — The tax amount derived by
levying on a structure for which a five-year tax abatement has been granted,
a property tax imposed in the same manner as other property taxes are
levied pursuant to Chapter 4 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes, except
that, for all tax years subsequent to the last tax abatement year including
and ending in the tax year prior to a municipal-wide revaluation, the total
property tax prior to any tax deduction shall be equalized by the Tax
Collector by multiplying that amount times the average ratio of the taxing
district, but in no event shall the payment for equalized taxes otherwise due
be less than the total property tax payment on the structure prior to any tax
deduction due and payable during the third tax year following completion of
§ 317-17 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 317-17
305:557
construction, improvements or conversion alterations pursuant to Section 7
of P.L. 1989, c. 207 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.145). No appeal shall be taken by the
property owner from the determination by the Tax Collector of equalized
taxes otherwise due, except for mathematical or typographical errors.
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — The form of real property ownership
provided for under the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c. 168 (N.J.S.A
46:8A-1 et seq.).
QUALIFIED MUNICIPALITY — A municipality in which an urban enterprise
zone or part of an urban enterprise zone has been designated pursuant
to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, P.L. 1983, c. 303 (N.J.S.A.
52:27H-60 et seq.), and shall include the entire area within the corporate
boundaries of that municipality, whether or not that area is included within
an urban enterprise zone.
QUALIFIED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any newly constructed building
used or to be used or held for use as a home or residence, including
accessory buildings located on the same premises and including
condominiums, cooperatives and horizontal property regimes. No building
shall be considered a qualified residential property if the certificate of
occupancy for the construction, conversion, rehabilitation or renovation
was issued on or before the date falling 30 months prior to the effective date
of this article.
§ 317-18. Determination of need.
The governing body of the City of Bridgeton declares that within the City of
Bridgeton there is a need for increased new housing and that the facilitation
of construction of new residential properties within the City of Bridgeton
will be enhanced by the enactment of a tax exemption plan for residential
dwelling units. Further, the City Council of the City of Bridgeton finds and
determines that a significant percentage of the housing stock in the City of
Bridgeton is deteriorated and that the supply of and demand for housing
within the City of Bridgeton is disparate and that the entirety of the City of
Bridgeton is in need of rehabilitation and improvements with respect to the
housing stock for the benefit of the residents of the City of Bridgeton.
§ 317-19. Tax abatement terms; application; payment computation.
Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.142, abatement of real property
taxes shall be allowed as follows:
A. Property tax abatement shall be allowed for a term of five years.
B. The application for an abatement under this article shall require that an
application be made on a form prescribed by the Director of the
Division of Taxation to be submitted to the Tax Assessor's office of the
City of Bridgeton.
C. The application for a tax abatement under this article shall be made not
later than 30 days following the completion of the structure,
§ 317-17 BRIDGETON CODE § 317-19
305:558
§ 317-20. Approval by Assessor.
Upon submission of the application designated in the preceding section, the
Tax Assessor of the City of Bridgeton may approve it to the degree that the
application is consistent with the provisions of this article, provided that
the property for which the application is being made constitutes a qualified
residential property pursuant to the provisions of this article. An abatement
granted under this article shall take effect upon the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy to the owner, and it shall be recorded and made a permanent
part of the official tax records of the City of Bridgeton and shall contain a
notice of the termination date of the abatement.
§ 317-21. Financial agreement for payments in lieu of taxes.
Each approved abatement shall be evidenced by an agreement between the
City of Bridgeton and the applicant. The agreement shall be prepared by
the City on a form prescribed by the City of Bridgeton and shall contain
the representations that are required by this article. The agreement shall
provide for the applicant to annually pay to the City an amount in lieu of
real property taxes, to be computed as hereinafter provided:
improvement, conversion or alteration, including saturdays and
sundays. The application shall set forth the identification of the
property by lot and block, address, the cost of improvements,
construction, conversion, or alteration, description of the same and a
certification of whether or not the property for which the abatement is
sought shall be occupied by the owner thereof. Further, an applicant
shall certify as to property taxes being paid or delinquent with respect
to the property.
D. The method of computing payments in lieu of real property taxes
pursuant to this article shall be as set forth in §§ 317-21 and 317-22.
A. Payments in lieu of taxes may be computed as a portion of the real
property taxes otherwise due according to the following schedule:
(1) In the first tax year following completion: no payment in lieu of
taxes otherwise due;
(2) In the second tax year following completion: an amount not less
than 20% of taxes otherwise due;
(3) In the third tax year following completion: an amount not less than
40% of taxes otherwise due;
(4) In the fourth tax year following completion: an amount not less
than 60% of taxes otherwise due;
(5) In the fifth tax year following completion: an amount not less than
80% of taxes otherwise due;
§ 317-19 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 317-21
305:559
§ 317-22. Annual administration fee.
In addition to the annual payment required pursuant to the preceding
section of this article, the owner of a structure to which an abatement is
applicable shall pay to the City of Bridgeton an annual administration fee in
the amount of 1% of the payment provided for in the preceding section with
respect to dwellings which are not owner occupied.
§ 317-23. Payments by quarterly installments.
Payments required pursuant to this article shall be made in quarterly
installments according to the same schedule as real property taxes are due
and payable. Failure to make these payments shall result in termination
of the abatement. In addition, the payments required pursuant to the
preceding section of this article shall be enforced in the same manner as is
provided for real property taxes pursuant to Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.
§ 317-24. Liability for real property taxes assessed and levied.
In addition to the payments required in lieu of taxes pursuant to § 317-21A
of this article, the owner of a parcel of qualified property granted an
abatement pursuant to this article shall be liable for all real property taxes
assessed and levied against the land on which the qualified residential
property is situated.
§ 317-25. Abatement prohibited for property with delinquent taxes.
No abatement shall be granted pursuant to this article with respect to any
property for which property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid or for
which penalties for nonpayment of taxes, other liens or assessments are
due.
§ 317-26. Number of abatements restricted.
Only one abatement is to be used. An owner of property seeking an
abatement under Article II hereof shall be entitled to apply for an abatement
(6) In the sixth and all subsequent tax years following completion:
100% of the equalized taxes otherwise due.
B. For the purposes of this section, the amount of "taxes otherwise due"
(not to be confused with "equalized taxes otherwise due") shall be
determined by including the appropriate percentage of the assessed
valuation of the abated structure, improvement or conversion
alteration, as the case may be, on the assessment list of the city as
taxable property, and levying taxes thereon in the same manner as
other taxes are levied pursuant to Chapter 4 of Title 54 of the Revised
Statutes; provided, however, that no value for a property subject to the
provisions of this article shall be included in the calculation of the "net
valuation on which county taxes are apportioned" until the first year for
which a city-wide reevaluation is implemented.
§ 317-21 BRIDGETON CODE § 317-26
305:560
only under Article II of this chapter or Article I of this chapter and shall not
be entitled to apply for nor receive an abatement under both articles during
the allowed five-year abatement or exemption.
§ 317-26 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 317-26
305:561

ARTICLE III
One-Hundred-Percent Disabled Veteran Tax Refunds
[Adopted 6-19-2018 by Ord. No. 18-12]
§ 317-27. Retroactive refund of property taxes.
§ 317-28. Enforcement.
The City's Tax Assessor, together with all other appropriate officers and
employees, is hereby authorized and directed to take any and all steps
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this article.
A. Timely filing with the Tax Assessor.
(1) For a veteran, or his or her surviving spouse or domestic partner,
entitled to exemption under N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.30, after a formal
written request for a retroactive refund of property taxes as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 54:4-3, submitted to the City of Bridgeton's Tax
Assessor with all required documentation, and which shall have
been timely filed within 120 calendar days after the date on the
total disability termination letter issued by the United States
Department of Veterans Affairs, the City Council, by appropriate
resolution, shall refund taxes previously paid only for the calendar
year in which the claim of the veteran, or his or her surviving
spouse or domestic partner, was submitted to the City's Tax
Assessor, and for such portion of the prior calendar year during
which the total disability was in effect, but in no event greater than
a twenty-four-month period in the aggregate.
(2) No further or additional refund of taxes shall be permitted,
regardless of the date of the disability of the veteran as determined
by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs.
B. Late filing with the Tax Assessor.
(1) In the event a veteran, or his or her surviving spouse or domestic
partner, entitled to exemption under N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.30, shall
submit a request to the City of Bridgeton's Tax Assessor for refund
of taxes at any time later than 120 calendar days after the date on
the total disability termination letter issued by the United States
Department of Veterans Affairs, the City Council, by appropriate
resolution, shall refund taxes previously paid only for the calendar
year in which the claim of the veteran, or his or her surviving
spouse or domestic partner, was submitted to the City's Tax
Assessor.
(2) No further or additional refund of taxes shall be permitted,
regardless of the date of the disability of the veteran as determined
by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs.
§ 317-27 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 317-28
305:563
Chapter 321
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Taxicab fees — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Traffic control signal monitoring
system — See Ch. 336.
Traffic violations — See Ch. 338.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 350.
§ 321-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRUISING — Driving an empty taxicab along a public street at a slow rate
of speed for the obvious purpose of soliciting passengers.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Transporting in a taxicab one or more
persons for hire, or accepting a passenger to be transported for hire from a
point of departure within the City to a destination within or without the City
shall be considered operation of a taxicab within the City. The operation of
a taxicab by one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the
owner as well as by the person actually driving the taxi. The transportation
of any person other than the owner or driver in any motor vehicle bearing
a sign using the words "taxi," "taxicab," "cab" or "hack" shall be prima facie
evidence of operation.
OWNER — Any person or legal entity in whose name title to any taxicab is
registered with the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles, or who appears
in the Division's records to be a conditional vendee or lessee or has any
other proprietary interest in a taxicab.[Amended 3-6-2018 by Ord. No.
18-6]
TAXICAB or TAXI — A motor vehicle used to transport passengers for hire
which does not operate over a fixed route and is not hired by the day or
hour.
TAXI STAND — A designated, and marked, location within the City where a
taxicab may legally park.
§ 321-2. License for owner and driver required.
A. No person shall operate a taxicab within the City unless both the owner
and the driver of the taxicab are licensed under this chapter.
B. All applications for taxicab owner's and drivers' licenses shall be
completed in their entirety and filed with the City Clerk. Any application
which is deemed incomplete by the City Clerk, or their designee, shall
be rejected. All completed applications shall have the date and time
§ 317-28 BRIDGETON CODE § 321-2
305:564
that they have been received recorded thereon. [Amended 9-19-2017
by Ord. No. 17-20; 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-6]
C. Each applicant for a owner's, or driver's, license shall have the
following qualifications:
(1) Be at least 21 years of age. This requirement becomes effective for
all new applicants after the effective date of this chapter.
(2) Be a citizen, or legal resident, of the United States.
(3) Have a valid New Jersey driver's license.
(4) Be able to communicate in the English language as determined by
the Municipal Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(5) Be fingerprinted prior to the issuance of any license.
(6) Upon license approval, provide a recent (within one year) passportstyle
photograph to the Municipal Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-20]
(7) Submit to a criminal history background check, the results of which
shall warrant disqualification for a license if a record of conviction
is revealed for any of the following crimes:
(a) Aggravated assault.
(b) Arson.
(c) Burglary.
(d) Extortion.
(e) Escape.
(f) Homicide.
(g) Kidnapping.
(h) Robbery.
(i) Sexual, or aggravated sexual, assault.
(j) Endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A..
2C:24-4.
(k) Any crime pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.. 2C:39-3;
2C:39-4, or 2C:39-9.
(l) Other than a disorderly persons, or petty disorderly persons
offense, for the unlawful use, possession, or sale of a controlled
dangerous substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
(8) Not have been convicted of an equivalent offense in any other state
pursuant to the crimes listed in § 321-2C(7).
§ 321-2 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 321-2
305:565
§ 321-3. Types of licenses. [Amended 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-6]
§ 321-3.1. Maximum number of taxi licenses and auction of same.
[Amended 4-17-2012 by Ord. No. 11-23; 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 18-6]
(9) Based on the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the criteria in
Subsection C(7) and (8) shall not warrant automatic license
disqualification provided that:
(a) The person convicted can produce a certificate of
rehabilitation issued pursuant to N.J.S.2A:168A-8 or,
(b) If the criminal offense occurred outside New Jersey, an
equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction where the criminal
offense occurred.
D. Renewal applications. Previous convictions pursuant to § 321-2C(7) or
(8) that have satisfied the requirements of § 321-2C(9) shall not be a
basis for license disqualification provided that there has been no new
disqualifying crime within the past year.
E. Nonrefundable fees for the services provided to license owners and
drivers, transfer or replace licenses, inspect cabs, photograph and
fingerprint licensees, and conduct background investigations shall be
as provided in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees, and are
payable prior to providing the service.
A. Driver's license. The holder of a Bridgeton taxicab driver's license shall
be entitled to operate within the City any taxicab whose owner has been
licensed under this chapter.
B. Owner's license. The holder of a taxicab owner's license shall be
entitled to operate a taxicab owned by him within the City, provided
that the person driving the cab holds a valid Bridgeton taxicab driver's
license.
C. Neither owner's nor driver's licenses shall be transferred from one
person or entity to another.
D. Taxicab license. Taxicab licenses are the property of the City of
Bridgeton. They shall not be sold or otherwise transferred.
A. The maximum number of taxicabs that will be permitted in the City of
Bridgeton shall be 21.
B. No taxicab owner may have more than seven taxicabs operating in the
City of Bridgeton.
C. Taxicab license auction. Upon the reversion of any taxicab license, the
City shall hold an auction:
(1) A taxicab license shall be available to the highest bidder at an
auction for the available license(s) conducted by the Municipal
§ 321-2 BRIDGETON CODE § 321-3.1
305:566
§ 321-4. Licensing of taxicab owners.
Clerk upon authorization of the auction by resolution of the City
Council.
(2) The minimum bid price shall be $250.
(3) The auction shall be advertised by the Municipal Clerk as a public
notice for two consecutive weeks prior to the auction date.
(4) The successful bidder must comply with the requirements of
§ 321-4 within 30 calendar days of acquiring an owner's license and
submit an application for an owner's license. Should the applicant
be denied an owner's license, the bid price will be refunded minus a
processing fee of $100. The application fee for the owner's license
is non-refundable.
D. All drivers shall disclose which taxi owner the driver intends to operate
under and shall have an ongoing obligation to update this information
with the City Clerk's office upon any change in this status. If the driver
is no longer intending to drive for a taxi owner in the City of Bridgeton,
the driver shall have the obligation to report same to the City Clerk in
writing.
A. Application information.
(1) Application for a taxicab owner's license shall be made to the
Municipal Clerk. The forms and the information required thereon
shall be established by the City Council by resolution. [Amended
9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(2) Applications shall be verified by oath or affirmation. Applications by
a partnership shall give the information required for each partner
and shall be verified by all partners. Applications by a corporation
shall give the information required for and be verified by all officers
and directors and all persons holding more than 10% of the
corporation's common stock, as well as the corporation itself.
B. Referral to police. Each applicant shall be referred to the Chief of Police
or his designee, who shall immediately institute whatever investigation
of the applicant's business responsibility, moral character and ability to
properly conduct a taxicab business, as he considers necessary for the
protection of the public.
C. Investigation. The Chief of Police or his designee shall investigate the
application. A report containing the results of the investigation and
evaluation, a recommendation by the Chief of Police that the license be
granted or denied, and the reasons for the recommendation shall be
forwarded to the Municipal Clerk within 10 days from the request for
the investigation. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
§ 321-3.1 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 321-4
305:567
D. Notice of hearing. The Municipal Clerk shall advise the Council of the
filing of an application on receipt of the report from the Chief of Police.
The Council shall set a date for a hearing on the application and shall
notify the applicant. The date set shall be within a reasonable time after
the filing of the application. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No.
17-20]
E. Conduct of hearing. At the hearing any person who is a resident or
taxpayer of the City may appear in person and make a brief statement
or submit a written statement in support of or opposition to the
granting of a license. In addition, the applicant and any other person
who will be affected by the granting or denial of the license other than
as a City resident or taxpayer shall have the right to be represented by
an attorney, to testify himself or to present witnesses in support of his
position, to cross-examine opposing witnesses and, at his own expense,
to have a stenographic record made of the proceedings.
F. Factors considered. In determining whether to grant or deny the
license, the City Council shall take into consideration the following
factors:
(1) The character, business and financial responsibility and experience
of the applicant, and the probability that, if granted a license, the
applicant will operate his taxicab in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(2) Any other factors directly related to the granting or denial of the
license which would substantially affect the public safety or
convenience.
G. Issuance of license. The City Council shall by resolution grant or deny
the license. If the application is approved, the Clerk shall issue the
license upon forms established by the City Council by resolution.
H. A taxicab owner's license shall be valid for the remainder of the
calendar year in which it is issued. The license fee per year or a portion
thereof per vehicle shall be as provided in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II,
Schedule of Fees, payable upon the filing of the application for the
issuance or renewal of the license. Any amounts paid during the
calendar year of this amendment towards licensing fees shall be
prorated and any balance applied to the new fee applicable hereunder.
I. Renewals. A taxicab owner's license may be renewed by the City
Council without a hearing upon the licensee's filing with the Chief of
Police a sworn statement that there have been no changes in the
information contained in the initial application.
J. All applications for taxicab owner's license shall contain, or be
accompanied by, the following:
(1) The names, age and residence of the applicant. A post office box is
not acceptable.
§ 321-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 321-4
305:568
§ 321-5. Licensing of taxicab drivers.
(a) If a partnership, the names, ages and residences of all partners
along with the business address of the partnership.
(b) If a corporation, the names, ages and residences of its
president, secretary and treasurer along with its certificate of
incorporation, certified copy of resolution authorizing this
application and a certificate of good standing issued by the
State of New Jersey not more than 30 days prior to the date of
application. Corporations shall maintain an office in the City of
Bridgeton, and their applications shall be signed by its
president and attested by its secretary.
(c) If a limited liability company, the names, ages and residences
of all of its members, name, age and residence of managing
member, certified copy of the resolution authorizing the
application, certificate of good standing issued by the State of
New Jersey not more than 30 days prior to the date of the
application. All partners, corporate officers or members of the
limited liability company applicant shall be at least 18 years of
age.
(2) (Reserved).
A. Applications.
(1) Applications for a taxicab driver's license shall be made to the
Municipal Clerk's office upon forms provided by the Municipal
Clerk. The forms and the information required thereon shall be
established by the Municipal Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-20]
(2) The application shall be accompanied by a fee as provided in
Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees, for the initial
license period.
B. Referral to police. Each application shall be referred to the Chief of
Police or his designee, who shall immediately institute whatever
investigation of the applicant's business responsibility, moral character
and ability to properly operate a taxicab, as he considers necessary for
the protection of the public.
C. Investigation. The Chief of Police or his designee shall investigate the
application. A report containing the results of the investigation and
evaluation, a recommendation by the Chief of Police that the license be
granted or denied, and the reasons for the recommendation shall be
forwarded to the Municipal Clerk within 10 days from the request for
the investigation. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
D. Issuance of license; contents. Upon approval of the application by the
Mayor, the Municipal Clerk shall immediately issue the applicant a
§ 321-4 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 321-5
305:569
§ 321-6. Inspection of vehicles.
taxicab driver's license. The license shall be signed by the Mayor.
The license shall contain the licensee's name and address, physical
description, signature and photograph. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-20]
E. Term of license; fees. An initial license to drive a taxicab shall be valid
for the remainder of the calendar year in which it is issued. A taxicab
driver's license may be renewed annually, unless it has been revoked or
suspended, upon the payment of a fee as provided in Chapter 149, Fees,
Article II, Schedule of Fees.
F. Display of license. The taxicab driver's license shall be prominently
displayed in the taxicab so that it is readily observable by all
passengers.
A. No license shall be issued until the said taxicab has been thoroughly
inspected and it is determined that the following requirements are met:
(1) The taxicab is found to be in a safe condition for the transportation
of passengers.
(2) The taxicab is of good appearance and well painted and varnished.
(3) There has been submitted with the application a certificate from a
qualified individual or organization that the taximeter is recording
the charges on fare accurately and that said meter has been
inspected within 30 days of the application.
(4) There has been submitted with the application a certified check for
the annual license fee.
(5) There has been submitted with the application a certificate from
the Bridgeton Police Department that the said taxicab is in a clean
and sanitary condition and that the rates of fare to be charged have
been posted permanently on the taxicab so that they are visible to
the passengers prior to the hiring of the taxicab and while riding in
a taxicab.
(6) Taxicab advertisements are restricted to advertising the taxicab
company name, phone number, and address. [Added 2-17-2015
by Ord. No. 15-02]
B. Reinspection. All taxicabs shall be reinspected annually or more often if
the Mayor so requires, and such inspection shall be conducted by the
Bridgeton Police Department. In addition, a police officer may inspect a
taxicab at any reasonable time to determine if it is clean, sanitary and in
a safe and proper operating condition.
C. Failure to pass inspection. Any taxicab which fails to pass inspection
shall be immediately taken out of service and shall not be operated
again within the City until the defects which led to its rejection are
§ 321-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 321-6
305:570
§ 321-7. Identification of taxicabs.
§ 321-8. Fares.
corrected. In the case of minor defects which do not constitute an
immediate danger to the health or safety of the public, the taxicab may
continue to operate for a period of one week, at the end of which time
it shall be reinspected. If the defect has not by then been corrected, the
vehicle shall immediately be taken out of service and shall remain out
of service until the defect is corrected.
A. Identification required. Each taxicab operated in the City shall have a
sign painted on each rear door. The sign shall contain the owner's name
and the words "Taxicab" or "Taxi" in letters that are not less than four,
nor more than eight inches, in height.
B. Imitation of color scheme or insignia. [Amended 2-17-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-02]
(1) No taxicab operated in the City shall imitate the color scheme or
any identifying design or insignia of another taxicab lawfully
operating in the City, nor shall one taxicab have a color scheme or
identifying design or insignia which is as similar to that of another
taxicab as to be likely to have a tendency to mislead the public. The
person first using a particular color scheme or identifying design or
insignia for his taxicab shall have the prior right to it.
(2) Taxi company owners shall declare a color scheme (body &
lettering) on their annual application that shall not be changed
during the term of the owner's license. The color scheme may only
be changed during a new, or renewal, license application.
C. Taxi number. The owner of each taxicab shall display on the body of the
vehicle the taxi license number issued to that vehicle. The number shall
be issued by the Municipal Clerk, and be three inches in height and
located in the center of the rear quarter panels on the driver and
passenger sides and the rear center line of the trunk of the vehicle.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
D. Municipality name. Each taxicab shall display on each rear door of the
vehicle the words "City of Bridgeton, N.J." in block letters three inches
in height.
E. It shall be the taxi company owner's responsibility to ensure that all taxi
identification markings required by Subsections A through D above are
removed within five days of removing the vehicle from service, or
immediately upon selling or transferring the vehicle title.
A. The rates of fare to be charged within the City limits of the City of
Bridgeton shall be posted permanently on the taxicab so that the rates
are visible to persons prior to hiring the taxicab and passengers while
riding in the taxicab.
§ 321-6 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 321-8
305:571
§ 321-9. Insurance policy required.
§ 321-10. Rules and regulations.
The Business Administrator may establish, with the approval of the Mayor,
regulations relating to the operating of taxicabs and the conduct of
licensees. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be furnished to each
licensee.
§ 321-11. Cruising and soliciting; use of taxi stands.
B. Receipts. The driver of a taxicab upon request shall give the passenger
a receipt for the amount charged. The receipt shall show the name of
the owner, the license number of the taxicab, the amount of the fare,
and the date of the transaction.
C. Refusal to pay fare. No person after hiring a taxicab shall refuse to pay
the legal fare, nor shall any person hire a taxicab with the intent not to
pay the legal fare.
D. Upon request of the driver or passenger to the Bridgeton Police
Department, all fare disputes shall be resolved through the Municipal
Court system following the issuance of a signed complaint. [Amended
2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02]
A. No taxicab shall be licensed until an insurance policy or certificate in
lieu thereof, together with power of attorney appointing the Business
Administrator as lawful attorney for the acknowledgment of service,
has been filed with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-1 to
48:16-22, as amended and supplemented. [Amended 9-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-20]
B. The minimum liability insurance required for a taxicab license in the
City shall be $100,000 single limit, or such lesser amount as is the
maximum being written by insurance carriers in the state for taxicab
insurance, but in no event less than the requirements of N.J.S.A.
48:16-3.
A. Cruising prohibited. No taxicab owner or operator shall cruise on the
streets of the City at any time for the purpose of soliciting passengers.
B. Parking restricted to taxi stands. No operator of a taxicab shall park on
any street within the City except at those places designated and marked
as taxi stands. This prohibition shall not apply to a taxicab that is
stopped waiting to pickup, or discharge, passengers. Taxi stands are
designated at the discretion of the Director of Public Works who shall
provide a listing of taxi stand locations to the Municipal Clerk.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
C. Soliciting passengers. No taxicab operator while waiting for
employment shall stand on any public street or place other than at a
designated taxi stand. Nor shall any driver seek employment by
§ 321-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 321-11
305:572
§ 321-12. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
repeatedly and persistently driving to and fro on a short space before,
or by otherwise interfering with the proper and ordinary access to or
egress from, any public, or private, place.
A. Generally. In addition to the causes for revocation of a license set forth
in Chapter 200, Licensing, Article I, General Licensing Requirements,
any license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended or
any application for the issuance or renewal of a license denied, for any
of the following reasons:
(1) Failure to render reasonable, prompt, safe and adequate taxicab
service.
(2) The existence of a judgment unsatisfied of record against the
licensee or applicant in any suit arising over the operation of a
motor vehicle.
(3) Permitting any taxicab owned or driven by the licensee to become
unsafe, unsanitary or dirty.
(4) Failure to comply with all applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey, the ordinances of the City or the rules and regulations
adopted in accordance with this chapter.
B. Drivers. If the licensee is a driver, his license may also be revoked or
suspended for the following reasons:
(1) Revocation or suspension of his New Jersey motor vehicle
operator's license.
(2) (Reserved)71
(3) Operating a taxicab in a reckless or grossly negligent manner, or
habitually operating a taxicab in a negligent manner.
C. Self reporting. Company owners and taxi drivers shall immediately
surrender their City-issued licenses to the Municipal Clerk whenever
their New Jersey driver’s license has been suspended or revoked.
[Added 1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 12-16; amended 9-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-20]
D. Owner's responsibility. Company owners are responsible to ensure that
all taxi drivers have a valid New Jersey driver's and a City-issued
taxicab driver’s license in their possession whenever they operate any
taxicab. [Added 1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 12-16]
E. Failure to comply with § 321-12C or D shall be deemed to be a violation
of this chapter and subject the respective licensee to the maximum
71.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), regarding contraction of contagious diseases, was
repealed 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 15-02.
§ 321-11 STORM SEWER SYSTEMS § 321-12
305:573
§ 321-13. Rates and meters.
penalties as set forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. [Added
1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 12-16]
A. Taximeter.
(1) No person shall operate a taxicab unless and until the taxicab has
been equipped with a taximeter of a type and design approved by
the State Division of Consumer Affairs, Office of Weights and
Measures.
(2) The taximeter shall be located in the cab so as to be visible to the
passengers at all times, and it shall be the duty of the person
operating the cab to keep the meter operating at all times within
such standard of accuracy as may be prescribed from time to time
by the State Division of Consumer Affairs, Office of Weights and
Measures.
(3) No passenger shall be carried in any cab unless the taximeter is in
operation. This provision shall apply regardless of whether the
taxicab is engaged for a trip entirely within the boundaries of the
City or partially outside the City. The meter shall be kept operating
continuously during the entire time that it is engaged in the
transportation of passengers for compensation at all times that the
point of origin or the point of return for the passenger is within the
limits of the City.
(4) No taxicab shall be permitted to operate in the City of Bridgeton
unless the driver shall have in his possession a meter registration
form, a "Form 50," and valid meter calibration sticker affixed to the
meter from the individual or organization qualified to so certify that
the taximeter is recording the service for fares accurately.
B. Taximeter use. All taximeters shall be equipped with a device (flag,
button, knob, touchpad, etc.) that when operated indicates the taxicab
is employed and a fare is being charged (recording position), or not
employed and no fare is being charged (nonrecording position). This
operational device shall be kept in the nonrecording position when the
taxicab is for hire and shall be kept in the recording position when the
taxicab is employed. At no time may a taxicab transport a person with
the taximeter in a nonrecording position. It shall be the duty of the
taxicab operator to ensure the taximeter's operational device is placed
in the nonrecording position at the end of each trip. Any taxicab driver
transporting a person for hire with the device in a nonrecording
position shall have his license suspended for a period not to exceed six
months. The licensed operator may appeal the license suspension by
filing a request with Municipal Clerk (within 10 calendar days the
suspension date) for a hearing on the suspension before City Council.
[Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
§ 321-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 321-13
305:574
§ 321-14. Violations and penalties; misstatement on application.
If the applicant purposely misstates the facts on the application, in addition
to the ability of the Council to deny the application or suspend or revoke the
license, if previously applied for or granted, the applicant shall be deemed
to have violated this chapter and be subject to the maximum penalties as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. There shall be a rebuttable
presumption that any misstatement on the application is purposeful.
Chapter 328
TIRES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Littering — See Ch. 203.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
Solid waste — See Ch. 300.
C. Fare display. Taximeters shall have a mechanism that registers and
displays the current fare being charged in accordance with established
rates of fare. The taximeter shall be so placed that the fare being
charged is in plain view of the passenger while riding in the taxicab or
upon exiting. Taxicabs shall be equipped with a light which during the
period between sunset and sunrise shall reflect upon the taximeter's
fare display so as to enable the passenger to read the figures.
D. Top light. Each taximeter shall be furnished with a tamperproof switch
within the system of electrical distribution so that when the no fare is
being charged (nonrecording position) the roof light will be lit, and
whenever a fare is being charged (recording position), the top light will
go off.
E. Rates of fare. No person owning or operating or controlling any taxicab
in the City of Bridgeton shall charge other than the following rates to be
determined by the taximeter:
(1) The minimum (or flag drop) fare shall be $2.50.
(2) For each additional meter mile: $2.50. Fractions of each mile shall
be calculated at the rate of $0.25 per 1/10 of a mile.
(3) For each 1/2 minute of waiting time or fraction thereof: $0.15.
(4) For each package delivered: $1.50.
(5) For each additional passenger there shall be charged a fare of
$0.30 per person. The fare shall be registered on the taximeter's
extra button. Two children under the age of 10 years shall be
considered the equivalent of one adult. Where the driver is
required to carry, transport, or handle groceries, an additional
charge of $0.10 per bag shall be made.
§ 321-13 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 321-14
328:575
§ 328-1. Storage and deposit of tires restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as an owner, occupant, lessee,
agent, tenant or otherwise, to store or deposit or cause or permit to be
stored or deposited used tires upon any land, private or public, within the
City of Bridgeton, except as hereinafter authorized.
§ 328-2. Limitation on storage of tires on private property.72
Any person who owns, leases or uses a vehicle for any purpose may store
on private property, in an enclosed building, no more than four used tires,
not including tires affixed to said vehicle, for each vehicle owned, leased or
used.
§ 328-3. Limitation on storage of tires on commercial and industrial
property.73
Any person operating a commercial or industrial business, whose intended
primary use is tire-related, may store no more than 150 used tires on the
property owned, leased or used by said person for said business purpose.74
§ 328-4. Violations and penalties.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty. Each and every day in which a
violation of any provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate
violation.
Chapter 334
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Licensing — See Ch. 200.
Towing license fee; towing and storage
charges — See Ch. 149, Art. II.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 347.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
74.Editor's Note: Original Section 4, which required a plan for compliance by existing
properties not in compliance with the terms of this chapter, was deleted at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 321-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 334-1
328:576
§ 334-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is without a current,
valid registration tag and has been left unattended on a public street
or in a public parking area for more than 30 days, or left upon private
property for more than 30 days and its removal is requested by the owner of
such private property. (A vehicle is deemed abandoned in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5 if left on private property for more than 48 hours without
current license and without consent of the owner of such property.)
AUTOMOBILE — A private-passenger automobile of a private-passenger or
station-wagon type that is owned or hired and is neither used as a public or
livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver, and a
motor vehicle with a pickup body, a delivery sedan, a van, a panel truck or a
camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned by an individual
or by a husband and wife who are residents of the same household, not
customarily used in the occupation, profession or business of the insured
other than farming or ranching. An automobile owned by a farm family
copartnership or corporation, which is principally garaged on a farm or
ranch and otherwise meets the definitions contained in this section, shall be
considered a private-passenger automobile owned by two or more residents
in the same household.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road, or from
a parking area or storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Insurance.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Safety of the City of Bridgeton.
GARAGE — A building where motor cars or other vehicles are sheltered,
stored, repaired and made ready for use, not including gasoline service
stations used principally for the furnishing of gasoline, oil, lubrication
services and other services primarily relating to the repair of motor
vehicles.
INSIDE BUILDING — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles, and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a privatepassenger
automobile comes in contact with any other object for which the
private-passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in
a storage facility. This includes all situations which are accidental as to
the owner of the vehicle even if they were caused by intentional acts of a
perpetrator and the perpetrator was not the owner or otherwise involved
with the owner of the vehicle.
§ 334-1 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 334-1
328:577
OUTSIDE SECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least six
feet high. The facility is to be lighted at night.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier, and all
other storage facilities not defined above as "inside building" or "outside
secured."
PERSON — Individuals, as well as corporations, companies, associations,
societies, partnerships and other entities.
STORAGE CHARGES FOR A TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — The
maximum allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a twentyfour-
hour period or fraction thereof. A new twenty-four-hour period begins
at 12:01 a.m.
TOWING OPERATOR — A person, firm, corporation or other business entity
engaged in the business of removing, transporting and storing disabled,
damaged or otherwise immobile motor vehicles by means of a tow vehicle
A towing operator shall be required to be either the first party lessee or
owner of towing vehicles which are used to remove or transport damaged
or otherwise immobile motor vehicles.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts or under-reach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of privatepassenger
automobiles.
§ 334-2. Establishment of towing list.
The governing body of the City of Bridgeton, at the beginning of each year,
will establish a list of towing operators to be called by the Police Division
when required. The towing operators, as so listed and licensed pursuant to
this chapter, shall be called on a weekly rotating basis by the Police Division
of the City of Bridgeton. Changes in the order of towing rotation shall be
made by the Director of Public Safety with the approval of the governing
body.
§ 334-3. Insurance required.
A. No towing operator shall be licensed or included on the towing list
established under this chapter unless the following insurance coverage
is in effect and a copy of the coverage in effect on behalf of such towing
operator has been deposited with the Chief of Police of the City of
Bridgeton:
(1) Comprehensive automobile liability in the amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limits;
(2) Workers' compensation, as required by state law;
(3) Garage keeper's liability in the amount of $1,000,000 per location;
§ 334-1 BRIDGETON CODE § 334-3
328:578
§ 334-4. License required; fee schedules; transfer, expiration and
renewal of licenses.
§ 334-5. Application for licenses.
(4) Garage liability in an amount not less than $500,000 combined
single limits;
(5) Comprehensive general liability coverage in an amount not less
than $500,000 for each person and $500,000 for each accident;
(6) Endorsements providing for collision coverage for vehicles in tow;
(7) Endorsements for indemnification; and
(8) Endorsement adding the City as additional insured on all insurance
policies (except workers' compensation).
B. Each policy of insurance in effect on behalf of a towing operator shall
contain a provision providing for at least 15 days' notice to the Clerk of
the City of Bridgeton in the event of any cancellation or material change
with respect to coverages provided and shall provide a provision for
defense and indemnification of the City, its elected officials, boards,
commissions, officers, employees and agents from all suits, actions,
damages or claims to which the City may be subjected, of any kind and
nature whatsoever, resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as a
consequence of the actions by the towing operator by said insurance
company.
C. All insurance policies shall be written by insurance companies
acceptable to the City and authorized to do business in the State of New
Jersey.
A. No towing operator shall be authorized to be included within the towing
rotation list established pursuant to this chapter without first obtaining
a license from the Municipal Clerk of the City of Bridgeton.
B. The fee schedules of licensed towing operators shall be made available
at the Clerk's office during normal business hours.
C. The towing operator shall at no time transfer or assign a license, or any
part thereof, for any purpose whatsoever.
D. All licenses under this section shall expire at the end of the calendar
year in which issued. Applications for renewals shall be filed with the
Clerk on forms provided by the Clerk, at least 30 days before the
expiration of said licenses.
A. Application for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be made
upon blank forms prepared by and made available by the Clerk of the
City of Bridgeton and shall include the following information:
§ 334-3 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 334-5
328:579
§ 334-6. License fee.
The annual license fee for a towing application to be included within the
towing rotation list shall be as provided in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II,
Schedule of Fees.
§ 334-7. Investigation and inspection of licensee; approval or denial
of application; appeals.
(1) The name, home address, proposed or actual business address and
telephone number of the applicant and whether he is the owner, the
lessee or operating under some other arrangement. If the
application is made for a corporation, it shall state the names and
addresses of the officers and directors thereof, its registered agent
and the names and residential addresses of every stockholder
owning more than 10% of the issued stock.
(2) The location, description and hourly availability of the tow trucks or
wreckers owned or operated by the applicant.
(3) A statement that the applicant has available space for properly
accommodating, storing and protecting all disabled motor vehicles
to be towed or otherwise removed from the place where they are
disabled, and that the disabled vehicles will not be stored or
allowed to remain on public property or City streets or on property
which is not zoned for such storage.
(4) The description of the vehicles for which the license is desired,
including the year, make, model, type, serial number of body, motor
capacity, length of time the vehicle has been in use and any other
information which the Clerk shall deem necessary or proper to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter.
(5) Proof that each vehicle to be licensed is duly registered and
inspected as a tow vehicle by the State of New Jersey Division of
Motor Vehicles.
B. All applications shall attach thereto a copy of the operator's current fee
schedule for towing and storage services, separately listing towing and
storage for automobiles and other motor vehicles.
C. A certification that on-call towing and storage services will be available
24 hours per day, every day of the year and a certification that the fees
and procedures required by this chapter shall be complied with at all
times.
D. All applications shall have an affidavit attached thereto or a
subscription thereto sworn to by the applicant that all information is
true and correct.
A. Within 10 days after the receipt of an application as provided for in this
chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall request an investigation to be made
§ 334-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 334-7
328:580
§ 334-8. Promulgation of rules and regulations; inspection of
towing vehicles; authority of Director of Public Safety and Chief of
Police.
of the applicant and of his proposed business operation, and shall
cause the Police Division to make an inspection of the business and the
vehicles proposed for inclusion in the City of Bridgeton towing rotation
list. Within 20 days from the date of the request by the Clerk for an
investigation, a report shall be filed by the Police Division as to the
qualifications of the applicant. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No.
17-20]
B. Upon completion of the application and inspection, and upon the
recommendation of the Director of Public Safety, the Clerk shall either
refuse or shall grant the application and the towing vehicles listed
thereon. The applicant shall be informed of the decision with respect to
the application. If the application is denied, the reasons for such denial
shall be set forth in the notice, along with the applicant's right to appeal
the denial to City Council of the City of Bridgeton in accordance with
this section.
C. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Director of Public
Safety or his designated agent in the denial of an application for a
license or in the revocation thereof or in the suspension from the City's
towing list may appeal to the City Council of the City of Bridgeton by
filing with the Municipal Clerk, within 14 days after notice of the action
complained of has been mailed to such person's last-known address, a
written request for a hearing, setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal. The Municipal Clerk will set a time and place for a hearing on
such appeal, and notice shall be served on or mailed to the applicant at
least five days prior to the hearing.
A. The Director of Public Safety or, by his delegation, the Chief of Police
shall establish reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection and
operation of towing vehicles and for the design, construction and
condition of fitness for the safe conduct of towing services performed in
accordance with this chapter, including but not limited to participation
in safety courses, training courses and/or association with any
approved agency.
B. The Director of Public Safety or the Chief of Police or their designee
shall have the right at all times to inspect all licensed tow trucks and
shall maintain a record of any such inspections. If, at any time, the
Director of Public Safety or Chief of Police or his or her designee shall
deem the equipment inadequate or unsafe, he or she shall have the
power to demand immediate correction of such inadequacies, and, if
not corrected to his or her satisfaction, he or she shall have full power
to suspend the licensee's entitlement to be included within the City of
Bridgeton towing rotation after a hearing before the Director of Public
Safety with respect to the violation alleged.
§ 334-7 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 334-8
328:581
§ 334-9. Approval of application.
The Clerk, upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Safety, shall
approve an application only when the following requirements have been
met, in addition to any other requirements imposed by this chapter.
§ 334-10. Classification of tow vehicles; equipment requirements.
The following minimum standards with respect to each class of vehicles
listed on the application shall be met:
C. The Director of Public Safety or, by his delegation, the Chief of Police
shall establish reasonable rules and regulations with respect to
inventory and inspection of all towed vehicles and their contents.
A. The public convenience and safety will be served by issuing the license
to the applicant for the vehicles described on such application.
B. The insurance policies as required by this chapter have been furnished
to the Municipal Clerk and verified as being in conformance with this
chapter. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
C. The applicant and proposed operators are fit persons to operate and
conduct a towing service within the City of Bridgeton.
D. The requirements of this section and all other governing laws, statutes
and ordinances have been met.
E. The vehicles listed on the application have been properly licensed and
inspected by the State of New Jersey and the necessary stickers affixed
thereto. No vehicle shall be licensed or utilized as a tow truck or towing
vehicle under this chapter which does not comply with state inspection
requirements.
F. The tow trucks or towing vehicles shall meet the standards of
classifications for tow vehicles set forth in § 334-10 of this chapter.
G. The applicant can provide on-call towing services 24 hours per day,
every day of the year.
H. The applicant's base of operation for calls and storage facility is located
within two miles of City limits and the applicant can demonstrate a
response time of no more than 10 minutes. [Amended 4-5-2011 by
Ord. No. 10-29; 9-20-2011 by Ord. No. 11-07]
I. The applicant has attended and completed any and all training courses
presented by the City of Bridgeton or required by the City of Bridgeton
as a condition of approval in the regulations governing tow operators.
J. The applicant has been certified by an organization approved by the
Director of Public Safety pursuant to § 334-8A.
§ 334-8 BRIDGETON CODE § 334-10
328:582
A. Light-duty/service requirements: The tow operator must present for
service a minimum of three trucks, consisting of two flatbeds and a
light-duty wrecker, which meet the following requirements:
(1) Commercially manufactured wrecker and chassis with a minimum
GVWR of 10,000 pounds.
(2) Dual rear wheels.
(3) Minimum wheel lift capacity of 3,000 pounds.
(4) Minimum winch capacity of 8,000 pounds.
(5) Minimum hydraulic boom capacity of 8,000 pounds.
(6) Vehicle manufacturer serial plate must be legible and visible for
inspection on undercarriage and chassis boom or certified by
manufacturer's rating paperwork.
(7) A cable 3/8 inch by 100 feet or OEM specifications.
(8) Two safety chains 3/8 inch by 10 feet with a minimum of Grade 8
alloy.
(9) Two tow chains 3/8 inch by 10 feet with a minimum of Grade 8 alloy
with J- and T-hooks and grab hooks.
(10) Wheel lift safety straps or equivalent wheel retention device.
(11) One four-ton snatch block per winch.
(12) Trailer ball hitch attachment.
(13) Motorcycle towing equipment.
(14) Amber emergency lights with proper amber light permit from State
of New Jersey.
(15) Two floodlights or worklights to the rear of the wrecker.
(16) Two-way radio or cellular phone.
(17) Assortment of tools.
(18) Jumper cables.
(19) Flashlight, fire extinguisher and first-aid kit.
(20) Gas can.
(21) Lug wrench and jack.
(22) Broom and shovel, road flares, triangles or road cones.
(23) Commercially manufactured flatbed and chassis with a minimum
GVWR of 14,500 pounds.
§ 334-10 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 334-10
328:583
(24) Vehicle manufacturer serial plate must be legible and visible for
inspection on underreach and chassis or certified by
manufacturer's rating paperwork.
(25) Seventeen-foot or longer hydraulically operated slide back or tilt
bed.
(26) A cable 3/8 inch by 50 feet or OEM specifications.
(27) Four tie-down devices; if chains, they must be 3/8 inch by 10 feet
with a minimum Grade 7 alloy or synthetic web straps of equivalent
strength.
(28) One bridle chain, high test, with J-hooks, T-hooks and grab hooks.
(29) One four-ton snatch block.
(30) Assortment of wood blocks and boards.
B. Heavy-duty/service vendors may tow vehicles that are over 32,000
pounds GVWR or that have dual rear wheels. All towing vehicles
classified as "heavy duty" shall meet the following requirements:
(1) One commercially manufactured hydraulic wrecker and chassis
with underreach capabilities and a minimum GVWR of 32,000
pounds.
(2) Meet state and federal DOT requirements governing commercial
motor vehicles.
(3) Air brakes.
(4) Air transfer system: a means of controlling the brakes of the towed
vehicle.
(5) Axle lift with a minimum lift capacity of 25,000 pounds and a tow
capacity of 80,000 pounds.
(6) Vehicle manufacturer serial plate must be legible and visible for
inspection on undercarriage and chassis boom or certified by
manufacturer's rating paperwork.
(7) Two safety chains 1/2 inch by 10 feet with a minimum of Grade 8
alloy.
(8) Two tow chains 5/8 inch by 10 feet with a minimum of Grade 8 alloy.
(9) Axle lift safety straps or equivalent retention device.
(10) Amber emergency lights with proper amber light permit from State
of New Jersey.
(11) Two floodlights or worklights to the rear of the wrecker.
(12) Tow light bar or magnetic tow lights.
§ 334-10 BRIDGETON CODE § 334-10
328:584
(13) Two-way radio or cellular phone.
(14) Assortment of wood blocks and boards.
(15) Assortment of tools.
(16) Flashlight.
(17) T-bolts/maxi release pins.
(18) Angle iron.
(19) First-aid kit.
(20) Fire extinguisher.
(21) Broom and shovel.
(22) Road flares, triangles or road cones.
(23) Two twelve-ton snatch blocks per winch.
(24) Trained/certified CVI-enlisted personnel will assist in any federal
DOT requirements governing commercial motor vehicles.
C. Recovery duty. Includes service for all accidents, recovery and winching
incidents for any vehicle over 10,000 pounds GVWR or any vehicle that
has dual wheels.
D. Recovery requirements.
(1) Two commercially manufactured hydraulic wreckers and chassis
with underreach capabilities and a minimum GVWR of 32,000
pounds.
(2) Oshkosh or Sterling-type crane can be substituted for one
hydraulic boom wrecker.
(3) Meet state and federal DOT requirements governing commercial
motor vehicles.
(4) Air brakes.
(5) Air transfer system: a means of controlling the brakes of the towed
vehicle.
(6) At least one truck shall have an axle lift with a minimum lift
capacity of 25,0000 pounds and a tow capacity of 80,0000 pounds.
(7) Each wrecker must have a minimum winch capacity of 50,000
pounds.
(8) Each wrecker must have a minimum boom capacity of 50,0000
pounds.
(9) A cable 5/8 inch by 200 feet or OEM specifications.
§ 334-10 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 334-10
328:585
(10) Two safety chains 1/2 inch by eight feet alloy.
(11) Two tow chains 1/2 inch by 10 feet and four chain binders.
(12) Recovery straps six inches by 20 feet or longer.
(13) Axle lift safety straps or equivalent retention device.
(14) Two scotch blocks or recovery stiff legs mounted into body of truck.
(15) Two twelve-ton snatch blocks per winch.
(16) Amber emergency lights with proper amber light permit from State
of New Jersey.
(17) Two floodlights or worklights to the rear of the wrecker.
(18) Two-way radio or cellular phone.
(19) Assortment of wood blocks and boards.
(20) Assortment of tools.
(21) Flashlight.
(22) Angle iron.
(23) Tow light bar or magnetic tow lights.
(24) T-bolts/maxi release pins.
(25) Hydraulic bottle jack.
(26) First-aid kit.
(27) Fire extinguisher.
(28) Broom and shovel.
(29) Road flares, triangles or road cones.
(30) Additional equipment, either owned or subcontracted.
(31) One air cushion recovery system, including starter cushions, with
motor-driven air pump and a lifting capacity of 100,000 pounds.
(32) One semi-tractor with fifth wheel.
(33) One lowboy or landall-type equipment-hauling trailer with a
minimum hauling capacity of 40,000 pounds.
(34) One relief trailer or truck capable of transferring loads off
damaged trucks.
E. In order to be qualified for a license, a towing operator must meet each
requirement of Subsections A, B, C and D above.
§ 334-10 BRIDGETON CODE § 334-11
328:586
§ 334-11. Term of license.
Licenses granted under this chapter shall be for a one-year period from
January 1 until December 31 of each year.
§ 334-12. Suspension and cancellation of license.
§ 334-13. Responsibility of licensed towing operators.
A. In the event that provisions of this chapter are not complied with, the
Chief of Police and/or the Director of Public Safety, in addition to such
other procedures established by this chapter, shall have the right to
suspend a licensee's license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the
Chief and/or Director has cause to believe the licensee is not following
the provisions of this chapter, the statutes of the State of New Jersey or
the rules and regulations enacted by the City of Bridgeton Police
Department governing towing operations.
B. If, within the thirty-day period of suspension, the licensee requests a
hearing, in writing, to the Clerk of the City of Bridgeton, such a hearing
shall be scheduled as soon as possible, but not less than within 20 days,
before City Council. The license shall continue on suspension pending
the hearing. At such hearing, the licensee shall show good cause why
the license shall not be canceled.
C. Upon cancellation, a licensee must reapply in accordance with this
chapter for a new license.
A. The licensee shall be responsible for any damage occurring to any
vehicle after it has come into the towing operator's possession until the
owner or his representative takes possession.
B. The licensee shall maintain insurance coverage in the amounts and
types specified in this chapter.
C. The licensee agrees to save and hold harmless the City from all manner
of liability and expense, including attorneys' fees, arising from actions
or omissions of the licensee.
D. All vehicles towed must be stored in an area protected by lighting and
six-foot-high chain-link or stockade fencing to secure the safety of all
vehicles stored.
E. The storage facility must be of sufficient size to accommodate at least
15 vehicles and must contain at least 4,000 square feet either inside or
outside storage area, or in combination.
F. Unless otherwise directed by the owner of a vehicle, all vehicles towed
by the licensee shall be stored at the yards or facilities listed on the
application and at no other location.
G. All storage yards or areas must meet current zoning standards and
comply with all applicable municipal ordinances and state laws.
§ 334-11 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 334-13
328:587
§ 334-14. Register of towing vehicles.
The Chief of Police shall keep a register of the names of all persons and
entities owning or operating tow trucks to which licenses have been issued
under this chapter, together with the license number and description of
such tow trucks.
§ 334-15. Towing fees.
H. The towing fees and storage fees established by the licensed towing
operator shall be conspicuously posted at the storage facility owned or
operated by the licensee, along with maximum fees established by
ordinance. Additionally, the driver responding to a call shall carry a
printed handout regarding towing fees and storage fees.
I. All towing operators shall be required to clear debris and refuse,
including but not limited to broken glass and speedy dry materials, from
the scene of any accident to which the licensee is called.
J. The licensee shall be required to respond to calls for towing services
without delay, and in no event shall a licensee respond to a request for
towing services later than 15 minutes from the receipt of a call for
towing services.
K. In the event that a tower cannot provide adequate towing services upon
being called, it shall notify the telecommunications officer, who shall
notify the next towing operator on the rotation list to assist with
provision of towing services.
A. Charges for the transportation, hauling or service of disabled or
abandoned passenger cars by a towing operator under this chapter
shall not exceed the charges as set forth by the Department of
Community Affairs, or any other department with jurisdiction over this
issue, if any, and as amended from time to time, but in no event shall
such charges be more than reasonable and customary in the area.
B. Station wagons, pickup trucks and panel trucks up to 1 1/2 tons shall be
considered the same as passenger automobiles for the purpose of rates
and fees.
C. For motor vehicles which are not private-passenger automobiles, as set
out in rules or regulations set forth by the Division of Community Affairs
or any other department with jurisdiction over this issue, and if the
vehicle is located within the public right-of-way, the maximum towing
charge shall be as provided in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of
Fees.
D. Rates for flatbeds shall be the same as for the utilization of other towing
vehicles as set forth above, depending upon the weight of the vehicle
being towed.
§ 334-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 334-15
328:588
§ 334-16. Storage fees.
§ 334-17. Towing of abandoned vehicles; responsibility for costs for
abandoned, towed or recovered vehicles.75
E. With respect to any vehicle that has been damaged, rolled over or is off
the public right-of-way, an additional charge, which shall not be
unreasonable, may be charged by the towing operator and negotiated
between the driver of the vehicle and the towing operator.
F. With respect to any straight-body truck, tractor-trailer or other vehicle
with over two axles, whether in the public right-of-way or not, such
rates, which shall not be unreasonable, may be agreed upon between
the towing operator and the owner of the vehicle.
G. To the extent practicable prior to engaging a tow, each towing operator
shall inform the owner of such vehicle as to the amount of fees and
costs, including storage fees, to be incurred for such services.
A. With respect to any fees paid to towing operators by the City of
Bridgeton for storage of removed motor vehicles, storage fees shall not
exceed the amount set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50; said fees are also
included in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
B. With respect to any fees charged for storage services to parties other
than the City of Bridgeton, storage fees shall not exceed the limits
established by the Department of Community Affairs or any other
department with jurisdiction over this issue.
C. With respect to any vehicle towed and stored at the direction of the
Police Division pursuant to a police investigation, no operator may
charge the City of Bridgeton for towing and storage in excess of $250
for any one vehicle in the event that possession and ownership
ultimately rest in the City of Bridgeton, regardless of the length of time
stored.
A. Any vehicle which is abandoned and which is towed by a licensee at the
request of the City of Bridgeton shall be towed in accordance with this
chapter.
B. All vehicles which are deemed to be abandoned vehicles in accordance
with this chapter may be towed at the request of the Police Division. If
the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement of the City of Bridgeton
determine the need for any vehicle to be towed in accordance with this
chapter, the City official shall notify the Police Division to arrange for
the tow. The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the cost of
abandoned vehicle tows in accordance with this chapter, and under no
circumstances shall the City of Bridgeton be responsible for fees in
excess of the storage fees set forth hereunder. Expenses for towing and
75.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 347, Vehicles, Abandoned.
§ 334-15 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 334-17
328:589
§ 334-18. Disposition of vehicles.
§ 334-19. Recordkeeping; notification of vehicle disposal,
destruction, removal, sale or transfer.
storage of abandoned vehicles shall be recovered from the sale of such
vehicles, and charges or expenses incurred for towing and storage of
abandoned vehicles may otherwise be collected from the owner of such
vehicles.
C. All towing operators shall comply with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
39:10A-1 et seq., as well as any other statute, rule or regulation
relevant to this issue.
D. Subject to agreement and negotiation with the owner/operator, the
recovery costs for any vehicle shall be the sole responsibility of the
owner/operator and shall not be the responsibility of the City of
Bridgeton.
E. Spillage. Any costs incurred by any City department, including but not
limited to the Streets and Roads Department, Fire Department, etc.,
such as storage, cleanup, etc., shall be borne by the owner/operator of
the vehicle. Any reasonable incidental expenses incurred by the City of
Bridgeton during the recovery of any vehicle shall be borne by the
owner.
A. Abandoned and unclaimed motor vehicles shall be disposed of and sold,
as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions of N J.S.A.
39:10A-1 et seq.
B. When a towing operator tows an abandoned vehicle at the request of
the City of Bridgeton, the required reports pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:10A-1a shall be prepared by such towing operator and furnished to
the Director of Public Safety of the City of Bridgeton or his designee.
C. Unless otherwise disposed of, when it has been ascertained that an
abandoned vehicle has not been stolen and is one which can be certified
for a junk title, and the vehicle shall remain unclaimed by the owner or
other person having a legal right thereto for a period in excess of 15
business days, then in such event such vehicle may be sold at auction,
at a public place, to be conducted by the Police Division of the City of
Bridgeton. The towing operator shall provide photographs of the
vehicle to the Chief of Police or his designated agent prior to the sale.
D. All other sales of abandoned motor vehicles shall take place and occur
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq.
A. The Police Division of the City of Bridgeton or the Director of Public
Safety shall maintain a record of all towing calls made to towing
operators appearing on the City of Bridgeton towing rotation list, the
date and time thereof, and any missed calls by towing operators.
Additional information may also be recorded as to the place, time of
§ 334-17 BRIDGETON CODE § 334-19
328:590
§ 334-20. Rotation list.
such tow, the identity and make, model and year of the vehicles being
towed and any other information which may be deemed pertinent.
B. Every towing operator licensed under this chapter shall record, in a
book kept solely for such purpose, the details of each disabled vehicle
towed, serviced or transported, together with all information
concerning the vehicle, including but not limited to the name of the
owner of the towed vehicle, if known, the individual engaging towing
services, the charges for the same, together with the make, model, year
and license plate number of all vehicles being towed. The record book
described in this section shall be kept open for inspection at all times by
any duly authorized representative of the City of Bridgeton.
C. No tow operator shall dispose of, destroy, remove, sell or otherwise
transfer any vehicle towed at the request of the City Police Division or
other City department without first complying with all applicable laws
of the State of New Jersey and notifying the City Police Division of its
intention to do so, in writing, at least 14 days prior to effectuating the
same.
A. Each towing operator approved for provision of towing services under
this chapter shall be included upon a list to be maintained by the
Director of Public Safety and Police Division of the City of Bridgeton.
B. Commencing at 12:01 a.m. each Monday morning, the Director of
Public Safety or the Chief of Police shall designate a towing operator to
receive all calls for towing services from the City of Bridgeton from
such time until 11:59 p.m. the following Sunday. Thereafter, the next
approved towing operator shall serve for the succeeding week, and
other towing operators shall be rotated in like fashion.
C. In the event that a towing operator is unable, refuses or fails to respond
to a towing call by not arriving at the scene of the tow within 15 minutes
from the call, then, in such event, the next approved towing operator on
the rotation list shall be called to respond by the tower at the scene.
D. If the licensee misses, fails or refuses to respond to three towing calls
within a thirty-day period, such towing operator's continued inclusion
on the City of Bridgeton's towing rotation list may be suspended or
revoked as provided herein. If a licensee is notified of an attempt to
suspend his license, upon request, the licensee shall be entitled to a
hearing before the Director of Public Safety. In the event that the
licensee is notified of the City's intention to revoke the licensee's
license, then in such event the licensee will be entitled to a hearing
before the City Council. Any appeal with respect to the Director of
Public Safety's determination to suspend a licensee's license shall be
heard by the City Council of the City of Bridgeton.
§ 334-19 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 334-20
328:591
§ 334-21. Selection of towing operator by owner.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude the owner of any
vehicle from requesting any towing operator, at the owner's election, from
towing the owner's vehicle or from utilizing the services of a particular
towing operator within or without the City of Bridgeton, so long as such
request does not jeopardize public safety.
§ 334-22. Violations and penalties; suspension or revocation of
license; notification by licensee of inability to comply.
E. Such additional rules and regulations regarding the rotation of towing
vehicles may be promulgated by the Director of Public Safety with the
approval of the governing body.
F. All vehicles towed during the designated rotation period for each
licensee shall, to the extent practicable, be made by the rotation towing
operator on duty. In the event that a towing operator lacks the
necessary equipment to conduct a tow, then in such event the tower
shall call the next scheduled towing operator for such tow. When any
unusual situation occurs which may be dangerous to the safety of the
public, such as a spill of toxic material of other dangerous cargo, the
Director of Public Safety or the Police Division may select any qualified
tow operator.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof; be punishable as provided in Chapter 1, Article III,
General Penalty.
B. In addition to the penalty prescribed under this section, the Clerk, after
notice and a hearing before City Council, may revoke or suspend any
license issued under this chapter or refuse to renew any license
previously issued for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or
any rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of Public Safety
and/or the Chief of Police of the City of Bridgeton.
(1) Additionally, licenses may be revoked or suspended for the
following reasons:
(a) Unsatisfactory service which jeopardizes public safety;
(b) More than three unexcused failures to respond and/or valid
complaints as determined by the Director of Public Safety after
investigation within a twelve-month period;
(c) Any complaint relative to service, overcharging, theft of parts,
damage, discourteous treatment or the like.
(2) This provision for suspension or revocation is in addition to the
action the Chief of Police is authorized to take under § 334-12 of
this Code.
§ 334-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 334-22
328:592
§ 334-23. Authority to promulgate rules, regulations and
procedures.
The Director of Public Safety and/or the City Police Division may
promulgate such rules, regulations and procedures, not inconsistent with
this chapter, as may be reasonable and necessary to carry out the provisions
of this chapter. Copies thereof shall be provided to all licensed tow
operators and shall be made available to the public, along with copies of
current fee schedules, during normal business hours. Failure to comply with
applicable rules, regulations and procedures may be cause for revocation of
a tow operator's license.
Chapter 336
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL MONITORING SYSTEM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 221.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 321.
Traffic violations — See Ch. 338.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 350.
§ 336-1. Investigation and installation.
C. In the event that any licensee, after procuring the license pursuant to
this chapter, shall thereafter be unable to comply with the provisions of
this chapter, he shall notify the Clerk of the City of Bridgeton, in
writing, after which the penalty provisions of this section shall not
apply.
D. In the event that any tow operator does not keep the required records
as required by this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted by the
Director of Public Safety or by his delegate, the Chief of Police, the tow
operator shall forfeit any fees or costs it would otherwise be entitled to
pursuant to this chapter.
A. The City of Bridgeton hereby determines to investigate, install and
utilize a traffic control signal monitoring system ("system") at
intersections under its jurisdiction where data has shown a high level of
violations and/or frequency of collisions, and as shall be approved by
the Commissioner of Transportation pursuant to the statute.76
B. The system to be installed shall be approved by the City Council of the
City of Bridgeton by resolution.
C. The City of Bridgeton shall have the authority to enter into a contract,
following a lawful procurement process, for the installation of the
system. Any contract that shall contain provisions contrary to the
76.Editor's Note: "The statute" refers to N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.13 et seq.
§ 334-22 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 336-1
328:593
§ 336-2. Issuance of summons.
The Police Department of the City of Bridgeton shall review the recorded
images produced by the system to determine whether sufficient evidence
exists demonstrating that a traffic control signal violation has occurred and
shall issue a summons within 90 days from the date on which the violation
occurred.
§ 336-3. Use of recorded images.
§ 336-4. Owner's liability.
statute shall not be deemed invalid but rather reformed to conform to
the statute.
D. The signs notifying drivers that a system is being utilized shall be
approved by the Municipal Engineer, and shall be placed on each street
converging into the affected intersection as required by the statute.
E. The Municipal Engineer shall inspect and certify the system at least
once every six months from the date of its installation.
A. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the recorded images
produced by the system shall be available for the exclusive use of the
Police Department for the purpose of discharging his or her duties
under the statute.
B. Any recorded image or information produced in connection with the
system shall not be deemed a public record under N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et
seq., or under common law. The recorded images shall not be:
(1) Discoverable as a public record by any person, entity, or
governmental agency, except upon a subpoena issued by a grand
jury or a court order in a criminal matter; or
(2) Offered as evidence in any civil or administrative proceeding not
directly related to a traffic control signal violation.
C. Any recorded image or information collected in connection with a traffic
control signal violation shall be purged and shall not be retained after
60 business days following the collection of any fine or penalty.
D. If a summons is not issued within 90 business days following the traffic
control signal violation, all recorded images and any information
collected with respect to the traffic control signal violation shall be
purged within three business days.
E. The City of Bridgeton shall certify compliance of this section by filing a
report with the Commissioner of Transportation in accordance with the
statute.
A. Except as set forth hereafter, the owner and operator shall be jointly
liable for a traffic control signal violation summons issued pursuant to a
§ 336-1 BRIDGETON CODE § 336-4
328:594
§ 336-5. Fines.
Any person liable for a traffic control signal violation, pursuant to the
chapter and the statute, utilizing the system shall be subject to the following
fines:
§ 336-6. Reporting requirements.
The City of Bridgeton, upon installation of a traffic control signal monitoring
system, shall prepare and file reports as required by the statute and
Commissioner of Transportation.
Chapter 338
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 338, Traffic Violations, comprised of Art. I, Failure
to Appear in Court, adopted 10-15-1974 by Ord. No. 74-5, was
superseded 4-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-06. See now Ch. 350, Vehicles
and Traffic.]
traffic control signal monitoring system established under N.J.S.A.
39:4-8.13 et seq., unless the owner can show that the vehicle was used
without consent of the owner, expressed or implied.
B. An owner who pays any fine, penalty, civil judgment, costs or
administration fees in connection with a traffic signal control violation
issued pursuant to a traffic control signal monitoring system shall have
the right to recover that sum from the operator in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
C. The owner of a motor vehicle who is a lessor shall not be liable for a
traffic control signal violation summons issued pursuant to the statute
when the motor vehicle is under the control or in the possession of the
lessee, if upon notice of a traffic control signal violation, the owner of
the motor vehicle which was leased at the time of the offense notifies
the City of Bridgeton's Municipal Court Administrator by affidavit of the
name and address of the lessee. The affidavit shall be in a form
prescribed by the Administrative Director of the Courts. After providing
the name and address of the lessee, the owner shall not be required to
attend a hearing of the offense, unless otherwise notified by the court.
A. Violation: $85.
B. Late fee: $10.
§ 336-4 TIRES, STORAGE OF § 336-6
328:595
Chapter 347
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Towing — See Ch. 334. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 350.
§ 347-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes any motor vehicle, omnibus,
road tractor, trailer, truck, truck tractor and vehicle which:
MOTOR VEHICLE, OMNIBUS, ROAD TRACTOR, TRACTOR, TRAILER,
TRUCK, VEHICLE AND MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARD — The meanings
given them in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.77
§ 347-2. Abandonment of vehicles prohibited.
§ 347-3. Notice to comply.
Is parked without the current year's registration or identification
markers as required by law and has been continuously parked in any of
the places mentioned in this chapter for a period greater than 30 days;
or
A.
Is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, and the driver
or person owning or in charge thereof neglects or refuses to move the
same to a place where it will not obstruct traffic; or
B.
Is found to be mechanically inoperative and incapable of economically
being made mechanically operative; or
C.
D. Is found without one or more tires.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, occupant, lessee,
agent, tenant or otherwise of any private property within the City, to
store or deposit, or cause to be stored or deposited, in an open and
visible manner an abandoned, junked or discarded motor vehicle upon
any private land, except that this chapter shall not apply to the owner or
operator of a motor vehicle junkyard in conformance with N.J.S.A.
39:11-1 et seq.
B. It shall be unlawful for the driver, owner or person in charge thereof to
abandon a vehicle on any public street within the City.
77.Editor's Note: See also N.J.S.A. 39:11-2.
§ 336-6 BRIDGETON CODE § 347-3
347:596
§ 347-4. Impounding abandoned vehicles; notification of owner.
§ 347-5. Sale of impounded vehicles; costs.
Whenever any vehicle impounded following the referral of the matter by
the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement to the Police Department
shall remain unclaimed for a period of 30 days, the vehicle may be sold
pursuant to the rules and regulations issued by the Chief of Police and/
or the Director of Public Safety and consistent with N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et
seq. The expenses incurred in hauling, towing or otherwise transporting
the vehicle to the place of storage shall be the responsibility of the person
buying such vehicle. The expenses incurred by the City of Bridgeton shall be
assessed against the proper owner and shall constitute a lien thereon and
collected as provided by law.
Chapter 350
A. If the provisions of the foregoing section are violated, the Division of
Housing and Code Enforcement shall serve written notice, either
personally or by mail, upon the owner, occupant or persons having
charge of any such private property to comply with the provisions of
this chapter. The Division of Housing and Code Enforcement may
determine ownership of any parcel of land from the then-current tax
rolls of the City of Bridgeton and may serve written notice upon such
owner by mailing, by regular mail, such notice to the owner at the
address listed in the then-current tax rolls.
B. The notice shall provide a date within which the vehicle must be
removed. Except in the case of emergency, it is anticipated that the
minimum time allowed for removal shall be 10 days from the date of the
notice.
A. In the event that the motor vehicle is not removed as prescribed in this
chapter, the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement is authorized to
report said vehicle to the Police Division. The Police Division shall direct
the towing and/or impounding of the vehicle, and such vehicle shall be
retained and impounded until the person owning the same shall first
pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result
from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle, along
with any costs charged by the Police Division in accordance with the
Codes of the City of Bridgeton.
B. Whenever any vehicle is impounded as provided in this chapter, the
Supervisor of the Division of Housing and Code Enforcement shall,
within 15 days from the date of impoundment, notify the registered
owner, in writing, by personal service or by certified mail, at the lastknown
address of the owner, of the removal of such vehicle, the reason
for its removal, and the location of the vehicle. This notification shall be
in addition to any notification required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et
seq., which shall be performed by the Police Division.
§ 347-3 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 347-5
347:597
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency lanes — See Ch. 141.
Motorized vehicles — See Ch. 221.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 321.
Towing — See Ch. 334.
Traffic control signal monitoring
system — See Ch. 336.
Traffic violations — See Ch. 338.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 347.
§ 347-5 BRIDGETON CODE § 347-5
347:598
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 350-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 350-2. Authorization for closing of any street.
§ 350-3. Authority to tow vehicles in violation of chapter.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner of such
A. Words and phrases. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this
chapter, the meaning respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title
39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et
seq.) shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
In addition, as used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT — The area bounded on the north by
a line running parallel to the northerly curbline of Washington Street,
a distance of 100 feet north of said northerly curbline of Washington
Street, on the east by the easterly curbline of Pearl Street, on the
south by the southerly curbline of Broad Street and on the west by the
Cohansey River.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Bridgeton.
B. Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this
chapter, they shall mean either Eastern standard time or Eastern
daylight saving time, as may be in current use.
A. The Chief of Police of this municipality, or his or her designee, is hereby
authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street or
portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days whenever he
or she finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the
public safety, health or welfare.
B. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police in accordance with
Subsection A above shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
C. Any violation of any regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished as provided in § 350-4 hereof.
D. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 350-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-3
347:599
vehicle shall bear the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may
result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 350-4. Violations and penalties; specific fines.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided elsewhere in this chapter
or by New Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of a
provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $200 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 15 days, or both.
B. Specific fines. Fines for violations of parking ordinances in the City are
hereby fixed as follows, provided said fines are paid within 10 days of
the time when such notice was attached to such vehicle. Any fines
collected will be in addition to court costs and assessments as
prescribed by statute.
Violation Penalty
LO1 (§ 350-12A) Parking overtime $20
LO2 (§ 350-12B) All-night parking $20
LO3 (§ 350-18) Law Enforcement Vehicle
Parking Zone
$20
LO4 (§ 350-13F) Parking in prohibited area or
no parking zone
$20
LO5 (§ 350-20) Parking in taxi stand $20
LO6 (§ 350-13E) Parking on wrong side of
street
$20
LO7 (§ 350-19) Parking in bus stop $20
LO8 (§ 350-11B) No stopping or standing $20
LO9 (§ 350-11A) Obstructing traffic $30
LO10 (§ 350-8) Parking in private driveway $20
LO11 (§ 350-13A) Parking within 10 feet of a
fire hydrant
$30
LO12 (§ 350-13B) Parking within 25 feet of a
crosswalk
$20
LO13 (§ 350-13C) Parking within 50 feet of a
stop sign
$30
LO14 (§ 350-13D) Parking on sidewalk $20
LO15 (§ 350-14) Violation of time restrictions $20
LO16 (§ 350-38) Parking in handicapped zone $100
C. Enhanced penalties. In the event the fines in Subsection B are not paid
within 10 days of when said notice was attached to the vehicle, then the
fines for violations of parking ordinances in the City are hereby fixed as
follows unless within said ten-day time period a not-guilty plea is
§ 350-3 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-4
347:600
§ 350-5. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 350-6. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the municipality adopted prior to the
adoption of this chapter are hereby repealed, and all ordinances or parts
of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall not affect or
prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or
committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking
effect of this chapter.
entered. Any fines collected will be in addition to court costs and
assessments as prescribed by statute.
Violation Penalty
LO1 (§ 350-12A) Parking overtime $30
LO2 (§ 350-12B) All-night parking $30
LO3 (§ 350-18) Law Enforcement Penalty Zone $30
LO4 (§ 350-13F) Parking in prohibited area $30
LO5 (§ 350-20) Parking in taxi stand $30
LO6 (§ 350-13E) Parking on wrong side of
street
$30
LO7 (§ 350-19) Parking in bus stop $30
LO8 (§ 350-11B) No stopping or standing $30
LO9 (§ 350-11A) Obstructing traffic $40
LO10 (§ 350-8) Parking in private driveway $30
LO11 (§ 350-13A) Parking within 10 feet of fire
hydrant
$40
LO12 (§ 350-13B) Parking within 25 feet of
crosswalk
$30
LO13 (§ 350-13C) Parking within 50 feet of
stop sign
$40
LO14 (§ 350-13D) Parked on sidewalk $30
LO15 (§ 350-14) Violation of time restrictions $30
LO16 (§ 350-38) Parking in handicapped zone $110
§ 350-4 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-6
347:601

ARTICLE II
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 350-7. Parking regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 350-8. Parking near public or private driveways or alleys.
Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or compliance
with the directions of a traffic or police officer or traffic sign or signal, no
operator of a vehicle shall stand or park a vehicle within five feet of the
nearest public or private driveway or alley. A violation of this section will be
considered a violation of LO10.
§ 350-9. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 350-10. Temporary parking prohibition for snowplowing and
removal.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
the streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are
displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police
officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting
of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather conditions,
accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations dictate or
require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with
the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY NO PARKING
signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner
of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets and highways, an emergency shall exist, and no vehicle shall
be parked on the streets or highways or portions thereof indicated
below:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
§ 350-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-10
347:603
§ 350-11. Stopping or standing prohibited.
C. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of removal
and storage which may result from such removal before regaining
possession of the vehicle.
A. No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any manner that
obstructs the normal flow of traffic. A violation of this section will be
considered a violation of LO9.
B. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours
specified on any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described below. A violation of this section will be considered a violation
of LO8.
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Academy Street South All/All except on
Wednesday from
7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon
From Giles Street to
Lawrence Street
Bank Street East All/All From East
Commerce Street to
a point 35 feet
north therefrom
Mayor Aitken
Drive
Both All/All From West Park
Drive to West
Commerce Street
North Laurel
Street
East All/All From the
prolongation of the
northeasterly
curbline of
Washington Street
to a point 50 feet
northerly thereof
South Laurel
Street
East All/All From the
prolongation of the
northeasterly
curbline of Broad
Street (Route 49) to
a point 50 feet
northerly thereof
§ 350-10 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-11
347:604
§ 350-12. Parking time limited on certain streets.
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
South Laurel
Street
West All/All From the
prolongation of the
northwesterly
curbline of Broad
Street (Route 49) to
a point 125 feet
northerly thereof
West Commerce
Street
South 12:00 noon to 3:00
p.m./Mon. through
Fri.
From a point 120
feet west from the
westerly curbline of
Lawrence Street
and West Commerce
Street to a point
320 feet westerly,
and from a point
420 feet westerly
from said curb to a
point 620 feet
westerly from said
curb
West Commerce
Street
South All/All From a point 320
feet west of
westerly curbline of
Lawrence Street
and West Commerce
Street to a point
420 feet from said
curb
A. Except where otherwise prohibited or regulated, no person shall park a
vehicle longer than the time limit indicated, between the hours listed on
any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets,
parts of streets, or upon any City-owned or operated parking facility, as
described in Subsection C. A violation of this section will be considered
a violation of LO1.
B. Except where otherwise prohibited or regulated, no person shall park a
vehicle between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. upon any of the
streets, parts of streets, or upon any City-owned or operated parking
facility, as described in Subsection C. A violation of this section will be
considered a violation of LO2.
C. In accordance with Subsection A and B, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any part of the streets, parts of streets, or upon any City-owned or
operated parking facility, as described below:
§ 350-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-12
347:605
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
Bank Street East 15 min./All Beginning at a point
34 feet north of the
northerly curbline of
East Commerce
Street to 54 feet
north thereof
Bank Street East 15 min./All Beginning at a point
54 feet north of the
northerly curbline of
East Commerce
Street to 76 feet
north thereof
Bank Street East 15 min./All Beginning at a point
76 feet north of the
northerly curbline of
East Commerce
Street to 96 feet
north thereof
East Commerce
Street
North 1 hr./All Between the
driveway adjacent to
City Hall Annex on
the east and Bank
Street on the west
East Commerce
Street
North 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
37 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
Cohansey Street to
220 feet west of
Cohansey Street
East Commerce
Street
North 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
12 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
Cohansey Street to
37 feet west of
Cohansey Street
East Commerce
Street
North 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
220 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
Cohansey Street to
240 feet west of
Cohansey Street
§ 350-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-12
347:606
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
East Commerce
Street
North 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
40 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
North Laurel Street
to 60 feet west of
North Laurel Street
East Commerce
Street
North 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
92 feet east of the
easterly curbline of
North Laurel Street
to 72 feet east of
North Laurel Street
East Commerce
Street
North 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
45 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
North Pearl Street to
65 feet west of North
Pearl Street
East Commerce
Street
North 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Between the
intersection of the
westerly curbline of
Walnut Street and a
point 95 feet east of
the intersection of
the curbline of North
Laurel Street with
the northerly curbline
of East Commerce
Street
East Commerce
Street
South 1 hr./All Between the entrance
and exit driveways of
City Hall (168 East
Commerce Street)
East Commerce
Street
South 15 mins./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
72 feet east of the
easterly curbline of
North Pearl Street to
92 feet east of North
Pearl Street
East Commerce
Street
South 15 mins./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
304 feet east of the
easterly curbline of
North Pearl Street to
324 feet east of
North Pearl Street
§ 350-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-12
347:607
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
East Commerce
Street
South 15 mins./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
12 feet east of the
easterly Riverfront
entrance to 32 feet
east of the Riverfront
entrance
East Commerce
Street
South 15 mins./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
52 feet east of the
easterly curbline of
South Laurel Street
to 74 feet east of
South Laurel Street
East Commerce
Street
South 15 mins./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
72 feet west of the
westerly curbline of
South Laurel Street
to 92 feet west of
South Laurel Street
East Commerce
Street
South 15 mins./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
44 feet west of the
westerly parking
curbline of South
Pearl Street to 66
feet west of South
Pearl Street
East Commerce
Street
South 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at the
westerly curbline of
Walnut Street east of
and extending to the
intersection of the
southerly curbline of
Commerce Street and
the easterly curbline
of the Riverfront
Entrance
North Laurel
Street
East 15 min./All except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
30 feet north of the
intersection from the
northerly curbline of
Church Lane to 50
feet north of Church
Lane
§ 350-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-12
347:608
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
North Laurel
Street
East 15 min./All except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
235 feet north of the
intersection from the
northerly curbline of
Church Lane to 256
feet north of Church
Lane
North Laurel
Street
East 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
43 feet north of the
intersection from the
northerly curbline of
East Commerce
Street to 65 feet
north of East
Commerce Street
North Laurel
Street
East 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
265 feet north of the
intersection from the
northerly curbline of
East Commerce
Street to 287 feet
north of East
Commerce Street
North Laurel
Street
East 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
65 feet north of the
intersection between
the northerly curbline
of East Commerce
Street and running to
a point 95 feet north
of the intersection of
the northerly curbline
of Washington Street
with the easterly
curbline of North
Laurel Street
North Laurel
Street
East 15 min./All except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
50 feet north of the
intersection from the
northerly curbline of
Washington Street to
72 feet north of
Washington Street
§ 350-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-12
347:609
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
North Laurel
Street
East 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
72 feet north of the
intersection from the
northerly curbline of
Washington Street to
94 feet north of
Washington Street
North Laurel
Street
West 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
60 feet north of the
intersection from the
northwesterly
curbline of East
Commerce Street to a
point 275 feet north
of Obledoble Lane
North Laurel
Street
West 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
60 feet north of the
intersection from the
northwesterly
curbline of East
Commerce Street to
80 feet north of East
Commerce Street
North Laurel
Street
West 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
60 feet south of the
intersection from the
southwesterly
curbline of
Washington Street to
80 feet south of
Washington Street
Riverfront
Parking Lot
All 2 hrs./8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
All unmarked parking
spaces not otherwise
marked and
restricted
Riverfront
Parking Lot
All 10 minutes Parking spaces
specifically marked
for ten-minute
parking
§ 350-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-12
347:610
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
South Laurel
Street
East 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at the
northerly curbline of
East Broad Street
running north to a
point 80 feet south of
the intersection of
the southeasterly
curbline of East
Commerce Street
South Laurel
Street
East 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
240 feet north of the
intersection from the
northeasterly
curbline of East
Broad Street to 260
feet north of East
Broad Street
South Laurel
Street
East 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
30 feet north of the
intersection from the
northeasterly
curbline of
McCormick Place to
50 feet north of
McCormick Place
South Laurel
Street
East 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
240 feet north of the
intersection from the
northeasterly
curbline of
McCormick Place to
260 feet north of
McCormick Place
South Laurel
Street
West 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
50 feet north of the
intersection from the
northwesterly
curbline of East
Broad Street and
running to a point
625 feet north of the
intersection of the
southwesterly
curbline of East
Broad Street
§ 350-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-12
347:611
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
South Laurel
Street
West 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
125 feet north of the
intersection from the
northwesterly
curbline of East
Broad Street to 150
feet north of East
Broad Street
South Laurel
Street
West 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
150 feet north of the
intersection from the
northwesterly
curbline of East
Broad Street to 175
feet north of East
Broad Street
South Laurel
Street
West 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
175 feet north of the
intersection from the
northwesterly
curbline of East
Broad Street to 200
feet north of East
Broad Street
South Laurel
Street
West 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
564 feet north of the
intersection from the
northwesterly
curbline of East
Broad Street to 584
feet north of East
Broad Street
Washington
Street
North 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
33 feet west of the
intersection from the
northwesterly
curbline of North
Laurel Street to 53
feet west of North
Laurel Street
§ 350-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-12
347:612
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
Washington
Street
North 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at the
northwesterly
curbline of North
Pearl Street to the
Washington Street
Bridge northwesterly
curbline of North
Pearl Street
Washington
Street
South 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
37 feet east of the
intersection from the
southeasterly
curbline of North
Laurel Street to 57
feet east of North
Laurel Street
Washington
Street
South 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at the
southwesterly
curbline of North
Pearl Street and
running to the
intersection of the
southeasterly
curbline of South
Laurel Street
West Commerce
Street
North 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at the
Commerce Street
Bridge and running
west to the
intersection of the
northeasterly
curbline of Mayor
Aitken Drive
West Commerce
Street
North 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
53 feet east of the
intersection from the
northeasterly
curbline of Mayor
Aitken Drive to 74
feet east of Mayor
Aitken Drive
§ 350-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-12
347:613
§ 350-13. Parking prohibited.
Name of
Street Side Time Limit/Hours Location
West Commerce
Street
North 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
122 feet east of the
intersection from the
northeasterly
curbline of Mayor
Aitken Drive to 143
feet east of Mayor
Aitken Drive
West Commerce
Street
South 15 min./All, except
no parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at a point
39 feet east of the
intersection from the
southeasterly
curbline of Atlantic
Street to 61 feet east
of Atlantic Street
West Commerce
Street
South 2 hrs./All, except no
parking between
2:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m.
Beginning at the
Commerce Street
Bridge and running
to the intersection of
the southerly
curbline of East
Commerce Street
with the easterly
curbline of Atlantic
Street
A. No person shall park a vehicle within 10 feet of any fire hydrant. A
violation of this subsection will be considered a violation of LO11.
B. No person shall park a vehicle on or within 25 feet of any marked
crosswalk. A violation of this subsection will be considered a violation of
LO12.
C. Unless otherwise specifically provided, no person shall park a vehicle
within 50 feet of any stop sign. A violation of this subsection will be
considered a violation of LO13.
D. No person shall park a vehicle in a manner that any portion of the
vehicle is on or obstructs a public sidewalk. A violation of this
subsection will be considered a violation of LO14.
E. No person shall park a vehicle in a manner other than parallel with the
edge of the curb and headed in the direction of traffic. A violation of this
subsection will be considered a violation of LO6.
§ 350-12 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-13
347:614
F. Except where otherwise regulated, no person shall park a vehicle at any
time upon any of the following streets or parts thereof. A violation of
this subsection will be considered a violation of LO4:
Name of Street Side Location
Academy Street
[Added
12-19-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-31]
North Between South Giles Street and South
Lawrence Street
Atlantic Street East From West Broad Street (Route 49) to
a point 90 feet south therefrom
Atlantic Street East From a point 225 feet south of West
Broad Street (Route 49) to a point 75
south therefrom including the
entrance to an alleyway running
easterly from Atlantic Street to Water
Street
Atlantic Street West From the southwesterly corner of West
Broad Street, along the west side of
Atlantic Street, to the northwesterly
corner of Vine Street
Babe Ruth Drive East From Burt Street to Scholastic Drive
Bank Street East From Siebel Street north to Penn
Street
Burt Street Both From West Avenue to Babe Ruth Drive
Cedar Street Both From Walnut Street west to Bank
Street
Chestnut Avenue East Entire length
Chestnut Avenue West From Laurel Street to Madison Street
Church Lane South From North Pearl Street to Laurel
Street
Church Street West From Cedar Street south to East
Commerce Street
Cohansey Street East From Commerce Street to Washington
Street
Cohansey Street East From a point 350 feet north of the
northeast corner of Irving Avenue and
Cohansey to a point 30 feet north
therefrom
Cohansey Street West From East Commerce Street to a point
185 feet north therefrom
Cohansey Street West From Washington Street to a point 76
feet north therefrom
§ 350-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-13
347:615
Name of Street Side Location
Cohansey Street West From Washington Street to a point 92
feet south therefrom
East Commerce
Street
North From Cohansey Street to a point 68
feet east therefrom
East Commerce
Street
North From North Laurel Street to a point 91
feet east therefrom
East Commerce
Street
North From North Laurel Street to a point 40
feet west therefrom
East Commerce
Street
North From North Pearl Street to a point 50
feet east therefrom
East Commerce
Street
North From North Pearl Street to a point 45
feet west therefrom
East Commerce
Street
South From South Laurel Street to a point 50
feet east therefrom
East Commerce
Street
South From South Laurel Street to a point 70
feet west therefrom
East Commerce
Street
South From South Pearl Street to a point 75
feet east therefrom
East Commerce
Street
South From South Pearl Street to a point 43
feet west therefrom
Fayette Street East From the gutterline of Route 49 to a
point 500 feet south therefrom
Fayette Street East From the northern sideline of Vine
Street to a point 25 feet north
therefrom
Fayette Street West From the southwesterly corner of
Belmont Avenue south to a point 238
feet south therefrom
Fayette Street West From the gutterline of Route 49 to a
point 25 feet south therefrom
Fayette Street West From the northern sideline of Vine
Street to a point 25 feet north
therefrom
Glass Street Both From South Laurel Street to South
Pearl Street
Grove Street East From South Avenue to the City line
Irving Avenue Both From Laurel Street to a point 50 feet
west therefrom
Irving Avenue Both From North Laurel Street to a point
100 feet east therefrom
§ 350-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-13
347:616
Name of Street Side Location
Irving Avenue North From Bank Street to a point 60 feet
east therefrom
Irving Avenue North From Bank Street to Pearl Street
Irving Avenue North From Manheim Avenue a distance of
336 feet to Magnolia Avenue
Irving Avenue South From Burlington Road to Magnolia
Avenue
Laning Street Both From North Laurel Street to Nichols
Street
Lawrence Street East From West Commerce Street to a
point 50 feet north therefrom
Lawrence Street East From West Commerce Street to a
point 50 feet south therefrom
Lawrence Street West From West Broad Street to West
Commerce Street
Lawrence Street West From West Commerce Street to a
point 50 feet north therefrom
Magnolia Avenue East From Irving Avenue to a point 34 feet
north therefrom
Manheim Avenue Both From Irving Avenue north to the
entrance into the driveway of the
hospital parking lot
Marion Street South From North Pearl Street west to North
Laurel Street
Mayor Aitken
Drive
Both From West Park Drive to West
Commerce Street
McCormick Place North From Bank Street Extension to North
Pearl Street
McCormick Place North From the northwesterly corner of
North Pearl Street to a point 265 feet
west therefrom
McCormick Place South Entire length
Nichols Street West From Laning Street to North Street
North Industrial
Boulevard
South From the southwest corner of South
Burlington Road to the southeast
corner of West Industrial Boulevard
North Laurel
Street
East Between a point 50 feet south of
Charles Street and a point 50 feet
north of Charles Street
North Laurel
Street
East From Chestnut Avenue to a point 75
feet north therefrom
§ 350-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-13
347:617
Name of Street Side Location
North Laurel
Street
East From East Commerce Street to a point
40 feet north therefrom
North Laurel
Street
East Between a point 80 feet south of Irving
Avenue and a point 50 feet north
Irving Avenue
North Laurel
Street
East From Penn Street to a point 140 feet
south therefrom
North Laurel
Street
East From Washington Street to a point 49
feet north therefrom
North Laurel
Street
East From Washington Street to a point 50
feet south therefrom
North Laurel
Street
West From East Commerce Street to a point
50 feet north therefrom
North Laurel
Street
West Between a point 240 feet north to a
point 150 feet south of the southerly
curbline of the Glass Company
driveway
North Laurel
Street
West Between a point 50 feet north of Irving
Avenue and a point 60 feet south of
Irving Avenue
North Laurel
Street
West From a point 192 feet south of North
Street to a point 135 feet south
therefrom
North Laurel
Street
West From Washington Street to a point 33
feet south therefrom
North Laurel
Street
West From Washington Street to a point 50
feet north therefrom
North Street South Entire length, except Sunday
North West
Avenue
Both For a distance of 100 feet north from
the intersection of West Avenue with
Route 49 along the easterly curb of
West Avenue
Orange Street Both From McCormick Place to East
Commerce Street
Penn Street Both From Laurel Street to a point 100 feet
east therefrom
Penn Street Both From the intersection of Penn Street
and Bank Street easterly to Magnolia
Avenue
Rose Street South From North Pearl Street west to North
Laurel Street
§ 350-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-13
347:618
Name of Street Side Location
Scholastic Drive Both From Mayor Aitkin Drive west to a
point 1,282 feet thereof
South Avenue West From Grove Street to the City line
South Industrial
Boulevard
North From the northeast corner of West
Industrial Boulevard to the northwest
corner of South Burlington Road
South Laurel
Street
East From Broad Street (Route 49) to a
point 75 feet north therefrom
South Laurel
Street
East From East Commerce Street to a point
81 feet south therefrom
South Laurel
Street
East From Glass Street to Broad Street
(Route 49)
South Laurel
Street
West From Broad Street (Route 49) to a
point 125 feet north therefrom
South Laurel
Street
West From Broad Street (Route 49) to a
point 150 feet south therefrom
South Laurel
Street
West From East Commerce Street to a point
50 feet south therefrom
South West
Avenue
Both For a distance of 100 feet south from
the intersection of West Avenue with
Route 49 along the west curb of West
Avenue
Taylor Street West From Vine Street south to Hampton
Street
Union Street Both From North Laurel Street to Cohansey
Street
Vine Street North From a point commencing 250 feet
from the center line of the intersection
of Fayette Street and Vine Street to a
point 230 feet west therefrom
Walnut Street East From Irving Avenue north to Orchard
Street
Washington Street North From Cohansey Street to a point 30
feet west therefrom
Washington Street North From North Laurel Street to a point 60
feet east therefrom
Washington Street North From North Laurel Street to a point 40
feet west therefrom
Washington Street South From Cohansey Street to a point 37
feet east therefrom
§ 350-13 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-13
347:619
§ 350-14. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on any day
(except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets. A violation of this section will be considered a violation of
LO15.
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Academy Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Lawrence Street
to Giles Street
Albertson Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Watson Street
to North West Avenue
Albertson Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From Watson Street
to North West Avenue
American Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Laurel Street to
Pearl Street
American Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Laurel Street to
Pearl Street
Andrews Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Atlantic Street East 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./Wed.
From Broad Street to
Vine Street
Atlantic Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Commerce
Street to Harvard
Avenue
Name of Street Side Location
Washington Street South From Cohansey Street to the
Washington Street Bridge
Washington Street South From North Laurel Street to a point 40
feet east therefrom
Washington Street South From North Laurel Street to a point
120 feet west therefrom
Water Street West From Broad Street to University
Avenue
West Commerce
Street
Both From Lawrence Street to a point 50
feet east therefrom
West Commerce
Street
Both From Lawrence Street to a point 50
feet west therefrom
West Industrial
Boulevard
East From the southeast corner of North
Industrial Boulevard to the northeast
corner of South Industrial Boulevard
§ 350-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:620
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Atlantic Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Commerce
Street to Harvard
Avenue
Babe Ruth Drive West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From Burt Street to
Scholastic Drive
Baltimore Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South East
Avenue to South
Avenue
Bank Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Commerce
Street to Pearl Street
Bank Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Commerce
Street to Pearl Street
Beck Drive Northeast 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Crestwood
Drive to City Line
Beck Drive Southwest 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Crestwood
Drive to City line
Belmont Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Water Street to
Quarter Mile Lane
Belmont Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Water Street to
Quarter Mile Lane
Bertini Drive North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Pearl Street to
Logan Street
Bertini Drive South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Pearl Street to
Logan Street
Bowentown Road North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From West Avenue to
City line
Bowentown Road South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From West Avenue to
City line
Bridgeton Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Chestnut
Avenue to Laurel
Street
Bridgeton Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Pearl Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Bridgeton Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Chestnut
Avenue to Laurel
Street
Bridgeton Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Pearl Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Brookside Drive North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Burlington Road
to end
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:621
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Brookside Drive South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Burlington Road
to end
Brynmawr
Avenue
Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Terrace Street
to end
Buckshutem Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Commerce
Street easterly to City
line
Budd Street East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Albertson
Avenue south to end
Budd Street West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From Albertson
Avenue southerly to
end
Burt Street North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From North West
Avenue to Budd Street
Burt Street South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From North West
Avenue to Budd Street
Cambridge
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Oxford Avenue
to Purdue Avenue
Cambridge
Avenue
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Oxford Avenue
to Purdue Avenue
Cedarbrook
Avenue
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Indian Avenue
to Spring Street
Cedarbrook
Avenue
East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Cedarbrook
Avenue
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Indian Avenue
to Spring Street
Cedarbrook
Avenue
West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Cedar Dell
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South Avenue to
Grove Street
Cedar Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Bank Street to
East Avenue
Cedar Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Bank Street to
East Avenue
Central Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From West Avenue
westerly to City line
Central Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From West Avenue
westerly to City line
Charles Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Mt. Vernon
Street to Harrison
Street
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:622
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Charles Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Mt. Vernon
Street to Harrison
Street
Cherry Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South East
Avenue easterly to
end
Chestnut Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Bridgeton
Avenue northerly to
end
Chestnut Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Laurel Street to
Bridgeton Avenue
Church Lane North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From North Pearl
Street to North Laurel
Street
Church Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Commerce
Street to Irving
Avenue
Church Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Commerce
Street to Irving
Avenue
Cohansey Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Washington
Street to North Street
Cohansey Street West 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From East Commerce
Street north to
Washington Street
Cohansey Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Washington
Street to North Street
Colfax Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Garfield Avenue
to Cone Street
Columbus Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From New Street to
Vine Street
Columbus Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From New Street to
Vine Street
Cone Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South East
Avenue to Colfax
Street
Coral Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Commerce
Street to Gilmore
Street
Coral Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:623
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Coral Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From James Place
southerly to end
Coral Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Commerce
Street to Gilmore
Street
Coral Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Coral Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From James Place
southerly to end
Cornell Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Oxford Avenue
to Purdue Avenue
Cornell Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Oxford Avenue
to Purdue Avenue
Cottage Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Suncrest
Avenue to Oxford
Avenue
Cottage Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Suncrest
Avenue to Oxford
Avenue
Crestwood Drive North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From North
Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Crestwood Drive South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From North
Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Cumberland
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Bank Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Cumberland
Avenue
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Bank Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Dare Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Gilmore Avenue
north and south to
end
Devonshire Place East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Glen Drive to
Lincoln Way
Devonshire Place West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Glen Drive to
Lincoln Way
Division Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Martin Luther
King, Jr. Way to
Terrace Street
DuBois Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Chestnut
Avenue to Mulford
Court
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:624
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
DuBois Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Chestnut
Avenue to Mulford
Court
Eagle Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South Avenue to
Grove Street
East Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Commerce
Street to Irving
Avenue
East Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Commerce
Street to Irving
Avenue
East Commerce
Street
North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Cohansey Street
west to the Cohansey
River
East Commerce
Street
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From North Elm
Street easterly to City
line
East Commerce
Street
North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From North Laurel
Street west to
Cohansey Street
East Commerce
Street
North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From North Pearl
Street west to North
Laurel Street
East Commerce
Street
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Walnut Street to
North Elm Street
East Commerce
Street
South 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From the Cohansey
River east to South
Laurel Street
East Commerce
Street
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From North Elm
Street easterly to City
line
East Commerce
Street
South 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From South Laurel
Street east to South
Pearl Street
East Commerce
Street
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Walnut Street to
North Elm Street
Edgewood
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Martin Luther
King, Jr. Way to
Terrace Street
Edward Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Bridgeton
Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:625
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Edward Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Bridgeton
Avenue to Chestnut
Avenue
Ellis Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Martin Luther
King, Jr. Way to
Terrace Street
Elmer Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Walnut Street to
East Avenue
Elmer Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Walnut Street to
East Avenue
Ewing Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Ewing Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Fairview Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Buckshutem
Road southerly to end
Fayette Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Broad Street to
Harvard Avenue
Fayette Street East 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./Wed.
From Broad Street to
Vine Street
Fayette Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Broad Street to
Harvard Avenue
Fayette Street West 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./Thurs.
From Broad Street to
Vine Street
Fern Road North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Fern Road South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Florida Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Martin Luther
King, Jr. Way to
Buckshutem Road
Franklin Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Commerce
Street to Lake Street
Franklin Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Lake Street to
end
Franklin Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Commerce
Street to Broad Street
Franklin Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Commerce
Street to Broad Street
Frazier Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Kirby Avenue to
Vickers Street
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:626
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Frazier Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Kirby Avenue to
Vickers Avenue
Freemont Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South Avenue to
South East Avenue
Garden Road Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Pamphylia
Avenue to Russell
Avenue
Gardner Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Garfield Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South East
Avenue to Grove
Street
Gary Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Manson Avenue
to Stephenson Avenue
Gilbert Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Burlington Road
to Stephenson Avenue
Giles Road East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Cottage Avenue
to Rugby Lane
Giles Road East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Glen Drive to
Lincoln Way
Giles Road West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Cottage Avenue
to Lincoln Street
Giles Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Lincoln Way to
Lake Street
Giles Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Lincoln Way to
Lake Street
Gilmore Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Manheim
Avenue to Park
Avenue
Gilmore Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Manheim
Avenue to Park
Avenue
Glen Drive North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Giles Road to
Devonshire Place
Glen Drive South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Giles Road to
Wayne Road
Glenview Terrace Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Lincoln Street
to Cottage Avenue
Green Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Pamphylia
Avenue to Jordan
Avenue
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:627
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Grove Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South Avenue
southerly to City line
Halsford Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Bridgeton
Avenue to DuBois
Avenue
Halsford Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Bridgeton
Avenue to DuBois
Avenue
Hampton Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From West Avenue to
Water Street
Hampton Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From West Avenue to
Water Street
Harrison Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From North Street to
Morton Street
Harrison Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From North Street to
Morton Street
Harvard Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Fayette Street
to Oxford Avenue
Harvard Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Fayette Street
to Oxford Avenue
Henry Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Martin Luther
King Jr. Way to Grove
Street
Highland Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Pearl Street to
DuBois Avenue
Highland Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Pearl Street to
DuBois Avenue
High Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Penn Street to
Monroe Street
High Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Penn Street to
Monroe Street
Hill Street North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Ridge Avenue to
Cedarbrook Avenue
Hill Street South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Ridge Avenue to
Cedarbrook Avenue
Hilltop Drive North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Hilltop Drive South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Hitchner Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From West Avenue
westerly to City line
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:628
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Hitchner Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From West Avenue
westerly to City line
Holly Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Magnolia
Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Holly Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Magnolia
Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Hopewell Road North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Thompson
Street to Watson
Street
Hopewell Road South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From Thompson
Avenue to Watson
Avenue
Horton Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Pearl Street to
Bank Street
Horton Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Pearl Street to
Bank Street
Indian Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Burlington Road
to Penn Street
Indian Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Burlington Road
to Penn Street
Institute Place North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Atlantic Street
to Woodland Drive
Institute Place South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Atlantic Street
to Woodland Drive
Irving Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Cohansey Street
to Burlington Road
Irving Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Cohansey Street
to Burlington Road
James Place North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Coral Avenue to
Dare Avenue
James Place South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Coral Avenue to
Dare Avenue
Jordan Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Manson Avenue
to Stephenson Avenue
Kings Way North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Ridge Avenue to
Spring Street
Kings Way South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Ridge Avenue to
Spring Street
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:629
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Kirby Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Frazier Avenue
to West Commerce
Street Extension
Kirby Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Frazier Avenue
to West Commerce
Street Extension
Lake Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Sherman Street
to Franklin Drive
Lake Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Sherman Street
to Franklin Drive
Lakeview Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Irving Avenue to
Orchard Street
Lakeview Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Irving Avenue to
Orchard Street
Lambdin Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Garden Road
westerly to end
Lawrence Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Lincoln Street
to Lake Street
Lawrence Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Lincoln Street
to Lake Street
Liberty Road North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Liberty Road South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Lincoln Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Water Street to
Wayne Road
Lincoln Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Water Street to
Wayne Road
Lincoln Way North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Wayne Road to
Giles Road
Lincoln Way South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Giles Road to
Wayne Road
Linden Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From East Avenue to
York Street
Linden Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From East Avenue to
York Street
Logan Street East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Bertini Drive
northerly to end
Logan Street West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Bertini Drive
northerly to end
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:630
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Madison Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Pearl Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Madison Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Pearl Street to
Chestnut Avenue
Magnolia Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Magnolia Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Manheim Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Commerce
Street to Indian
Avenue
Manheim Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Commerce
Street to Indian
Avenue
Manson Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Pamphylia
Avenue to Jordan
Avenue
Marion Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Laurel Street to
South East Avenue
Marion Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Laurel Street to
South East Avenue
Marlyn Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Kirby Avenue to
West Avenue
Marlyn Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Kirby Avenue to
West Avenue
Martin Luther
King, Jr. Way
Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Florida Avenue
to South Avenue
Mather Street East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Hitchner
Avenue to Woodcrest
Avenue
Mather Street West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From Hitchner
Avenue to Woodcrest
Avenue
McCormick Place North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Bank Street
Extension west to
Orange Street
McCormick Place North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Orange Street
west to South Pearl
Street
McCormick Place North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From South Pearl
Street west to South
Laurel Street
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:631
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Mead Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Cottage Avenue
to Belmont Avenue
Mead Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Cottage Avenue
to Belmont Avenue
Mill Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From South East
Avenue to Pine Street
Mill Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From South East
Avenue to Pine Street
Monroe Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Chestnut
Avenue to Pearl Street
Monroe Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Chestnut
Avenue to Pearl Street
Morris Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South Avenue to
Grove Street
Morton Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Harrison Street
to Pearl Street
Morton Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Harrison Street
to Pearl Street
Mt. Vernon Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From North Street to
Charles Street
Mt. Vernon Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From North Street to
Charles Street
Mt. Zion Way North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Lawrence Street
to Columbus Avenue
Mt. Zion Way South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Lawrence Street
to Columbus Avenue
Mulford Court East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From DuBois Avenue
northerly to end
Mulford Court West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From DuBois Avenue
northerly to end
Mulford Drive North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Pearl Street to
Mulford Court
Mulford Drive South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Pearl Street to
Mulford Court
Myrtle Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Lakeview
Avenue westerly to
end
Myrtle Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Laurel Street to
Walnut Street
Myrtle Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Lakeview
Avenue to end
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:632
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Myrtle Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Laurel Street to
Walnut Street
New Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Fayette Street
to Suncrest Avenue
New Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Fayette Street
to Suncrest Avenue
Nichols Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Laning Street to
North Street
Nichols Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Laning Street to
North Street
Nixon Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Irving Avenue to
Orchard Street
Nixon Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Irving Avenue to
Orchard Street
North Burlington
Road
East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Commerce
Street to Indian
Avenue
North Burlington
Road
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Indian Avenue
to Rosenhayn Avenue
North Burlington
Road
West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Commerce
Street to Indian
Avenue
North Burlington
Road
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Indian Avenue
to Rosenhayn Avenue
North Drive North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Fayette Street
to Wayne Road
North Drive South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Fayette Street
to Wayne Road
North Elm Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Commerce
Street north to end
North Elm Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Commerce
Street north to end
North Laurel
Street
East 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Church Lane
north to Washington
Street
North Laurel
Street
East 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From East Commerce
Street north to
Church Lane
North Laurel
Street
East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Washington
Street to Bridgeton
Avenue
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:633
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
North Laurel
Street
West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Washington
Street to Bridgeton
Avenue
North Laurel
Street
West 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Washington
Street south to East
Commerce Street
North Laurel
Street
West 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Washington
Street south to
Obeldoble Lane
North Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Pearl Street to
Nichols Street
Northwest Drive North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From West Avenue to
the end of Northwest
Drive
Northwest Drive South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From West Avenue to
the end of Northwest
Drive
Oak Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Franklin Street
to Lawrence Street
Oak Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Franklin Street
to Lawrence Street
Orchard Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Lakeview
Avenue to Burlington
Road
Orchard Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Lakeview
Avenue to Burlington
Road
Oxford Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Harvard Avenue
to University Avenue
Oxford Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Summit Avenue
to Cottage Avenue
Oxford Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Harvard Avenue
to University Avenue
Oxford Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Summit Avenue
to Cottage Avenue
Pamphylia
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South Avenue to
South East Avenue
Pamphylia
Avenue
Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From South East
Avenue to South
Burlington Road
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:634
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Park Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Commerce
Street to Gilmore
Avenue
Park Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Commerce
Street to Gilmore
Avenue
Parker Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Walnut Street to
Church Street
Parker Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Walnut Street to
Church Street
Park Lane Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Smith Avenue to
Hitchner Avenue
Penn Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From North Laurel
Street to Indian
Avenue
Penn Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From North Laurel
Street to Indian
Avenue
Pine Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From East Commerce
Street to Mill Street
Pine Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From East Commerce
Street to Mill Street
Pleasant Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Buckshutem
Road southerly to end
Preston Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From West Avenue to
Thompson Avenue
Preston Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From West Avenue to
Thompson Avenue
Preston Avenue
Extension
North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Thompson
Avenue to Westwood
Avenue
Preston Avenue
Extension
South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From Thompson
Avenue to Westwood
Avenue
Princeton Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Oxford Street to
Atlantic Street
Princeton Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Oxford Avenue
to Atlantic Street
Purdue Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Cornell Avenue
to Cambridge Avenue
Purdue Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Cornell Avenue
to Cambridge Avenue
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:635
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Quarter Mile
Lane
Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Cottage Avenue
to Belmont Avenue
Railroad Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Irving Avenue to
Orchard Street
Railroad Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Irving Avenue to
Orchard Street
Reeves Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Rev. Matthew
Brown Way
Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South Avenue to
Grove Street
Richardson
Avenue
Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Pamphylia
Avenue to Jordan
Avenue
Ridge Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Indian Avenue
to Kings Way
Ridge Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Indian Avenue
to Kings Way
River Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South Avenue to
Grove Street
Rogers Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Rogers Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Rosenhayn
Avenue
North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Pearl Street
easterly to City line
Rosenhayn
Avenue
South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Pearl Street
easterly to City line
Rose Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Laurel Street to
Pearl Street
Rugby Lane North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Wayne Road to
Giles Road
Rugby Lane South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Wayne Road to
Giles Road
Russell Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Garden Road
westerly to end
Russell Sage Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Cambridge
Avenue to Rutgers
Avenue
Rutgers Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Atlantic Street
to Russell Sage
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:636
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Rutgers Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Atlantic Street
to Russell Sage
Sharp Avenue Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From South Avenue to
South East Avenue
Sherman Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Commerce
Street to Lake Street
Sherman Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Commerce
Street to Lake Street
Siebel Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Pearl Street to
Walnut Street
Siebel Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Pearl Street to
Walnut Street
Smith Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Woodcrest
Avenue to Park Lane
Smith Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From Woodcrest
Avenue to Park Lane
South Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Martin Luther
King, Jr. Way
southerly to City line
South Burlington
Road
Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Commerce
Street southerly to
City line
South Drive North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Fayette Street
to Wayne Road
South Drive South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Wayne Road to
Fayette Street
South East
Avenue
Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Route 49
southerly to City line
South Elm Street Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Route 49
southerly to end
South Laurel
Street
East 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From East Broad
Street north to
McCormick Place
South Laurel
Street
East 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From McCormick
Place north to East
Commerce Street
South Laurel
Street
West 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From East Commerce
Street south to East
Broad Street
South Pine Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Martin Luther
King, Jr. Way to
Baltimore Avenue
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:637
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Spring Street East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Indian Avenue
to Cedarbrook Avenue
Spring Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Spring Street West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Indian Avenue
to Cedarbrook Avenue
Spring Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Irving Avenue to
Indian Avenue
Spruce Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Martin Luther
King, Jr. Way to Sharp
Avenue
Stephenson
Avenue
Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Pamphylia
Avenue to Jordan
Avenue
Summit Avenue North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Fayette Street
to Oxford Street
Summit Avenue South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Fayette Street
to Oxford Street
Suncrest Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From New Street to
Cottage Avenue
Suncrest Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From New Street to
Cottage Avenue
Taylor Street Both 9:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m./Tues.
Entire length
Taylor Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Vine Street to
Hampton Street
Terrace Street Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Brynmawr
Avenue easterly to
end
Terrace Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Fri.
From Spruce Street to
Division Street
Theorosa Road Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Fri.
From Pamphylia
Avenue to Gilbert
Avenue
Thompson
Avenue
East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Hopewell Road
to Westwood Avenue
Thompson
Avenue
West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From Hopewell Road
to Westwood Avenue
Thompson Court North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Preston Avenue
northerly to end
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:638
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Thompson Court South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From end south to
Preston Avenue
Timber Road Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
University
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Water Street to
Fayette Street
University
Avenue
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Water Street to
Fayette Street
Vickers Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From West Commerce
Street Extension to
Frazier Avenue
Vickers Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From West Commerce
Street Extension to
Frazier Avenue
Victory Road North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Mon.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Victory Road South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Tues.
From Burlington Road
easterly to City line
Vine Street North 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./Wed.
From South Giles
Street to Atlantic
Street
Vine Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From South Giles
Street westerly to end
Vine Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Water Street
westerly to Atlantic
Street
Vine Street South 6:00 a.m. to 8:00
a.m./Thurs.
From South Giles
Street to Atlantic
Street
Vine Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From South Giles
Street westerly to end
Vine Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Water Street to
Atlantic Street
Violet Drive Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Central Avenue
northerly to end
Walnut Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From East Commerce
Street to Siebel Street
Walnut Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From East Commerce
Street to Siebel Street
Washington
Street
North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Cohansey Street
west to the Cohansey
River
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-14
347:639
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Washington
Street
North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From North Laurel
Street west to
Cohansey Street
Washington
Street
North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From North Pearl
Street west to North
Laurel Street
Washington
Street
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Pearl Street to
Bank Street
Washington
Street
South 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Cohansey Street
east to North Laurel
Street
Washington
Street
South 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From North Laurel
Street east to North
Pearl Street
Washington
Street
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Pearl Street to
Bank Street
Water Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Broad Street to
University Avenue
Watson Street Both 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Albertson
Avenue to Hopewell
Road
Wayne Road East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Cottage Avenue
to South Drive
Wayne Road East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From North Drive to
Lincoln Way
Wayne Road West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From North Drive to
South Drive
Wayne Road West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Rugby Lane to
Lincoln Way
West Avenue East 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From Burt Street
northerly to City line
West Avenue East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Hampton Street
to Burt Street
West Avenue West 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From Burt Street
northerly to City line
West Avenue West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Hampton Street
to Burt Street
West Commerce
Street
North 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From the Cohansey
River west to Mayor
Aitken Drive
West Commerce
Street
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From West Avenue to
Atlantic Street
§ 350-14 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-14
347:640
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
West Commerce
Street
South 2:00 a.m. to 6:00
a.m./Mon. through
Sat.
From Atlantic Street
east to the Cohansey
River
West Commerce
Street
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From West Avenue to
Atlantic Street
West Commerce
Street
South 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./school days
From West Avenue to
Lawrence Street
West Commerce
Street Extension
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From West Avenue to
Shiloh Pike (Route 49)
West Commerce
Street Extension
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From West Avenue to
Shiloh Pike
West Lincoln
Street
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Giles Road to
Glenview Terrace
West Lincoln
Street
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Giles Road to
Glenview Terrace
West Park Drive North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From West Avenue
westerly to City line
West Park Drive South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From West Avenue
westerly to City line
Westwood Avenue North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From West Avenue to
Westwood Place
Westwood Avenue South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From West Avenue to
Westwood Place
Woodcrest
Avenue
North 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Wed.
From West Avenue
westerly to City line
Woodcrest
Avenue
South 1:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m./Thurs.
From West Avenue
westerly to City line
Woodland Drive North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Wed.
From Institute Place
to Atlantic Street
Woodland Drive South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Thurs.
From Atlantic Street
to Institute Place
Wood Street North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From East Avenue to
York Street
Wood Street South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From East Avenue to
York Street
York Street East 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Mon.
From Linden Street to
Irving Avenue
York Street West 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon/Tues.
From Linden Street to
Irving Avenue
§ 350-15. Parking by permit.
§ 350-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-15
347:641
A. Permit required. With certain limited exceptions as set forth hereafter,
no vehicle shall be parked along the streets and roadways within the
City of Bridgeton on attached Schedule A78 unless the vehicle displays a
proper parking permit issued by the Department of Police of the City of
Bridgeton.
B. Exceptions. The following vehicles shall be excepted from displaying a
parking permit while parked on a street or roadway on Schedule A:79
(1) Contractor, service and delivery vehicles, bearing the name and
address of a commercial business during the time that services are
being rendered;
(2) City, emergency, public service, telephone or public utility vehicles
during the time services are rendered on that street; or
(3) Vehicle displaying a handicapped placard issued by the Department
of Police.
C. Permits intended for residents residing on street or commercial
enterprises operating on street. Parking permit(s) shall be issued by the
Department of Police to:
(1) A resident owning or operating a vehicle on a regular basis on
streets or roadways on Schedule A;80 or
(2) A commercial enterprise operating legally and with its street
address on a street or roadway on Schedule A.81
D. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE — A business entity operating legally in
the City of Bridgeton and having its street address on a roadway or
street on Schedule A,82 as provided by proof of such address acceptable
to the City of Bridgeton.
RESIDENT — A person who is dwelling permanently or continuously
at an address on the street for which the resident seeks a parking
permit, as provided by proof of such residency acceptable to the City of
Bridgeton. If a tenant, the tenancy shall be registered with the City of
Bridgeton.
E. Criteria for proving residency; rules and regulations. The Business
Administrator and the Chief of the Police Division shall develop criteria
for proving residency, shall develop rules and regulations and
appropriate forms to implement the Parking Permit Program, all of
78.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
79.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
80.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
81.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
82.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
§ 350-15 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-15
347:642
which shall be known and published as the "Bridgeton Parking Permit
Program," and shall be effective upon the filing with the Clerk of the
City of Bridgeton, the Business Administrator and the Department of
Police. Said criteria, rules, regulations and forms may be amended from
time to time by the Director of Public Safety in consultation with the
Chief of the Police Division. Such amended criteria, rules, regulations
and forms shall be effective upon filing with the Clerk of the City of
Bridgeton, with the Business Administrator and with the Department
of Police of the City of Bridgeton and upon publication of the changes
to the Bridgeton Parking Permit Program in a local newspaper by the
Clerk of the City of Bridgeton.
F. Issuance of residential parking permits. Upon the approval of a parking
permit application by the Department of Police, the resident of the City
of Bridgeton shall be entitled to:
(1) A residential parking permit for each vehicle which is owned or
leased by the resident or which is owned by the resident's employer
and used by the resident;
(2) Two packs of five visitor parking permits on an annual basis, which
visitor parking permit is a daily permit for on-street parking for
streets and roadways on Schedule A;83
(3) Supplemental parking permits, as justified for special situations or
conditions, such as vehicles used by visiting medical support
personnel or vehicles used by members of a resident's family
temporarily residing with the resident due to educational or
hardship needs or as further promulgated in the Bridgeton Parking
Permit Program;
(4) A sixty-day temporary nonrenewable permit for new residents.
G. Issuance of commercial parking permits. Upon the approval of the
Department of Police of a parking permit application by a commercial
enterprise, the commercial enterprise shall be entitled to two
commercial parking permits.
H. Acceptance or denial of application; appeals. The Department of Police,
within two business days of the receipt of a completed application, shall
either accept the application and issue the parking permit or deny the
application. If the application is denied, the Department shall provide a
written explanation together with a right of appeal; any decision of the
Department of Police may be appealed in writing to the Business
Administrator or other appropriate authority under the Municipal Code
of the City of Bridgeton, who shall have a period of two business days to
respond.
I. Suspension of enforcement. The Chief of Police may suspend for 24
hours or less the enforcement of on-street parking on the streets and
83.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
§ 350-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-15
347:643
roads on Schedule A84 upon the application by a resident of said street
or roadway setting forth the reason for such suspension, such as the
resident hosting a special event on the street or roadway.
J. Terms of permits.
(1) A residential parking permit as established herein shall be
permanent as long as the resident resides at the address on the
application and all the information on the application is truthful;
(2) Renewal of a residential parking permit with the Department of
Police of the City of Bridgeton shall be required when any
information on the application is inaccurate;
(3) Visiting parking permits shall be obtained on an annual basis
beginning January 1 of each year;
(4) A supplemental parking permit and a commercial parking permit
shall be renewed annually on or before its anniversary date or
when any information on the application is inaccurate.
K. Return of permits. When a resident or commercial enterprise no longer
resides or has an address on the street or roadway on Schedule A,85
such resident or commercial enterprise shall inform and return all
parking permits issued to the Department of Police.
L. Fees. The fees for the parking permits as established herein are as
follows:
(1) Residential parking permit: no charge.
(2) Visitor parking permit: no charge.
(3) Supplemental parking permit: no charge.
(4) Commercial parking permit: no charge.
(5) Replacement fees: $5 each permit when replacing a lost permit or
permit whose information is inaccurate.
M. Display of permit on vehicles. The parking permits as established
herein are properly displayed when the original parking permit is
affixed to the inside of the driver's side rear window and visible from
the outside of the vehicle.
N. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any vehicle parked on a street or roadway on Schedule A86 without
a valid parking permit issued by the Department of Police shall be
84.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
85.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
86.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
§ 350-15 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-15
347:644
§ 350-16. Parking of certain tractor-trailers, trucks, trailers and
vehicles.
subject to being towed and/or impounded by the Department of
Police.
(2) It shall be a violation of the parking permit program to share,
borrow or loan parking permits or to copy or otherwise duplicate
said parking permits or to utilize a parking permit when a resident
no longer dwells or resides on a street or roadway on Schedule A87
or when a commercial enterprise no longer maintains an address
on the street or roadway on Schedule A.
(3) In addition to having a vehicle towed and/or impounded, violations
of the parking permit program as set forth herein shall be
punishable as follows:
(a) First offense: $50.
(b) Second offense: $250.
(c) Third or more offense: $1,000.
(4) Furnishing of false information or documentation to the City of
Bridgeton in order to obtain a parking permit as set forth herein
shall be punishable as provided in the Code of the City of
Bridgeton, Chapter 1, Article III, General Penalty.
O. Schedule A, Street Listing Permit Required.
Name of Street Location
Oak Street From Lawrence Street to Franklin Street
Note:
Additional City streets may be added to this listing, based upon
resident request or public safety.
A. Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this section imposing a
time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe
other more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 or any
other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided.
B. Repairing vehicle parked on street. No person, persons, firm,
partnership, corporation or entity shall at any hour of the day or night
make mechanical repairs of any nature or description whatsoever to
any motor vehicle while said motor vehicle is parked or standing on any
public street, avenue, road or highway within the City limits of the City
of Bridgeton.
87.Editor's Note: See § 350-15O.
§ 350-15 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-16
347:645
C. Parking restrictions; exceptions.
(1) The parking of the following vehicles shall not be permitted on any
street or highway within the City of Bridgeton nor within or upon
any City-owned or operated parking facility.
(a) All vehicles having three or more axles.
(b) Class A-1 trucks and trailers, whether loaded or unloaded.
(c) Buses and other commercial vehicles with measurements
greater than any one of the following:
[1] Twenty feet in length.
[2] Seven feet in width, excluding side view mirrors.
[3] Eight feet in height, excluding radio antenna.
(d) All cabs or tractors capable of pulling a trailer.
(e) Commercial tow trucks.
(f) Trailers intended or used for dwelling space, offices, storage or
any other residential, commercial or industrial purposes.
(g) Trailers, boat trailers, camp cars, campers or equivalent
vehicles, whether self-propelled or otherwise, used or intended
for use as a conveyance upon public streets or highways and
whether or not designed, constructed, reconstructed or added
to by means of accessories, sheds or tents in such manner as to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place
for one or more persons or having no foundation other than
wheels, jacks or skirting so arranged to be integral with or
portable by said trailer, boat trailer, camp car, camper or
equivalent vehicle.
(h) All vehicles having a registered gross weight of four tons or
greater.
(2) The foregoing parking restrictions shall not be applicable to the
following:
(a) Vehicles in the course of making deliveries requested by an
adjacent resident.
(b) Vehicles used in conjunction with the rendering of necessary
services requested by an adjacent resident during such times
as may be necessary during the time such services are actually
being rendered.
(c) Vehicles utilized for maintenance or repair of public utilities or
other construction within the public right-of-way during such
§ 350-16 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-16
347:646
§ 350-17. Angle parking.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated for
angle parking at an angle so indicated:
Name of Street Side Angle Location
(Reserved)
times as said maintenance, repairs or construction are in
progress.
(d) Commercial school buses during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m. Monday through Friday.
(e) Commercial tow trucks designated as on-call and listed on the
City of Bridgeton list of approved towing companies.
D. Parking prohibited at all times. No person shall park a vehicle at any
time upon any of the streets or locations set forth in this Code which are
otherwise prohibited according to the terms thereof.
E. Violations and penalties. Any person violating any provision of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not greater than $500 for each
offense or subsequent offense or a period of incarceration not to exceed
10 days, or both. Each day that a violation shall continue shall be
considered as a separate offense.
§ 350-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-17
347:647

ARTICLE III
Special Purpose Parking Zones
§ 350-18. Law Enforcement Vehicle Parking Zones.
The following locations are hereby designated as Law Enforcement Vehicle
Parking Zones. No person shall park a vehicle, other than a marked law
enforcement vehicle, in the following locations during the times indicated.
A violation of this section will be considered a violation of LO3.
Name of
Street Side Location
Fayette Street West From a point 25 feet south of the gutterline of
Route 49 to a point 275 feet south therefrom
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:30
p.m. on weekdays, except weekdays when the
Cumberland County Courthouse is closed
§ 350-19. Bus stops.
The following locations are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy any of said locations between the hours indicated. A
violation of this section will be considered a violation of LO7.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 350-20. Taxi stands.
The following locations are hereby designated as taxi stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations during the
times indicated. A violation of this section will be considered a violation of
LO5.
Street Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 350-21. Hospital discharge and pickup zones.
A. There is hereby established a parking zone adjacent to the Bridgeton
Hospital which shall be used for the pickup and discharge of patients,
said zone being more fully described as follows:
Street Side Location
Magnolia
Avenue
East From a point 225 feet north of Irving
Avenue to a point 255 north therefrom
B. No vehicle shall be parked in the aforesaid zone for the pickup and
discharge of patients except those vehicles being used for the pickup of
§ 350-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-21
347:649
§ 350-22. Bank zones.
The following bank zones are hereby established within the Central
Business District of the City of Bridgeton. Bank zones shall be used solely
for the conducting of business in banks directly adjacent to said bank zones.
A violation of this section will be considered a violation of LO1.
Name of Street Time Limit Location
(Reserved)
patients being discharged from said hospital. Said vehicles shall be
identified by a slip which shall be issued by the hospital and attached to
said vehicle. The hospital shall retrieve the slip from the vehicle upon
completion of the discharge procedures so the slip will not be used
illegally. A violation of this section will be considered a violation of LO4.
§ 350-21 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-22
347:650
ARTICLE IV
Traffic Regulations
§ 350-23. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Vehicles over the gross vehicle weight indicated are hereby excluded from
the streets or parts of streets described below except for the pickup and
delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Weight Limits
(Reserved)
§ 350-24. One-way streets.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Side/Parking
Permitted
Academy Street West Between Giles
Street and
Lawrence Street
Regulated by
§§ 350-11 and
350-14
Bank Street South Between Siebel
Street and
Commerce Street
Both
Cedar Dell
Avenue
East Between Grove
Street and South
Avenue
Both
Cedar Street East Between Walnut
Street and Church
Street
Both
Cedar Street West Between Bank
Street and Walnut
Street
None
Chestnut Avenue North Between Laurel
Street and Madison
Avenue
None
Church Lane West Between Pearl
Street and Laurel
Street
North
Cohansey Street
[Added
6-3-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
North Between Irving
Avenue and North
Street
Both
§ 350-23 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-24
347:651
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Side/Parking
Permitted
Cohansey Street North Between Laning
Street and North
Street
Both
Cohansey Street North Between West
Commerce Street
and Washington
Street
Regulated
§ 350-13
Crane Street
[Added
6-23-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-16]
South Between Broad
Street (Rt. 49) and
Academy Street
None
Eagle Street East Between South
Avenue and Grove
Street
Both
Garfield Avenue West Between South
Avenue and Grove
Street
Both
Grove Street South Between Glass
Street and City line
West
Marion Street
[Added
6-3-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
West Between Bank
Street and Church
Street
Both
Marion Street West Between Pearl
Street and Laurel
Street
North
Morris Avenue East Between South
Avenue and Grove
Street
Both
Myrtle Street West From Pearl Street
to Laurel Street
None
Oak Street West Between Lawrence
Street and Franklin
Street
North
Parker Street
[Added
6-3-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-10]
East Between Walnut
Street and Church
Street
North
Penn Street West Between Pearl
Street and Laurel
Street
Both
§ 350-24 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-24
347:652
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
Side/Parking
Permitted
River Street East Between Grove
Street and South
Avenue
Both
Rose Street West Between Pearl
Street and Laurel
Street
North
South Avenue North Between the City
line and South Pearl
Street
East
Taylor Street South From Vine Street to
Hampton Street
Both
Union Street West From North Laurel
Street to Cohansey
Street
None
Walnut Street North Between Commerce
Street and Irving
Avenue
Both
§ 350-25. Through streets.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following streets or
parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Albertson Avenue Between West Avenue and the Hopewell Township -
City of Bridgeton corporate line
Andrews Avenue From South Burlington Road easterly to Davis Street
Atlantic Street Between Harvard Avenue and Vine Street
Baltimore Avenue Between South Avenue and South East Avenue
Bank Street Between East Commerce Street and Irving Avenue
Bank Street Between Irving Avenue and North Pearl Street
Belmont Avenue Between Fayette Street and Quarter Mile Lane
Belmont Avenue Between Water Street and Atlantic Avenue
Chestnut Street Between Bridgeton Avenue and the northerly
terminus of Chestnut Street
Chestnut Street Between North Laurel Street and Bridgeton Avenue
Church Street Between East Commerce Street and Irving Avenue
Cohansey Street Between East Commerce Street and Washington
Street
§ 350-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-25
347:653
Name of Street Limits
Cohansey Street Between Washington Street and North Street
Coral Avenue Between Irving Avenue and Indian Avenue
Cottage Avenue Between Fayette Street and Quarter Mile Lane
East Avenue Between East Commerce Street and Irving Avenue
East-West
Commerce
Between Route 49 and North Pearl Street (N.J. Route
77)
East-West
Commerce
Between North Laurel Street and West Avenue
Edwards Avenue Between Bridgeton Avenue and Chestnut Avenue
Ewing Street Between Irving Avenue and Indian Avenue
Gardener Avenue From South Burlington Road easterly to Davis Street
Garden Road From Pamphylia Avenue to Russell Avenue
Gary Street From Stephenson Avenue to Manson Avenue
Hampton Street Between Fayette Street and the westerly terminus of
Hampton Street
Hitchner Avenue Between West Avenue and the Hopewell Township -
City of Bridgeton corporate line
Jordan Avenue Between South Burlington Road and the westerly
terminus of Jordan Avenue
Lakeview Avenue Between Irving Avenue and Orchard Street
Lincoln Street Between Fayette Street and Glenview Terrace
Madison Street Between Chestnut Avenue and North Pearl Street
(N.J. Route 77)
Magnolia Avenue Between Irving Avenue and Indian Avenue
Martin Luther King,
Jr. Way
Between South Avenue and South East Avenue
Martin Luther King,
Jr. Way
Between South East Avenue and Florida Avenue
Monroe Street Between Chestnut Avenue and North Pearl Street
(N.J. Route 77)
New Street Between Fayette Street and Suncrest Avenue
North Laurel Between Broad Street (Route 49) and the City of
Bridgeton - Upper Deerfield Township corporate line
North Street Between North Laurel Street and Nichols Street
North Street Between North Pearl Street and North Laurel Street
Oxford Street Between Cornell Avenue and University Avenue
Pamphylia Avenue From South Burlington Road westerly to South East
Avenue
§ 350-25 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-25
347:654
Name of Street Limits
Pleasant Avenue From Buckshutem Road to the dead end
Rogers Avenue Between Irving Avenue and Indian Avenue
Sharp Avenue Between South Avenue and South East Avenue
Stephenson Avenue Between Pamphylia Avenue and Jordan Avenue
Summit Avenue Between Atlantic Avenue and Oxford Street
Vine Street Between Fayette Street and West Avenue
Walnut Street Between East Commerce Street and Irving Avenue
Water Street Between Rutgers Avenue and Broad Street (Route
49)
Wayne Road Between Cottage Avenue and Lincoln Street
§ 350-26. Stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following intersections
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Academy Street and Crane Street Crane Street
Atlantic Street and Harvard
Avenue
Atlantic Street
Bank Street and Commerce Street Bank Street
Bank Street and Route 49 Bank Street
Budd Street and Burt Street Burt Street
Cedarbrook Avenue and Orchard
Street
Orchard Street
Dare Avenue and Gilmore Avenue Dare Avenue
Giles Road and Glen Drive Glen Drive
Giles Road and Rugby Lane Rugby Lane
Giles Street and Oak Street Oak Street
Glass Street and South Laurel
Street
South Laurel Street
Henry Street and Pine Street Pine Street
Lake Street and Giles Street Giles Street
Mather Street and Woodcrest
Avenue
Mather Street
Oxford Street and Summit Avenue Oxford Street
Smith Avenue and Park Lane Park Lane
§ 350-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-26
347:655
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Smith Avenue and Woodcrest
Avenue
Smith Avenue
South Laurel Street and Mulberry
Street
Mulberry Street
South Lawrence Street and
Academy Street
Academy Street
South Lawrence Street and Mt.
Zion Way
Mt. Zion Way
South Lawrence Street and Oak
Street
Oak Street
Spring Street and Orchard Street Orchard Street
Thompson Avenue and Preston
Avenue
Preston Avenue
University Avenue and Oxford
Street
Oxford Street
University Avenue and Water
Street
University Avenue
West Avenue and Vine Street Vine Street
West Commerce Street Extension
and Kirby Avenue
Kirby Avenue
§ 350-27. Multi-way stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following intersections
are designated as multi-way stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed
as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Bank Street, Penn Street and
Indian Avenue
Bank Street, Penn Street and Indian
Avenue
Fayette Street and Vine
Street
Fayette Street and Vine Avenue
§ 350-28. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the following intersections
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided herein.
Intersection Yield Sign(s) On
(Reserved)
§ 350-26 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-29
347:656
§ 350-29. Turn prohibitions.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated at the locations listed
below and only in the manner described:
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Bridgeton Municipal
Parking Lot and Broad
Street
Left Onto Broad Street
West Avenue U-turn Between West Commerce Street
Extension and Hitchner Avenue
§ 350-30. No turn on red.
No person shall make a turn on the red signal at any of the following
locations:
Intersection
Direction of
Travel Prohibited Turn on Red
East Commerce Street
and Laurel Street
All Right
§ 350-31. Lane use reservations.
The following locations are designated as lane use reservations, and traffic
shall move only as indicated:
Intersection or Location Movement
Cohansey Street and Washington Street,
along the northbound approach, left lane, of
Cohansey Street
Left turn only
Commerce Street and Laurel Street, along
the easterly approach, on the inside lane, of
East Commerce Street
Left turn only
Commerce Street and Laurel Street, along
the westerly approach, on the inside lane, of
East Commerce Street
Left turn only
Commerce Street and Laurel Street, along
the northerly approach, on the inside lane,
of North Laurel Street
Left turn only
Commerce Street and Laurel Street, along
the southerly approach, on the inside lane,
of South Laurel Street
Left turn only
Washington Street and Laurel Street, along
the southerly approach, on the inside lane,
of Laurel Street
Left turn only
§ 350-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-31
347:657
Intersection or Location Movement
Washington Street and Laurel Street, along
the northerly approach, on the inside lane,
of North Laurel Street
Left turn only
Washington Street and Laurel Street, along
the easterly approach, on the inside lane, of
Washington Street
Left turn only
Washington Street and Laurel Street, along
the westerly approach, on the inside lane, of
Washington Street
Left turn only
§ 350-32. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Description Direction
Atlantic Street From Harvard Street to
Commerce Street
Both
Cherry Street From South East Avenue
to school driveway parking
lot
Both
Florida Avenue From Buckshutem Road to
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Way
Both
Frazier Avenue Entire length Both
Glass Street From South Laurel Street
to South Pearl Street
Both
Irving Avenue Entire length Both
Kirby Avenue Entire length Both
Laurel Street Between Glass Street to
City limits
Both
Lincoln Street From Wayne Road to
Water Street
Both
Manheim Avenue From Route 49 to Indian
Avenue
Both
Martin Luther
King, Jr. Way
From Florida Avenue to
Henry Street
Both
Mary Elmer Drive From Beebe Run Road to
City limits
Both
Mayor Aitken
Drive
From West Park Drive to
West Commerce Street
Both
West Avenue/
Beebe Run Road
From Hampton Street to
City limits
Both
§ 350-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-32
347:658
ARTICLE V
Speed Limits
§ 350-33. Speed limits established.
The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the following streets
or parts of streets are hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the
above-designated speed limits.
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Description
Burlington Road 35 From Irving Avenue to Rosenhayn
Avenue
Burlington Road 40 From Route 49 to Irving Avenue
Burlington Road 35 From Route 49 south to the
boundary line between the City of
Bridgeton and the Township of
Fairfield
Fayette Street 40 From the City line to Summit
Avenue
Fayette Street 30 From Summit Avenue to Vine Street
Fayette Street 25 From Vine Street to Route 49
Grove Street 40 From a point 250 feet south of
Henry Street to the City line
Grove Street 30 From South Pearl Street to a point
250 feet south of Henry Street
Indian Avenue 35 Between Bank Street and Burlington
Road
Irving Avenue 40 From Burlington Road to the
easterly Bridgeton line
Irving Avenue 25 From Cohansey Street to Manheim
Avenue
Irving Avenue 35 From Manheim Avenue to
Burlington Road
Mayor Aitken
Drive
25 From Commerce Street to a point
250 feet north of Washington Street
Mayor Aitken
Drive
20 From a point 220 feet south of
Scholastic Drive to a point 1,150
feet south of West Park Drive from
May 1 until October 31
Mayor Aitken
Drive
30 From a point 250 feet north of
Washington Street to West Park
Drive
§ 350-33 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-33
347:659
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Description
Rosenhayn
Avenue
35 From State Highway Route 77 to the
Upper Deerfield Township/City line
South Avenue 40 From the City line to Sharp Street
South Avenue 25 From Henry Street to South Pearl
Street
South Avenue 30 From Pamphylia Avenue to Henry
Street
South Avenue 35 From Sharp Street to Pamphylia
Avenue
West Avenue 40 Between Hitchner Avenue and the
northern boundary of the City limits
West Avenue 35 Between Route 49 and Hitchner
Avenue
§ 350-34. School zones.
Speed limits for school zones are hereby established as follows, and are in
effect during recess or while children are going to or leaving school during
opening or closing hours.
Name of Street/Zone
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Bridgeton High School
Zone
25
Indian Avenue School Zone 25
West Avenue School Zone 25
§ 350-33 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-34
347:660
ARTICLE VI
Pedestrian Control
§ 350-35. Midblock crosswalks.
The following locations are hereby established as midblock crosswalks:
Name of Street Location
Mayor Aitken Drive [Added
4-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-08]
The bridge over Sunset Lake Raceway on
Mayor Aitken Drive, Cumberland County
Bridge No. 0600-023, between
Washington Street and Scholastic Drive
§ 350-36. Crosswalks for older and walking-impaired persons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.1b, the following locations are hereby
established as crosswalks for older and walking-impaired persons:
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 350-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-36
347:661

ARTICLE VII
Parking for the Handicapped
§ 350-37. Residential handicapped parking permits.
A. Pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, 39:4-197.6 and
39:4-197.7, restricted parking zones in front of residences occupied by
handicapped persons are hereby established subject to the provisions
of Subsections B, C, D, E and F.
B. Pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7, a fee of $25 is hereby
established for the initial issuance of a permit designating a residential
handicap parking zone. The initial permit shall be valid for a period
from the date of issuance until May 31 of the year following the year
that the permit was issued. An annual fee of $10 is hereby established
for the renewal of a permit.
C. The Chief of Police or his designee shall approve and retain a list of all
approved handicapped parking spaces for private residences. A
notification letter will be sent at least 30 days prior to the expiration of
the assigned permit. The City will remove any sign where a permit has
not been renewed by July 1.
D. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6 and 39:4-197.7, a permit establishing a
restricted parking zone pursuant to Subsections A and B will only be
issued to persons or immediate family members of a handicapped
person who:
(1) Hold a current New Jersey driver's license;
(2) Have a motor vehicle equipped for its safe operation as the Director
of the Division of Motor Vehicles may deem necessary;
(3) Can prove ownership and operation of the motor vehicle;
(4) Can prove residency at the location where the restricted parking
zone is to be established; and
(5) Can prove the unavailability of private, off-the-street parking space.
E. Pursuant to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7, the permit
provided for in Subsection C shall be 5 1/2 inches by 8 1/2 inches in
size, shall bear an appropriate certificate of authenticity and shall be
displayed prominently within the vehicle when it is parked so as to be
seen from the middle of the street.
F. Notice to the public of a restricted residential parking zone shall be
effected by the placing of a sign in accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 by
the City of Bridgeton at the place where a permit provided for in
Subsections C and D has been issued authorizing the restricted parking
zone.
§ 350-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-37
347:663
§ 350-38. Handicapped parking on streets.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following street
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park
in these spaces. A violation of this section will be considered a violation of
LO16.
Name of Street Number of Spaces Location
East Commerce
Street
1 South side of East Commerce
Street from 104 feet east to 124
feet east of the easterly curbline
of Bank Street
East Commerce
Street
1 North side of East Commerce
Street from 56 feet east to 34
feet east of the easterly curbline
of Bank Street
Magnolia Avenue 5 West side of Magnolia Avenue
from 255 feet north to 365 feet
north of the northerly curbline of
Indian Avenue
Washington Street 1 South side of Washington Street
134 feet east to 154 feet east of
the easterly curbline of
Cohansey Street
§ 350-39. Handicapped parking on streets for private residences.
See § 350-37H.
G. No restricted parking zone shall be established in a location where
parking is otherwise prohibited or where it would cause interference
with the normal flow of traffic.
H. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following
on-street locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces in
front of private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards or plates or placards by the Division of Motor
Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other
person shall be permitted in these spaces. A violation of this section will
be considered a violation of LO4:
Name of Street Location Permit Number
A list of all active spaces will be kept by the Chief of Police or his
designee
§ 350-37 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-40
347:664
§ 350-40. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots and
Board of Education property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following offstreet
parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards by the Motor
Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police.
No other person shall be permitted to park in these areas. A violation of this
section will be considered a violation of LO4:
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Bridgeton Hall of Fame Parking
Lot
3 As Marked
Bridgeton Municipal Police and
Court Complex
5 As Marked
Bridgeton Municipal Water
Department Lot
1 As Marked
Cohansey Street Municipal
Parking Lot
1 As Marked
Cohanzick Zoo Municipal Parking
Lot
3 As Marked
Sunset Lake Recreation Area
Parking Lot
2 As Marked
Riverfront Municipal Parking Lot 2 As Marked
§ 350-41. Handicapped parking on private property open to the
public and to which the public is invited (retail business).
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 350-42. Handicapped parking on all other private property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
§ 350-40 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-42
347:665
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 350-43. Handicapped parking in municipal parks.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 350-44. Signs and pavement markings; installation and
maintenance.
The owners of the premises referred to in §§ 350-39, 350-40 and 350-41
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the municipality. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration of same.
§ 350-42 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-44
347:666
ARTICLE VIII
Traffic and Parking Control on Public and Private Property
§ 350-45. Municipal property and Board of Education property.
In accordance with the provisions N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following municipal
and Board of Education property shall have the movement of traffic
controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate or
park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 350-46. Private property open to public and to which public is
invited (retail business).
§ 350-47. All other private property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below:
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
A. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, on the
following private property, which is open to the public and to which the
public is invited, the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the
regulations listed herein. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in
violation of the following regulations.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
B. The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The cost of signs and installations
shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The owner
shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or
expense to the municipality.
C. The penalty for a violation and conviction of this section shall be not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by a period of community
service not to exceed 90 days.
§ 350-45 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-48
347:667
§ 350-48. Municipal parks.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below:
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 350-49. Signs and pavement markings; installation and
maintenance.
The owners of the premises referred to in §§ 350-45 and 350-46 above
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings as required, which
signage and markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. The cost for the procurement and installation of
signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the owner
of said property. The owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition
at no cost or expense to the municipality. The owner shall be responsible for
the repair and restoration or replacement of same.
§ 350-48 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-49
347:668
ARTICLE IX
Traffic Controls for Street and Highway Construction and
Maintenance Operations
§ 350-50. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways.
The City Council finds and declares that problems of traffic control occur
when traffic must be moved through or around street construction,
maintenance operations and utility work, above or below the ground, which
requires blocking the street and obstructing the normal flow of traffic, and
that such obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly
controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety, peace and
welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations directed to
secure the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through and around
construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work
forces performing these operations. The City Council does hereby adopt
the current Manual on Uniform Control Devices for Streets and Highways
hereafter known as the "MUTCD," except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction, maintenance
operations or utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor or utility who fails to comply with the provisions of the MUTCD
while performing such work is in violation of this article.
§ 350-51. Preconstruction meetings.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or utility (in the
case of a public utility as required under the public utility agreement,
Section 16:25-9.2) wishing to conduct work on, under or above the street
to contact the Police Department of the municipality in order to arrange a
preconstruction meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction or work. Any person, contractor or
utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work or
whose plans are not approved by the Police Department of the municipality
is in violation of this article.
§ 350-52. Emergencies and hazardous conditions.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide at least two emergency
contact telephone numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at
the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If, for
any reason, emergency contact cannot be made, or if the emergency contact
person does not respond to a call from the Police Department to correct
such hazardous condition, the municipality may respond to correct the
hazardous condition(s). The reasonable fees for such emergency services
by the municipality shall be charged to the person, contractor or utility
responsible for the condition.
§ 350-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-53
347:669
§ 350-53. Hours of operation; exceptions.
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work
on any roadway in the municipality before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m. This time limit may be adjusted by the officer in charge of the
municipal Police Department to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m. If it is determined by the officer in charge that the construction
or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would
substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall
then be permitted only between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 350-54. Road closings or detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the municipal Police Department.
§ 350-55. Traffic directors.
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the municipal Police Department that they are
necessary to provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 350-56. Stop work.
The municipal Police Department shall have the authority to stop work,
including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within
the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other related
work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this article.
§ 350-57. Site preparation.
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or equipment are
to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area until all construction signs,
lights, devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 350-58. Violations and penalties.
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days; for a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a
fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which violation occurs or continues.
§ 350-53 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-58
347:670
ARTICLE X
Engine Braking
[Added 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-32]
§ 350-59. Prohibition on engine braking.
A. Definition. As used in this article, the following term shall have the
meaning indicated:
ENGINE BRAKING — The use or operation of any mechanical exhaust
device designed to aid in the braking, decompression or deceleration
of any motor vehicle which results in the excessive, loud, unusual or
explosive noise from such vehicle.
B. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to
use or operate or cause to be used or operated, at any time on Martin
Luther King Jr. Way and/or Baltimore Avenue within the City of
Bridgeton, any mechanical exhaust or decompression device which
results in the practice known as "engine braking."
C. Exceptions.
(1) The provisions of this article shall not apply to engine braking
where necessary for the protection of persons and/or property
which cannot be avoided by the application of an alternate braking
system. Noise caused by the application of engine compression
brakes, otherwise known as "engine-braking," which is effectively
muffled or if the application is necessary for the health, safety and
welfare of the community is exempt from the provisions of this
article.
(2) Sounds created by emergency equipment for emergency purposes
are also exempt.
D. Posting of signs. The City of Bridgeton is hereby authorized to post at
reasonable locations within the City of Bridgeton on Martin Luther King
Jr. Way and Baltimore Avenue signs indicating the prohibition of engine
braking.
E. Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided
by New Jersey Statute, any person convicted of a violation of this article
shall be punished for a first conviction thereof by a fine of not more than
$100 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 10 days or by both
such fine and imprisonment; for a second such conviction, such person
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200 or by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 20 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment; and upon the third or any subsequent conviction, such
person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
§ 350-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-59
347:671
F. Severability. Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence,
clause or phrase of this article, or its application to a specific person or
set of circumstances, be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any
reason, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of this article, or its application to any other person or set of
circumstances.
G. When effective. This article shall take effect upon final passage and
publication in accordance with the law but not before approval has
been received from the Commissioner, Department of Transportation.
§ 350-59 BRIDGETON CODE § 350-59
347:672
Chapter 360
WATER AND SEWER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Water and sewer fees and charges — See Ch.
149, Art. II.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 167.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 307.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 311.
Zoning — See Ch. 370.
§ 350-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 350-59
347:673

ARTICLE I
Water Supply Facility
§ 360-1. Establishment.
§ 360-2. Acquisition, construction or operation of water supply
facilities.
§ 360-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONDS — Bond anticipation notes or bonds issued in accordance with the
Local Bond Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq.
LOCAL UNIT — A county or municipality and shall specifically mean the
"City of Bridgeton" where appropriate.
§ 360-4. Powers of City.
The City of Bridgeton in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:31-4 is authorized and
empowered:
A. In order to assure the public health, safety and welfare of its residents,
the City of Bridgeton shall acquire, construct, maintain, operate or
improve facilities for the accumulation, supply or distribution of water,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:31-1 et seq.
B. The Division of Water and Sewer shall be responsible for the
maintenance, operation and construction of the water supply facility,
for the provision of water services and for the supply and distribution of
water. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-04]
A. The City of Bridgeton shall acquire, construct or operate a water supply
facility pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:31-1 et seq.
B. The City of Bridgeton may acquire, construct or operate a water supply
facility by itself or in combination with one or more local units, a private
water company subject to regulation by the Board of Public Utilities as
a public utility, or the state, upon the adoption of an ordinance or
resolution determining that the City's public health, safety or welfare
can be best assured by such acquisition, construction or operation.
C. No water supply facility may be acquired, constructed or operated until
all necessary permits and approvals have been received from the
appropriate state agency.
A. Alone or in combination with another local unit, private water company
or the state, to acquire, construct, improve, extend, enlarge or
reconstruct and finance water supply facilities, and to operate, manage
§ 360-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-4
347:675
§ 360-5. Surveys, maps and other costs; reimbursement from bond
funds.
and control all or part of these facilities and all properties relating
thereto;
B. To issue bonds of the local unit or units to pay all or part of the cost of
the water supply facilities;
C. To receive and accept from the federal or state government, or any
agency or instrumentality thereof, grants or loans for, or in aid of, the
planning, purchase, construction, improvement, extension,
enlargement or reconstruction, or financing of water supply facilities,
and to receive and accept from any source contributions or money,
property, labor or other things of value to be held, used and applied only
for the purposes for which the grants or loans and contributions are
made;
D. To acquire in the name of the City, by gift, purchase, or by the exercise
of the right of eminent domain, such lands and rights and interests
therein, including lands under water and riparian rights, and such
personal property as may be deemed necessary for acquisition,
construction, improvement, extension, enlargement or reconstruction,
or for the efficient operation of any facilities acquired or constructed
under the provisions of this act and to hold and dispose of all real and
personal property so acquired;
E. To make and enter into all contracts and agreements necessary or
incidental to the performance of the City's duties and the execution of
powers authorized under this act, and to employ consulting and other
engineers, superintendents, managers, attorneys, financial or other
consultants or experts, and such other employees and agents as may be
deemed necessary, and to fix their compensation;
F. Subject to the provisions and restrictions set forth in the ordinance or
resolution authorizing or securing any bonds issued under the
provisions of this act, to enter into contracts with the federal or state
government, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or with any other
local unit, private corporation, copartnership, association or individual
providing for, or relating to, water supply, which contracts may provide
for the furnishing of water supply services either by or to the local unit
or units, or the joint construction or operation of water supply facilities;
G. To fix and collect rates, fees, rents and other charges in accordance
with this act;
H. To exercise any other powers necessary or incidental to the effectuation
of the general purposes of this act.
A. Whenever the City chooses to exercise powers granted hereunder, the
City shall make or cause to be made such surveys, investigations,
§ 360-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-5
347:676
§ 360-6. Property damaged; repair, restoration or compensation.
All public or private property damaged or destroyed in carrying out the
powers granted by this act shall be restored or repaired and, as nearly as
practicable, placed in its original condition, or adequate compensation shall
be made therefor.
§ 360-7. Relocation of public utility property.
Whenever the City determines that it is necessary that any public utility
facilities such as tracks, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, towers, poles
and other equipment and appliances of any public utility, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, which are now or hereafter may be located in, on, along,
over or under any project, should be removed, the public utility owning or
operating the facilities shall relocate or remove the same in accordance
with the order of the City; the cost and expense of the relocation or removal,
including the cost of installing the facilities in a new location or new
locations, and the cost of any lands, or any rights or interest in lands, and
any other rights acquired to accomplish the relocation or removal, less
the cost of any lands or any rights of the public utility paid to the public
utility in connection with the relocation or removal of the property, shall
be ascertained and paid as a part of the cost of the project. In case of any
relocation or removal of facilities pursuant to this section, the public utility
owning or operating the same, its successors or assigns, may maintain and
operate the facilities, with the necessary appurtenances, in the new location
for as long a period, and upon the same terms and conditions, as it had the
right to maintain and operate the facilities in their former location.
§ 360-8. Bonds and security for water supply facility.
§ 360-9. Rates, rentals and other charges.
studies, borings, maps, plans, drawings and estimates of costs and of
revenues as may be necessary.
B. The cost of the surveys, investigations, studies, borings, maps, plans,
drawings, and estimates, or of any other costs relating to the
acquisition or construction of a water supply facility, may be paid out of
the general funds of the City. The City may be reimbursed for part or all
of the expenditures made in accordance with this section from the
proceeds of bonds issued pursuant to this act.
A. The City may issue bonds pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:31-1 et seq., in
particular N.J.S.A. 40A:31-9, for all or parts of the cost of the water
supply facilities or pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:31-15.
B. The water supply facility shall be deemed a self-liquidating purpose
under certain circumstances (N.J.S.A. 40A:31-16).
C. Any bonds authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:31-1 et seq. are legal
investments (N.J.S.A.40A:31-22).
§ 360-5 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-9
347:677
§ 360-10. Connection fees.
A. The City shall prescribe, and from time to time may alter, rates or
rentals to be charged to users of the water supply services. Rates or
rentals, being in the nature of use or service charges or annual rental
charges, shall be uniform and equitable for the same type and class of
use or service of the facilities. Rates or rentals and types and classes of
use and service may be based on any factors which the governing body
of the City shall deem proper and equitable within the region served.
B. In fixing rates, rentals and other charges for supplying water services,
the City shall establish a rate structure that allows, within the limits of
any lawful covenants made with bond holders, the City to:
(1) Recover all costs of acquisition, construction or operation,
including the costs of raw materials, administration, real or
personal property, maintenance, taxes, debt service charges, fees
and an amount equal to any operating budget deficit occurring in
the immediately preceding fiscal year;
(2) Establish a surplus in an amount sufficient to provide for the
reasonable anticipating of any contingency that may affect the
operation of the utility, and, at the discretion of the City, allow for
the transfer of moneys from the budget for the water supply
facilities to the local budget in accordance with Section 5 of P.L.
1983, c. 111 (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-35.1).
C. The City shall not, however, impose any rates or rentals in excess of the
cost of water actually used for any sprinkler system required to be
installed in any residential health care facility pursuant to the Health
Care Facilities Planning Act, P.L. 1971, c. 136 (N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.)
and regulations promulgated thereunder or in any rooming or boarding
house pursuant to the Rooming and Boarding House Act of 1979, P.L.
1979, c. 496 (N.J.S.A. 55:13B-1 et seq.) and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
A. In addition to rates and rentals, a separate charge in the nature of a
connection fee or tapping fee for each connection of any property with
the water supply system may be imposed upon the owner or occupant of
the property so connected. The connection charges shall be uniform
within each class of users, and the amount thereof shall not exceed the
actual cost of the physical connection plus an amount computed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:31-11 in the following manner to represent a
fair payment towards the cost of the system.
B. The connection fee shall be recomputed at the end of each budget year,
after a public hearing is held. The revised connection fee may be
imposed upon those who subsequently connect in that budget year to
the system.
§ 360-9 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-10
347:678
§ 360-11. Rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges as lien on
property; discontinuance of service.
§ 360-12. Financing of improvements; procedures for and manner
of assessment and collection.
The City may determine to have the cost of acquisition or construction
of water supply facilities financed by local improvement assessments on
real properties located within the City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:31-13 and
N.J.S.A. 40A:31-14.
§ 360-13. Contracts entered into prior to appropriations therefor.
The City shall have the power to authorize, by resolution, officials to enter
into and execute a contract pursuant to this act for such periods of time
C. The combination of the connection fee or tapping fee and the aforesaid
water service charges shall be such that the revenues of water supply
facilities shall be adequate to pay the expenses of operation and
maintenance of the water supply facilities, including operating and
maintenance of the water supply facilities, including improvements,
extensions, enlargements and replacements to water supply facilities,
reserves, insurance, principal and interest on any bonds, and to
maintain such reserves or sinking funds therefor as may be required
under the bond covenants or any contracts, or as may be deemed
necessary or desirable.
A. Rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges levied in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:31-10 and 40A:31-11 shall be a first lien or charge
against the property benefitted therefrom. If any part of the amount due
and payable in rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges remains
unpaid for 30 days following the date for the payment thereof, interest
upon the amount unpaid shall accrue at a rate of interest to be
determined in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:31-17. The City Council of
the City of Bridgeton may authorize payment of delinquent assessments
on an installment basis in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-19. Liens levied
in accordance with this section shall be enforceable in the manner
provided for real property tax liens in Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the
Revised Statutes.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the right of the City to
discontinue service to any property for the failure to pay any amount
owing within 60 days after the date the amount is due and payable, if
written notice of the proposed discontinuance of service and of the
reasons therefor has been given, within at least 10 days prior to the
date of discontinuance, to the owner of record of the property. In the
event that notice is provided by mail, the notice requirements shall be
satisfied if the mailing is made to the last known address of the owner of
record and is postmarked at least 10 days prior to the date of
discontinuance. [Amended 6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 99-21]
§ 360-10 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-13
347:679
and under such terms and conditions as are deemed proper and necessary,
notwithstanding that no appropriation was made or provided to cover the
estimated cost of the contract. The City Council of the City of Bridgeton
shall have full power and authority to do and perform all acts and things
provided under the terms and conditions of the contract.
§ 360-14. Payments by local unit to another local unit.
The chief fiscal officer of another government having entered into a contract
pursuant to this act shall cause to be paid to the City such amounts of money
at such times as shall be stipulated in the contract and certified by the
City. The power and obligation to make payments in accordance with the
terms of the contract shall be unlimited, and the sums necessary therefor
shall be included in the annual budget of the other government, which shall
be irrevocably and unconditionally obligated to levy ad valorem taxes on
all taxable property therein, without limits as to rate or amount, to the
extent necessary to make payments in full as due. Any part of a payment
that remains unpaid for 30 days following the date payment is due shall be
assessed an interest charge at a rate of interest at least equal to the monthly
index for the immediately preceding month for twenty-year tax exempt bond
yields as compiled by the bond buyer or any similar index agreed to by the
parties.
§ 360-15. Right of entry to make surveys and investigations;
interference therewith and discontinuance of water supply.
A. The City may authorize officials or other agents of the City or another
local unit to enter upon any land or water for the purpose of making
surveys, studies, investigations or inspections and, at reasonable hours,
to enter any building or other structure using pipes or any equipment
connected to the water supply facilities or service pipes for compliance
with established standards and other requirements.
B. The supply of water to any property may be discontinued if the owner,
lessee or other user of that property opposes or obstructs an authorized
official or other agent in the performance of his duties. The
discontinuance shall continue until the required investigations or
inspections are made and any alterations or repairs found to be
necessary have been made and approved by the appropriate official or
agent.
§ 360-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-15
347:680
ARTICLE II
Operation of Water Supply Facility
§ 360-16. Establishment of rules and regulations.
The City Council shall establish such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary for the benefit of the water system and facility.
§ 360-17. Connection required; private wells.
§ 360-18. Responsibility for installation and connection,
maintenance and repair; indemnification.
A. Each building or structure, of any nature whatsoever, hereafter used for
any purpose whatsoever, using water and located on property abutting
or being provided access from any street wherein there is located a
public water supply main shall be individually connected with the water
facility and system of the City.
B. All buildings or structures, located on property abutting or provided
access from any street wherein a public water supply main shall be
installed, shall connect to the public water facility and system of the
City within 60 days of said installation.
C. All buildings or structures which are constructed after the installation
of a public water supply main and having access or property abutting
the road or street served by the public water supply main shall be
connected to the City's water facility and system prior to issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for such building or structure.
D. No structure or building or premises shall use any private well, pump or
other means for furnishing of water to the premises. However, upon
application to the Director of the Division of Water and Sewer and with
explanation of the necessity for a relaxation of the requirement to use
City water, the City Council shall have the power to permit the owner of
any building or buildings to construct and maintain private wells,
pumps and other equipment for the furnishing of water to the particular
premises applied for. Such explanation may include the unavailability of
a public water main supply to the property. The applicant must have all
the necessary permits from the state and/or county prior to the digging
or driving of a well or to the use of any water not supplied by the City. If
a structure, building or premises is connected to a source of water
other than the City water facility, the structure, building or premises
shall not be connected to the City water facility. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
E. All water service taps or connections shall be made by or under the
supervision of the City or its authorized agent.
§ 360-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-18
347:681
A. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of a
building, structure or use to a public water supply main shall be the
responsibility of the owner(s) of the building, structure or use.
B. All costs and expenses incidental to the maintenance and repair of
water lines or pipes from the public water supply main to the building,
structure or use shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of the
building, structure or use.
C. Laterals from the public water supply main to the curbline shall be laid,
repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner(s) of the building,
structure or use. Said lateral shall be laid, repaired or replaced by or
under the supervision of the Division. The Division shall provide or
require that all new or replacement water lines, meters, etc., be
compatible with the existing water lines. [Amended 11-21-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(1) The Division shall install water lines or laterals up to one inch.
When the Division provides this service, the applicant shall deposit
a sum equal to the costs of the connection, renewal, installation,
repair, replacement, water meter or other service at the time of
application.
(2) The installation, repair and replacement for water lines over one
inch shall be contracted out by the owner at the owner's expense to
an approved contractor. The City shall approve the material,
supervise the installation and charge an inspection fee.
D. Lines from the curbline to the building, structure or use shall be laid,
repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner(s) of the building,
structure or use. All new or replacement lines must be compatible with
the City's water lines. The installation, repair or replacement shall be
contracted out by the owner at the owner's expense to an approved
contractor. The City shall approve the materials, supervise the
installation and charge an inspection fee.
E. The owner(s) of said building, structure or use shall indemnify the City
for any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by
the installation, connection, maintenance or repair of water lines or
pipes.
F. The owner(s) whose premises is supplied with water from the public
water supply main shall keep their pipes, stopcocks, and apparatus in
good order and repair and protected from frost, at their own risk and
expense, and shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water.
G. The owner(s) whose premises is receiving water from a branch, hydrant
or service pipe or fixture uniting with a common pipe shall be
responsible for the maintenance, operation and cost of repairs of the
common pipe and shall be severally liable. If the common pipe or line
must be replaced, service by common pipe or line shall be discontinued,
§ 360-18 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-18
347:682
§ 360-19. Application and permits for connection, service or repair.
§ 360-20. Extension of water main within public right-of-way.
and the owner of each property or premises shall be individually
responsible for the laying of its own pipe or line.
H. It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against the City by
reason of the breaking of any service pipe, or service cock, or other
fixtures, or from damage arising from shutting off water to repair main,
or make private connection with same.
I. If at any time it shall be necessary to repair a private pipe within the
limits of any street, court or alley, the expense for permits, for repaving
and repairs and for the costs of opening the street, court or alley, if any,
imposed by the New Jersey Department of Transportation or the City or
County of Cumberland shall be the responsibility of the owner.
J. Expenses which are incurred by the City in repairing or replacing or
maintaining lines, pipes, apparatus and fixtures for which the owner is
responsible and, through neglect, refusal or otherwise, the owner fails
to repair, replace or maintain shall be billed by the City and shall be
subject to the same penalties for nonpayment as are bills for water
rents.
K. Any person violating this chapter or its rules or regulations shall be
liable to the City for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the City
because of said violation.
A. Application for connection or renewal, for repairs to or replacement or
laying of water lines, from the public water supply main to the curb and
from the curb to the building, structure or use, or for water meters or
replacement thereof or any other services from the Division of Water
and Sewer shall be made in writing to the Division on a form provided
by the Division and signed by the owner of the property or his agent.
[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
B. If required, the applicant must secure any necessary state or
Cumberland County permits, including any permits for opening a state
or county highway or road, as well as permits from the City's code
enforcement officers.
C. The application shall designate the name of the plumber who shall
install the connection or make the repair, the address of the premises
applied for, and the purpose of the connection or repair.
D. The application must be obtained and all fees, expenses, escrows and/or
other costs must be paid prior to the start of any installation,
replacement, repair, construction or connection.
§ 360-18 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-20
347:683
§ 360-21. Water meters.
All property within the City receiving water service from the City shall have
installed a water meter with suitable shutoff valves.
A. Application for an extension of a public water supply main within the
public right-of-way shall be to the Division of Water and Sewer, who
shall consult with the City Engineer. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
B. The applicant shall submit the necessary engineering drawings and
other details as determined to be necessary by the City Engineer.
C. The application and submissions shall be reviewed by the City Engineer,
submitted to City Council and, if necessary, to appropriate state and/or
county agencies for approval. The City Council shall determine whether
to grant an extension of the public water supply or service based upon
its assessment of the need and ability of the City's water supply system
to accommodate the expansion. The City Council may set reasonable
terms and conditions and may make the extension of the public water
supply mains as local improvements with costs assessable to owners of
property abutting said mains.
D. Applicants will be responsible for all costs of the extension project,
including those for assessments, inspection escrows, miscellaneous
fees and costs, permits, costs of excavation and/or bonding as may be
required by the City Engineer and City Council.
E. Final approval of the extension project is dependent upon the applicant
paying all fees, costs, escrows, bonding requirements, and/or permits
as may be required by the City Engineer or ordinance.
A. Placement. The Division of Water and Sewer may determine that
conditions exist which make normal meter installation unfeasible due to
inadequate plumbing or due to lack of cellar, basement or crawl space.
Where such a determination is made, the Division shall require the
applicant, at the applicant's expense, to install the necessary plumbing
or appurtenances or to provide a meter box with vault located outside
the building, but as close as possible to the curb stop. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
B. Installation. The Division of Water and Sewer shall install and/or
replace water meters and shall charge as set forth in the schedule of
charges and rents. If the City installs the outside meter boxes or vaults,
it shall charge as set forth in the schedule of charges and rents.
[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
C. Specifications. Where the applicant or property owner provides for the
outdoor meter box or vault, the installation must be made complete
with approved fittings and lid, in accordance with specifications of the
§ 360-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-21
347:684
§ 360-22. Wasting of water and tampering prohibited.
Division of Water and Sewer. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
D. Responsibility. The owner of any premises where a meter is installed
shall be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or
other injury. The owner or occupant shall notify the Division of Water
and Sewer if the meter, including the seal, is injured, damaged or not
working; said notice shall be made as soon as the owner or occupant is
aware of the injury or damage to and the nonworking of the meter. No
by-pass around or disconnection of the meter is permitted. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
E. Repairs to be made by the City. Repairs to water meters will be made by
the City pursuant to charges as set forth in the schedule of charges.
However, if a proper protection has not been provided for a meter,
wherever located, or if a meter has been damaged, injured or
destroyed, tampered or disconnected, all expenses incurred by the City
for repairs or replacement of the meter or fixtures shall be charged to
the owners of the premises or the consumer where the meter is located.
The repairs will be charged only when evidence is obtained that such
repairs were necessary due to the neglect of the owner or consumer or
to tampering.
F. Readings conclusive. Where water is furnished by meter
measurements, the quantity recorded by said meters shall be
conclusive as to the consumer or property owner and the City, except
where the meter has been found to register incorrectly or has ceased to
register. In such event, the quantity shall be determined by the quantity
used by another meter or the same meter after repair or testing for a
thirty-day period; or the quantity used during a previous corresponding
period may, at the option of the City, be used as a basis of settlement.
G. Testing of meters. Should a consumer or owner believe that the meter is
not registering properly, he shall file a complaint with the Division of
Water and Sewer whereupon the meter will be removed and tested by
the Division. If it is found to register against the consumer or owner
more than 3%, there will be no charge for removing, repairing and
resetting the meter. If, however, the meter is found to register against
the consumer less than 3%, the Division will charge for the test, as set
forth in the attached schedule. The Division shall have the right to make
periodic tests of all meters at no cost to the consumer or owner. The
user will be charged for water according to the average rate as
previously shown by the meter. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
H. Duty to provide access to property or information about meter reading.
Failure to provide access to the property for meter reading or to
respond to the City's request for meter reading information shall result
in a charge as set forth in the schedule of charges.
§ 360-21 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-22
347:685
§ 360-23. Laying private pipes or changes to plumbing affecting
meters, stops or valves.
A. Any person who shall permit water to flow unnecessarily from any part
of a private pipe or fixture or permit any waste of water or any person
who shall permit water to flow unnecessarily from any private pipe or
fixture on his premises, either within a building or enclosure, street,
court or alley, shall be in violation of this chapter.
B. The Director of the Division of Water and Sewer or his agent shall be
authorized to inquire at any dwelling or other place where any
unnecessary waste of water is apparent, into the cause of the waste and
shall, if necessary, request the owner or occupier of the building to have
the pipes or fixtures repaired to prevent the wasting of water.
[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
C. If the waste arises from the need for a repair in the pipes or fixtures and
if the owner or occupier of the dwelling or building or premises shall
neglect or refuse to obtain the necessary repair, the Director of the
Division of Water and Sewer is authorized to shut off the water leading
to the building or dwelling within 24 hours of written notice, cause the
repairs to be made and charge the owner for costs. No person shall turn
on the water until the repairs are made. If, in the opinion of the
Director, the repair must be made immediately to protect the public
safety, the Director is authorized to immediately make the repairs and
charge the owner for costs. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
D. No person shall molest, tamper or attempt to molest or tamper with any
service pipe or line, curb stop, seal, water meter or any other appliance
or piece of equipment or apparatus which is part of the water system or
facility.
E. No person except the Director of the Division of Water and Sewer shall
open or close the stopcocks or valves in any public or private pipe.
[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
A. The construction or laying of private pipes or changes in the plumbing
which may affect water meters, stop, valves or the public water supply
shall conform to the requirements of the uniform construction codes,
plumbing subcode and any other applicable code, rule or regulation of
the City or state. Permits and inspections may be required.
B. In all cases where an opening shall be made in any of the streets, lanes
or alleys of the City, for the purpose of connecting any private pipe with
the public water supply main or of extending, repairing, renewing or
removing the private pipe, the opening shall be filled up as soon as the
circumstances will permit, and the roadbed or surface of the streets
and the paving and curbs firmly relaid and fixed in good order at the
§ 360-22 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-23
347:686
§ 360-24. Access to premises. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
The Director of the Division of Water and Sewer or other persons authorized
by his or her shall at all reasonable hours have free access to all parts of the
premises, grounds or buildings to which water is supplied for the purpose
of inspection, examination, repair, or disconnection of fixtures, mains, lines,
equipment, etc. No one shall oppose the access provided for in this section.
§ 360-25. Water restrictions; violations and penalties. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-16]
cost of the owner of the private pipe, and as set forth in the schedule of
charges, if applicable.
A. Right to limit water. The City reserves the right to decrease or limit the
quantity of water used in the City of Bridgeton whenever, in the
judgment of the Director of the Division of Water and Sewer, it is
necessary or expedient to do so. The Director of the Division of Water
and Sewer shall promulgate such restrictions by announcement in a
local newspaper and by posting in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
[Amended 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04; 9-19-2017 by Ord. No.
17-20]
B. Violation of water restrictions. It shall be unlawful for anyone to fail to
abide by the restrictions placed upon water use by the Director of the
Division of Water and Sewer, after promulgation of such restrictions.
[Amended 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(1) Violations of this section are punishable as follows:
(a) First offense: a written warning.
(b) Second offense: $50 municipal fine.
(c) Third offense: $100 municipal fine.
(d) Fourth offense and every offense thereafter: $250 municipal
fine.
(2) The Director of the Division of Water and Sewer or his or her agent
shall have the authority to issue a notice of violation or a summons
and complaint for violations as set forth herein.
(3) If, in the opinion of the Director of the Division of Water and Sewer,
the immediate shut off or termination of water service is necessary
to prevent further wasting of water in violation of this section, the
Director may shut off the water or discontinue water service
without notice. If water service is terminated, a service charge of
$100 shall be imposed for the water turn on.
C. Any municipal fines imposed under this section may be paid without
appearance in court unless the summons otherwise indicates that a
§ 360-23 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-25
347:687
§ 360-26. Authority to shut off water. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-12; 11-7-2007 by Ord. No. 07-16; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No.
09-04]
The Director of the Division of Water and Sewer or his or her agent shall
have the authority to shut off water or to discontinue water service. Notice
shall be as provided by statute or ordinance, elsewhere.
court appearance is necessary before the Judge of the Municipal Court
of the City of Bridgeton. If a court appearance is required, the court
may impose additional penalties as set forth in § 1-17.
D. The City shall not be responsible for damages by reason of the failure to
supply water insofar as it may affect any property or use thereof.
A. Service may be discontinued for the following reasons:
(1) For the use of water for any other purpose or property than that
described in the application for service, repair, etc.
(2) For the willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixture, or otherwise.
(3) For failure to maintain in good working order the connections,
service lines or fixtures for which the owner or user is responsible.
(4) For molesting, tampering or attempting to molest or tamper with
any service pipe, curb stop, seal, water meter or any other
appliance or piece of equipment of the Division.
(5) For refusal of access at reasonable hours to property for purposes
of inspecting or for repairing, caring for or removing meters.
(6) For nonpayment of bills or service rendered or water consumed or
fines and penalties or for any other reason causing or tending to
cause a loss to the Division of Water and Sewer.
(7) For violation of water use restrictions promulgated by the Director
of the Division of Water and Sewer.
B. Service may be discontinued until any necessary repairs or alterations
are made.
C. If the Director of the Division of Water and Sewer or his agent has
reason to believe there is actual or probable evasion or disregard of the
provisions governing water use, supply or distribution, or if alterations,
extensions or repairs are necessary, he may enter upon any land or
water to examine the pipes, conduits, or other fixtures or equipment to
ascertain whether there is evasion or disregard of the rules or whether
the mains, equipment, etc., are in proper order.
D. Service may be temporarily discontinued, in order to inspect and
examine.
§ 360-25 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-26
347:688
§ 360-27. Supplying water to other people. [Amended 11-21-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
No person shall supply water to others, except by special permission from
the Director of the Division of Water and Sewer. For every person so
offending, the supply of water will be stopped and the rent already paid
forfeited.
§ 360-28. Private fire hydrants. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
No private hydrant for domestic use shall be allowed to be erected on any
public street or alley where it may become a source of supply to any persons
who are not entitled to the use of the same. The corporation cock and lead
goose neck at the main is owned and controlled by the City and is not to
be removed or tampered with except by orders from the Director of the
Division of Water and Sewer.
§ 360-29. Permit required for ferrule. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
No person shall, without a permit from the Director of the Division of Water
and Sewer, introduce a ferrule into any public or private pipe or from any
connection or communication whatever with the pipes or break ground for
any purposes; nor shall any person introduce or use a ferrule of larger
diameter or make any attachment or do anything otherwise than is specified
in his permit.
§ 360-30. Meter required for steam boilers and irrigation.
Any person or persons using water for steam boilers or for irrigation
purposes, or in connection with the operation of an air-conditioning system,
or to supply a foundation or jet which permits free flow of water when
unattended shall use water for such purposes only when supplied through a
meter at established meter rates.
§ 360-31. Tank for steam pumps. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
Where it is desired to supply steam pumps, the Director of the Division of
Water and Sewer may direct that the owner or occupant of the property
shall provide a tank into which the water shall be discharged before going
to the pumps, and that no direct communication with the street mains be
allowed.
E. The City or its agents shall not be liable under any circumstances for a
deficiency or failure in the supply of water, whether occasioned by
shutting off the water to make inspection, repairs or connection, or for
any other cause whatsoever, including attaching or repairing meters.
§ 360-26 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-32
347:689
§ 360-32. Use of water from public fire hydrants. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
No person, unless authorized by the Division, shall take water from any
public fire hydrant except for fire purposes or for the use of the Fire
Department. No fire hydrants shall be used for sprinkling the streets,
flushing sewers or gutters or for any other than fire purposes, except by the
Division of Water and Sewer.
§ 360-33. Vacancy permit. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12;
12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
If a premises or building becomes vacant, the owner may apply to have
water service discontinued. The application shall be on a form provided by
the Division of Water and Sewer. No vacancy permit shall be granted except
by the Division of Water and Sewer and then only upon 30 days' notice of
the intention of the owner or occupant to vacate the premises and upon
payment of the turnoff fee.
§ 360-32 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-33
347:690
ARTICLE III
Schedule of Charges; Enforcement Procedures
§ 360-34. Establishment of charges and procedures for collection of
charges.
The water facility shall be self-sustaining and therefore the Council shall
establish, and provide for its collection, such charges, rentals, rates and
fees as it deems necessary and proper and such procedures to enforce its
rules and regulations.
§ 360-35. Collection of water rents, fees and charges; violations;
enforcement.
A. Records. The Tax Collector of the City of Bridgeton shall have charge of
the books and records of the water facility and collection of the water
rents, fees and charges and shall deposit all monies received in the
manner required by law. Water rents shall be payable quarterly.
B. Delinquent water bills and charges. If any water rent or charge or fee
shall remain unpaid for a period of 30 days, the Tax Collector may notify
the Division of Water and Sewer of the delinquency for a determination
whether water service should be discontinued. If any rate, rental, fee or
charge remains unpaid for a period of 30 days, interest shall accrue at
the rate of interest as allowed by law. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
C. Rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges as lien on real property.
Rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges levied in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:31-1 et seq. shall be a first lien or charge against the
property benefitted therefrom. Liens levied in accordance with this
section shall be enforceable in the manner provided for real property
tax liens in Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.
D. Service discontinued. The City may discontinue water service to any
property for the failure to pay any amount owing within 60 days after
the date the amount is due and payable. Written notice of the proposed
discontinuance of service under this section and the reasons therefor
shall be given within at least 10 days prior to the discontinuance; said
notice may be served personally on the owner of record and all persons
in possession of the property. Notice may be given by mail, with the
notice requirements being satisfied if the mailing is made to the last
known address of the owner of record and all persons in possession of
the property and is postmarked at least 10 days prior to the date of
discontinuance.
E. Service resumed. In all cases where water has been turned off, it shall
not be turned on again until all expenses for turning off and tuning on,
together with any rent, fine, penalties or other charges, have been paid.
§ 360-34 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-35
347:691
§ 360-36. Water rates, charges and fees to be established by
ordinance.
All rates, rents, charges, fees, connection fees, tapping fees, meter charges,
repair costs or any other fees and costs associated with the operation of the
City's water system shall be established by ordinance.
§ 360-37. Failure to provide meter reading; penalty. [Amended
6-19-2000 by Ord. No. 99-21]
In the event an owner or occupant of a property supplied with a water
meter shall fail to grant the City access to the property or to return the
meter reading card or to provide the meter reading by oral communication,
then the owner of the property shall pay a charge of $50 in addition to
the estimated charge for the billing period for which the charge goes into
effect and for each successive billing period until access is given or the
information is supplied. The charge shall be collectible in the same manner
as is the minimum charge. Before the charge shall go into effect, the City
shall by regular mail advise the owner of the property for two successive
billing periods in writing of the failure to provide access or information. The
charge shall go into effect 15 days after the second notice.
§ 360-38. Standby systems.
In addition to all the rates hereinabove mentioned, a charge shall also be
made for standby services established for fire sprinklers or other special
services. The charge shall be as provided in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II,
Schedule of Fees.
§ 360-39. Charges to turn service on or off.
F. Violations. In addition to the imposition of penalties for the violation of
any City ordinance, the City may initiate appropriate legal proceedings
to collect any rents, fees or charges in any court having jurisdiction
thereof or may prosecute any appropriate action for legal and/or
equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any complaint
filed for these purposes shall include a claim for costs of such action,
including reasonable attorney fees and expenses.
A. Turn off. In the event that it is necessary for the City to turn off any
water service, there shall be charged to the property owner a water
service turnoff fee, which shall be payable in advance; and, if for some
reason the fee is not paid in advance, it shall be a lien on the real estate
as if it were a charge for water service. The fee is set forth in Chapter
149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
B. Turn on. In the event that it is necessary for the City to turn on any
water service, there shall be charged to the property owner a water
service turn on fee, which shall be paid in advance. The fee is set forth
in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of Fees.
§ 360-35 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-39
347:692
§ 360-40. Connection charges. [Amended 11-21-2006 Ord. No.
06-12; 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 07-32; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
§ 360-41. Meter charges. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12;
6-19-2007 by Ord. No. 6-39 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 07-32]
C. Additional charges. The fee as established pursuant to Subsections A
and B shall apply only in the case where the curb box is plainly visible
and is not filled with debris. If the Division of Water and Sewer is
required to replace the curb box, or perform any other service, the fee
shall include costs of labor and the actual costs of material and
equipment. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009
by Ord. No. 09-04]
A. Connection costs. The costs of physically connecting or reconnecting a
property to the water supply system by the installation of a water line
from the public water supply main to the curb shall be a separate
charge.
(1) Connection to one inch. The Division of Water and Sewer shall
provide the connection for a one-inch copper water service
connection at cost as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II,
Schedule of Fees. This cost includes charges for breaking the
street, opening the street and cost of furnishing and installing all
pipes and connections to and including the furnishing of curb stop
and curb box, and making permanent repairs to the street. This
subsection shall not apply to any new housing development,
consisting of three or more residential units, whether attached or
detached residences. In the case of the connection for any unit of
such a housing development, the owner and/or developer of the
property shall be solely responsible for any connection fees as each
property is connected to the City system.
(2) Connection over one inch. The costs of physically connecting or
reconnecting a property to the water supply system with a water
line over one inch shall be the responsibility of the owner or
occupant of the property. The installation shall be made by an
approved independent contractor at the expense of the owner or
occupant. The contractor shall be responsible for installation of the
water line and the opening and closing of the street. The Division of
Water and Sewer shall oversee and inspect the work of the
contractor at a charge as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II,
Schedule of Fees.
B. A state permit shall be required and obtained from the Division if the
street is a state highway.
A. Installation charges (new or replacement of defective meter).
(1) Standard installation to single-family home, five-eighths-inch
meter. City bears the cost. This provision shall not apply to
§ 360-39 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-41
347:693
installation in of meters to any housing development consisting
of three or more residential units, whether attached or detached
residences.
(2) Nonstandard installation: prevailing cost of meter shall be paid for
by owner and the City shall bear no responsibility for costs of such
meter.
B. Outdoor meter boxes or vaults or pits with attachments.
(1) Cost.
Size
(inches) Cost
5/8 Prevailing cost of box or vault or pit and
attachments
3/4
1.0
1.5
2.0
(2) Over two-inch is installed only on special arrangement with the
Division of Water and Sewer, and the applicant shall pay the full
and actual cost of the installation. Attachments include lid and
meter setter. [Amended 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
(3) Any owner of a one-inch meter or larger shall cause the meter to be
calibrated on a yearly basis and provide proof of such to the
Division of Water and Sewer. At the discretion of the Director of the
Division of Water and Sewer or his designee, any owner of a meter
smaller than one-inch may be required to calibrate the meter no
more than once per year. All calibrations shall be at the cost of the
owner and the City shall have no responsibility for such costs.
[Amended 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
C. Repairs.
(1) Charges. Repair of meter due to tampering or injury from neglect,
including replacement of a frozen water meter, shall be the actual
cost of the meter or fixture, equipment, etc., in addition to the
charges as set forth in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of
Fees.
(2) Replacement. The Director of the Division of Water and Sewer or
the Director's designee shall decide if any meter over the standard
five-eighths-inch meter should be replaced. Any replacement of this
type of meter shall be at the owner's expense and shall comply with
all other provisions of this Code. [Amended 12-1-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-04]
§ 360-41 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-41
347:694
D. Upgrades/new installation. The Director of the Division of Water and
Sewer or his designee may require pit meters to be installed on any new
construction or upon the replacement of any meter covered by this
Code. [Amended 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
§ 360-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-41
347:695

ARTICLE IV
Sewerage Facilities
§ 360-42. Maintenance and operation of sewerage facilities;
responsibility.
§ 360-43. Acquisition, construction or operation of sewerage
facilities.
§ 360-44. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONDS — Bond anticipation notes or bonds issued in accordance with the
Local Bond Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq.
COST (as applied to sewerage facilities or extensions or additions thereto)
— The cost of acquisition or the construction, including improvement,
reconstruction, extension or enlargement, the cost of all lands, property,
rights and easements acquired. The cost of demolition or removal of all
buildings or structures thereon, financing charges, interest on bonds issued
to finance sewerage facilities prior to and during construction, the cost of
plans and specifications, surveys or estimates of costs and revenues, the
cost of engineering, legal services, and any other expenses necessary or
incident to determining the feasibility of construction, administrative and
other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the construction or
acquisition of sewerage facilities and the financing thereof.
A. In order to assure the public health, safety and welfare of its residents,
the City of Bridgeton shall finance, acquire, construct, maintain,
operate or improve works for the collection, transport and disposal of
sewage and shall finance these sewerage facilities pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:26A-1 et seq.
B. The Division of Water and Sewer shall be responsible for the
maintenance, operation and construction of the sewerage facility for
the provision of sewerage services. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
A. The City of Bridgeton shall operate, construct, maintain or acquire
facilities for the collection and transportation of sewage or wastewater
(N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-4).
B. The City shall have the power to authorize, by resolution, officials to
enter into and execute a contract pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq.
for periods of time and under conditions as are deemed proper and
necessary. The City Council shall have full power and authority to do
and perform all acts and things provided under the terms and
conditions of the contract (N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-18).
§ 360-42 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-44
347:697
LOCAL UNIT — A county or municipality, and shall specifically mean the
"City of Bridgeton" where appropriate.
SEWERAGE FACILITIES — The plants, structures or other real and
personal property acquired, constructed or operated, or any parts thereof,
used for the storage, collection, reduction, reclamation, disposal, separation
or other treatment of wastewater or sewage sludge or for the final disposal
of residues resulting from the treatment of wastewater, including but not
limited to pumping and ventilating stations, treatment plants and works,
connections, outfall servers, interceptors, trunk lines and other
appurtenances necessary for their use or operation. "City sewerage
facilities" shall mean sewerage facilities used for the collection and
transportation of sewerage, wastewater or sewage sludge from the City of
Bridgeton.
§ 360-45. Powers of City.
The City of Bridgeton is authorized and empowered:
A. To acquire, construct, improve, extend, enlarge or reconstruct and
finance sewerage facilities, and to operate, manage and control all or
part of these facilities and all properties relating thereto;
B. To issue bonds of the City for sewerage facilities to pay all or part of the
cost of the purchase, construction, improvement, extension,
enlargement or reconstruction of sewerage facilities;
C. To receive and accept from the federal or state government, or any
agency or instrumentality thereof, grants or loans for, or in aid of, the
planning, purchase, construction, improvement, extension,
enlargement or reconstruction, or financing of sewerage facilities, and
to receive and accept from any source contributions or money, property,
labor or other things of value to be held, used and applied only for the
purposes for which the grants or loans and contributions are made;
D. To acquire in the name of the City by gift, purchase, or by the exercise
of the right of eminent domain such lands and rights and interests
therein, including lands under water and riparian rights, and personal
property as may be deemed necessary for acquisition, construction,
improvement, extension, enlargement or reconstruction, or for the
efficient operation of any facilities acquired or constructed under the
provisions of this act and to hold and dispose of all real and personal
property so acquired;
E. To make and enter into all contracts and agreements necessary or
incidental to the performance of the City sewerage facilities duties and
the execution of powers authorized under this act, and to employ
consulting and other engineers, superintendents, managers, attorneys,
financial or other consultants or experts, and such other employees and
agents as may be deemed necessary, and to fix their compensation;
§ 360-44 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-45
347:698
§ 360-46. Surveys, maps and other costs; reimbursement from bond
funds.
§ 360-47. Property damaged; repair, restoration or compensation.
All public or private property damaged or destroyed in carrying out the
powers granted by N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq. shall be restored or repaired
and, as nearly as practicable, placed in its original condition, or adequate
compensation shall be made therefor.
§ 360-48. Relocation of public utility property.
Whenever the City determines that it is necessary that any public utility
facilities such as tracks, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, towers, poles
and other equipment and appliances of any public utility, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 48:2-13, which are now, or hereafter may be located in, on, along,
over or under any sewerage facility project, should be removed, the public
utility owning or operating the facilities shall relocate or remove the same
in accordance with the order of the local unit or units; the cost and expense
of the relocation or removal, including the cost of installing the facilities in
F. Subject to the provisions and restrictions set forth in the ordinance or
resolution authorizing or securing any bonds issued under the
provisions of this act, to enter into contracts with the federal or state
government, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or with any other
local unit, private corporation, copartnership, association or individual
providing for, or relating to, sewerage facilities, which contracts may
provide for the furnishing of City sewerage facilities either by or to the
City sewerage facilities, or the joint construction or operation of
sewerage facilities;
G. To fix and collect rates, fees, rents and other charges in accordance
with this act;
H. To prevent toxic pollutants from entering the sewerage system;
I. To exercise any other powers necessary or incidental to the effectuation
of the general purpose of this act.
A. Whenever the City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-4 chooses to exercise
powers granted hereunder, the City shall make or cause to be made
such surveys, investigations, studies, borings, maps, plans, drawings
and estimates of costs and of revenues as may be necessary.
B. The cost of the surveys, investigations, studies, borings, maps, plans,
drawings and estimates, or of any other costs relating to the acquisition
or construction of a sewerage facility, may be paid out of the general
funds of the City or another participating local unit. The local unit or
units may be reimbursed for part or all of the expenditures made in
accordance with this subsection from the proceeds of bonds issued
pursuant to this act (N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-4).
§ 360-45 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-48
347:699
a new location or new locations, and the cost of any lands, or any rights or
interest in lands, and any other rights acquired to accomplish the relocation
or removal, less the cost of any lands or any rights of the public utility
paid to the public utility in connection with the relocation or removal of the
property, shall be ascertained and paid as a part of the cost of the project.
In case of any relocation or removal of facilities pursuant to this section,
the public utility owning or operating the same, its successors or assigns,
may maintain and operate the facilities, with the necessary appurtenances,
in the new location, for as long a period, and upon the same terms and
conditions, as it had the right to maintain and operate the facilities in their
former location.
§ 360-49. Bonds and security therefor.
The City may issue bonds pursuant to the provisions of the Local Bond Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq., for all or part of the cost of sewerage facilities.
Proceeds from the bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the costs of
the sewerage facilities for which the bonds have been authorized.
§ 360-50. Rates, rentals and other charges.
A. The City may issue bonds pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-9 for all or part
of the cost of the City sewerage facilities or pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:26A-15;
B. The sewerage facility may be deemed a self-liquidating purpose under
certain circumstances (N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-16).
C. Any bonds authorized pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq. are legal
investments (N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-20).
A. The City shall prescribe, and from time to time may alter, rates or
rentals to be charged to users of the sewerage services. Rates or rental
charges shall be uniform and equitable for the same types and classes
of use and service. Rates or rentals and types and classes of use and
service may be based on any factors which the governing body of the
City shall deem proper and equitable within the region served.
B. In fixing rates, rentals and other charges for supplying sewerage
services, the City shall establish a rate structure that allows, within the
limits of any lawful covenants made with bondholders, the City to:
(1) Recover all costs of acquisition, construction or operation,
including the costs of raw materials, administration, real or
personal property, maintenance, taxes, debt service charges, fees
and an amount equal to any operating budget deficit occurring in
the immediately preceding fiscal year;
(2) Establish a surplus in an amount sufficient to provide for the
reasonable anticipation of any contingency that may affect the
operating of the sewerage facility, and, at the discretion of the City,
allow for the transfer of moneys from the budget for the sewerage
§ 360-48 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-50
347:700
§ 360-51. Connection fees. [Amended 2-19-2008 by Ord. No. 07-32]
§ 360-52. Rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges as lien on
real property; discontinuance of service.
facilities to the local budget in accordance with Section 5 of P.L.
1983, c. 111 (N.J.S.A. 40A:4-35.1).
A. In addition to rates and rentals, a separate charge in the nature of a
connection fee or tapping fee for each connection of any property to the
sewerage system may be imposed upon the owner or occupant at the
property so connected. The connection charges shall be uniform within
each class of users, and the amount thereof shall not exceed the actual
cost of the physical connection plus an amount computed pursuant to N.
J.S.A. 40A:26A-11. This subsection shall not apply to any new housing
development, consisting of three or more residential units, whether
attached or detached residences. In the case of the connection for any
unit of such a housing development, the owner and/or developer of the
property shall be solely responsible for any connection fees as each
property is connected to the City system.
B. The connection fee shall be recomputed at the end of each budget year,
after a public hearing is held. The revised connection fee may be
imposed upon those who subsequently connect to the system in that
budget year.
C. The combination of the connection fee or tapping fee and the aforesaid
sewerage service charges shall be such that the revenues of sewerage
facilities shall be adequate to pay the expenses of operation and
maintenance of the sewerage facilities, including improvements,
extensions, enlargements and replacements to sewerage facilities,
reserves, insurance, principal and interest on any bonds, and to
maintain reserves or sinking funds therefor as may be required under
the bond covenants or any contracts or as may be deemed necessary or
desirable.
A. Rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges levied in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-10 and 40A:26A-11 shall be a first lien or charge
against the property benefitted therefrom. If any part of the amount due
and payable in rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges remain
unpaid for 30 days following the date for the payment thereof, interest
upon the amount unpaid shall accrue at a rate of interest to be
determined in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-17. The City Council
may authorize payment of delinquent assessments on an installment
basis in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:5-19. Liens levied in accordance
with this section shall be enforceable in the manner provided for real
property tax liens in Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the right of the City
sewerage facility to discontinue service of any property for the failure
to pay any amount owing within 60 days after the date the amount is
§ 360-50 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-52
347:701
§ 360-53. Financing of improvements; procedures for and manner
of assessment and collection.
The City may determine to have the cost of acquisition or construction of
the City sewerage facilities financed by local improvement assessments on
real properties located within the City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-13 and
N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-14.
§ 360-54. Right of entry to make surveys and investigations;
interference therewith and discontinuance of sewerage service.
due and payable, if written notice of the proposed discontinuance of
service and of the reasons therefor has been given, within at least 10
days prior to the date of discontinuance, to the owner of record of
the property. In the event that notice is provided by mail, the notice
requirements shall be satisfied if the mailing is made to the last known
address of the owner of record and is postmarked at least 10 days
prior to the date of discontinuance. [Amended 6-19-2000 by Ord. No.
99-21]
A. The City of Bridgeton may authorize its officials or other agents to enter
upon any land or water for the purpose of making surveys, studies,
investigations or inspections. The officials or other agents are
empowered to examine pipes or any equipment connected to the
sewerage facilities or service pipes for compliance with established
standards and other requirements.
B. The use of sewerage facilities to any property may be discontinued if
the owner, lessee or other user of that property opposes or obstructs an
authorized official or other agent in the performance of his duties. The
discontinuance shall continue until the required investigations or
inspections are made and any alterations or repairs found to be
necessary have been made and approved by the appropriate official or
agent.
§ 360-52 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-54
347:702
ARTICLE V
Terms and Definitions
§ 360-55. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide terms and definitions for the
operation of the City's sewer system.
§ 360-56. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Director of the Division of Water Resources
of the Department of Environmental Protection for the State of New Jersey
or his/her authorized representative.
AUTHORITY — The Cumberland County Utilities Authority (CCUA).
AVERAGE DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Analyses by the CCUA containing
concentrations not more than the following:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or BOD — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure for five days at 20º C., expressed in terms of weight
(kilograms per day [kg/d]) and concentration (milligrams per liter [mg/l]).
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygenconsuming
capacity of organic and inorganic matter present in water or
wastewater expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed by a chemical
oxidant in accordance with an approved test procedure.
CHLORINE DEMAND (expressed in milligrams per liter) — The difference
between the amount of chlorine added to wastewater and the amount of
residual chlorine remaining at the end of a thirty-minute contact period.
COHANSEY RIVER BASIN SEWER SYSTEM — All sewer lines owned and
operated by the Cumberland County Utilities Authority discharging to
intercepting sewers, pumping stations, force mains, wastewater plants, and
appurtenances thereto within the Cohansey River Basin.
COMBINED WASTE — A wastewater containing surface or storm water.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solid, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, oil and grease, and such additional
pollutants as are now or may be in the future specified as controlled in
the CCUA's NJPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such
A. BOD: concentrations of 250 milligrams per liter (mg/l).
B. CHLORINE DEMAND: concentrations of 15 mg/l.
C. pH: not less than 5.5 nor more than 9.0.
D. SUSPENDED SOLIDS: concentrations of 250 mg/l.
§ 360-55 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-56
347:703
pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree required by
the NJPDES permit.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample consisting of several portions collected
from a waste stream during a specific time period and combined to make a
representative sample.
COOLING WATER — Any water used for the purpose of carrying away
excess heat and which may contain biocides used to control biological
growth or additives to protect the system against corrosion, freezing,
scaling and the like.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Water and Sewer in the City
of Bridgeton.[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-04]
DOMESTIC WASTEWATER — The liquid waste or liquid borne waste:
EFFLUENT — Wastewater after some degree of treatment, flowing out of
any treatment device or facilities.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR — The Executive Director of the Cumberland
County Utilities Authority.
FORCE MAIN — A pipeline carrying flow under pressure.
GRAB SAMPLE — A representative sample which is taken from a waste
stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream
and without consideration of time.
GRAVITY MAIN — A pipeline carrying flow by gravity or operating under
atmospheric pressures.
GREASE or OIL — Any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant as defined herein.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b), (c)
or (d) of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including
holding tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL PROCESS WASTEWATER — The liquid waste or liquid borne
waste resulting from the processes employed by any user or users identified
in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual 1972, Office of
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the
following divisions:
Resulting from the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling
of food; and/or
A.
Consisting of human excrement and similar wastes from sanitary
conveniences.
B.
A. Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
§ 360-56 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-56
347:704
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any:
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gaseous or solid substances or a
combination thereof resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing,
trade or business or from the development or recovery of any natural
resource, as distinct from sanitary wastes.
INFILTRATION — Water entering the City sewer system from the ground,
through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections, or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is
distinguished from, inflow.
INFLOW — Water discharged into the City sewer system from such sources
as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellars, yards and area drains,
foundation drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and
swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and
combined sewers, catch basins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash
waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from,
infiltration.
INFLUENT — Wastewater, raw or partly treated, flowing into any
wastewater treatment device or facilities.
INTERCEPTING SEWER — An Authority-owned sewer which receives flow
from a local sewer collection system.
B. Division B: Mining.
C. Division D: Manufacturing.
Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary
Services.
D.
E. Division I: Services.
Nonresidential user which discharges industrial or sanitary waste and
which is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual,
1972, as amended and supplemented, under one of the following
divisions:
(1) Division A: Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing;
(2) Division B: Mining;
(3) Division D: Manufacturing;
Division E: Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services;
(4)
(5) Division I: Services (as selectively identified by the USEPA); or
A.
Any user which discharges wastewater containing incompatible
pollutants or pollutants subject to pretreatment standards.
B.
§ 360-56 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-56
347:705
LOCAL SEWER — Any sewer or system of sewers which is connected to
the Cohansey River Basin Sewer System and owned and/or operated by any
person (as defined in Section 2.21.0) other than the Authority.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
The program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the
discharge of pollutants from point sources into navigable waters, the
contiguous zone and the oceans pursuant to Section 402 of P.L. 92-500 and
its amendments.
NEW JERSEY POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NJPDES)
— The New Jersey system for the issuing, modifying, suspending, revoking
and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing of discharge permits
pursuant to the state act. The term also includes discharge permits
(NPDES) issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Clean Water Act of 1977.
NORMAL SEWAGE — As defined in Section 2-7.2b as average domestic
sewage.
PERMITTED USER — Any authorization, approval, or equivalent control
document issued by the EPA, state approval authority, or the Cumberland
County Utilities Authority to restrict, control, or otherwise regulate the
quantity and/or quality of wastewater discharged to the Cohansey River
Basin Sewer System by a user. A user who is discharging into the Cohansey
River Basin System under authority of a permit is known as "permitted
user."
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association, group or society including the State of New Jersey and
agencies, districts, commissions and political subdivisions, created by or
pursuant to state law and federal agencies, departments or
instrumentalities thereof.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration in moles per liter of solution. Solutions with a pH less than 7
are said to be acidic, pH equal to 7 are considered neutral, and pH greater
than 7 are said to be alkaline.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean or may be so defined now or hereafter by
appropriate local, state or federal agencies or by the Authority as
substances which may be present in wastewater, whether gaseous, liquid
or solid, the amount of which may contain soluble or insoluble solids of
organic or inorganic nature which may deplete the dissolved oxygen content
of natural waters, contribute solids, contain oil, grease, or floating solids
which may cause unsightly appearances on the surface of such waters,
or contain materials detrimental to aquatic life, including but not limited
to any dredges spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage,
refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, substance, thermal waste, wrecked or
discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal or
agricultural waste or other residue discharged into receiving waters.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW that is designed to
provide treatment, including recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage
and industrial waste.
§ 360-56 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-56
347:706
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property, including land, improvements, or
appurtenances, such as buildings, ground, etc.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant's
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any procedural or substantive
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard, that is imposed on an industrial user.
PUBLIC SEWER — The public sewer lines or mains designed or used for
collection or disposal of wastewater.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 2392) which is maintained in
this instance by the Cumberland County Utilities Authority. For the purpose
of these rules and regulations, POTW shall also include any sewer lines
that convey wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the CCUA's
service area who are, by contract or agreement with the CCUA, users of the
CCUA's POTW and any devices and systems used to store, treat, recycle,
and reclaim municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. The
term also means the municipal discharges to and the discharges from such
a treatment works.
PUMPING STATION — A facility in which wastewater is conveyed from a
lower hydraulic elevation to a higher hydraulic elevation using mechanical
or pneumatic devices.
SANITARY WASTE — Wash water, culinary wastes, and liquid waste
containing only human excreta and similar matter, flowing in or from a
building drainage system in sewer originating in a dwelling, business or
office building, factory or institution. For the purposes of these articles,
sanitary waste shall be characterized as normal sewage.
SEWAGE — The liquid or water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be
present, whether treated or untreated.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit, generally closed, for carrying wastewater.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sewerage facilities within the City and shall include
all collecting sewers, pumping stations, force mains and appurtenances
thereto owned or operated by the City.
SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle having a dimension greater than 1/2 inch
in any direction, excluding household garbage wastes.
§ 360-56 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-56
347:707
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) —
STATE ACT — The New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:10A-1 et seq.
STORMWATER — The excess water running off from the surface of a
drainage area or building during or immediately following a period of rain
or snow melt.88
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) — The laboratory determination of the dry
weight expressed in milligrams per liter of solids that either float on the
surface, are in suspension, or are settleable and can be removed from
wastewater by filtering through a Gooch crucible.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Those pollutants, or combination of pollutants,
including disease-causing agents, which after discharge into the
environment in sufficient quantities and upon exposure, ingestion,
inhalation or assimilation into any organism, either directly or indirectly by
ingestion through food chains, will, on the basis of information available
to the Commissioner of the Department of Environmental Protection, cause
death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations,
physiological malfunctions, including malfunctions in reproduction, or
physical deformation, in such organisms or their offspring. Toxic pollutants
shall include but not be limited to those pollutants designated under Section
307 of the Federal Act or Section 4 of the State Act.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any substance or combination of substances,
whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which when discharged to the sewer
system in sufficient quantities may tend to interfere with any treatment
process, constitute a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the
Any user who discharges into the POTW of the CCUA industrial process
wastewater from industries defined by the EPA as categorical industries
and subject to categorical standards.
A.
Any noncategorical user discharging nondomestic wastewater that:
(1) Exceeds 25,000 gallons per day; or
Exceeds the same mass equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day of the
domestic wastes of the POTW of the CCUA based on the values for
normal sewage as defined hereinabove; or
(2)
(3) Exceeds 5% of the average daily flow of the POTW of the CCUA; or
Contributes 5% or more of the daily mass loading of any of the
pollutants listed in Table I which are entering the POTW; or
(4)
Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the control or approval
authority, to adversely affect the POTW treatment plant (inhibition,
pass-through of pollutants, sludge contamination, or endangerment
of POTW workers).
(5)
B.
88.Editor's Note: The former definition of "Supervisor," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12
§ 360-56 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-56
347:708
effluent from the wastewater treatment plant, pose a hazard to workers in
the sewer system, or constitute a hazard to fish or animal life.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any device or system, whether public or private,
used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal or
industrial waste of a liquid nature, including intercepting sewers, outfall
sewer, sewage collection systems, cooling towers and ponds, pumping,
power and other equipment and their appurtenances; extension,
improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; elements
essential to provide a reliable recycled supply such as standby treatment
units and clear well facilities; any other works including sites for the
treatment process or the ultimate disposal of residues resulting from such
treatment. Additionally, "treatment works" means any other method or
system for preventing, abating, reducing, storing, treating, separating or
disposing of pollutants, including stormwater runoff, or industrial waste in
combined or separate stormwater and sanitary sewer systems.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Water not containing any pollutants limited or
prohibited by the effluent standard in effect, and/or water whose discharge
will not cause any violation of receiving water quality standards or
interference with their designated uses.
UNSHREDDED GARBAGE; GARBAGE — Solid waste from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food or food products and from the handling,
storing and sale of produce, excluding household garbage wastes.
USER — Any person who discharges, causes, or permits the discharge of
any wastewater into the treatment works.
USER CLASSIFICATION — A classification of users based on the 1972 (or
subsequent) Edition of the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Manual
prepared by the Federal Office of Management and Budget.
WASTEWATER — The liquid or water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may
be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or
permitted to enter the CCUA treatment works.
§ 360-57. Definitions in County Sewer Use Rules and Regulations.
Terms not defined herein shall be defined as set forth in the Cumberland
County Utilities Authority Sewer Use Rules and Regulations, as amended.
To the extent that the terms and definitions herein are inconsistent with
those used by the Cumberland County Utilities Authority, the terms and
definitions herein shall be amended to the terms and definitions found in the
Cumberland County Utilities Authority Sewer Use Rules and Regulations.
§ 360-56 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-57
347:709

ARTICLE VI
Sewer Regulations89
§ 360-58. Applicability of county sewer use regulations; supervision
of sewerage facility.
§ 360-59. Disposal of wastes; connection to public sewer;
responsibility for installation, connection, maintenance, repair;
indemnification.
A. Generally. The sewer use regulations of the Cumberland County
Utilities Authority, as may be amended by the Cumberland County
Utilities Authority, shall be the sewer use regulations of the City of
Bridgeton in addition to those regulations specific to the City of
Bridgeton.
B. Supervision. The Director of the Division of Water and Sewer shall
exercise supervision of the sewerage facility and its operation and shall
enforce the rules and regulations of the Division. [Amended
11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
A. Unauthorized disposal. No person shall place, deposit or permit to be
deposited on public or private property, into streams or bodies of water
within the City any animal excrement or sanitary waste, including
garbage or industrial waste.
B. Connection to public sewer.
(1) Each premises fronting on a public way or easement in which a
public sewer is now in operation shall be connected separately and
independently with the public sewer main directly in front of the
building or dwelling or use on the premises, or nearest in a
downstream direction, with the exception of a premises which is
receiving sewer services through a common private sewer line at
the time of the passage of this chapter. If the common private sewer
line must be replaced, service by common sewer line shall be
discontinued, and each premises shall be connected individually
and independently with the public sewer.
(2) All premises fronting on a public way or easement in which a public
sewer shall be constructed or placed in operation shall connect to
the public sewer within 90 days after such operation begins.
(3) All toilets, sinks, bathtubs, wash basins or tubs or other fixtures for
receiving wastewater located in or connected with any building
shall be connected with the public sewer.
89.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 74-16, adopted on 1-22-1975, provided for a perpetual service
contract between the City of Bridgeton and the Cumberland County Sewerage Authority.
The City has a contract with the Cumberland County Utilities Authority, and said
documents are on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 360-58 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-59
347:711
(4) New or replacement sewer lines or pipes shall be compatible with
the existing sewer lines or pipes. No connection line or pipe from
the public sewer main to the wall of the building or to the premises
shall be less than four inches in diameter.
(5) Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings,
provided they are of good condition and conform to the
requirements of these regulations.
(6) The owner at owner's expense shall be responsible for keeping the
sewer line from the premises to the public sewer line in good
working order and repair, and free from blockage.
(7) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or
structure unless the owner of said building or structure complies
with the terms of this section.
(8) The Director may prohibit any person from connecting to the public
sewer if, in the Director's opinion, the sewage is detrimental to the
public sewer system or to the health, welfare, or safety of the City
and its citizens. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
(9) All building sewers and all laterals or connections of the building
sewer to the public sewer system shall conform to the
requirements of the building and plumbing codes or any other
applicable rule or regulation of the City, the Cumberland County
Utilities Authority or the State of New Jersey. The owner of a
premises with a below-grade sewer line shall have the sewer line
equipped with backup or check valves to prevent backup of
effluent.
C. Responsibility for installation, connection, maintenance and repair;
indemnification.
(1) All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of a premises to the public sewer line shall be the responsibility of
the owner(s) of the premises.
(2) All costs and expenses incidental to the maintenance and repair of
lateral sewer lines or pipes from the public sewer line to the
building, structure or use on the premises shall be the
responsibility of the owner(s) of the premises.
(3) Laterals from the public sewer line to the curbline shall be laid,
repaired or replaced at the expense of the owner(s) of the
premises. Such lateral shall be laid, repaired or replaced by or
under the supervision of the Division. The Division shall provide or
require that all new or replacement sewer lines be compatible with
the existing sewer lines. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No.
06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
§ 360-59 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-59
347:712
(a) The Division shall install four-inch sewer lines or laterals from
the public sewer line to the curbline. When the Division
provides this service, the owner or applicant shall deposit a
sum equal to the costs of connection, renewal, installation,
repair, replacement, or other service at the time of application.
(b) The installation, repair and replacement of sewer lines over
four inches from the public sewer to the curbline shall be
contracted out by the owner at the owner's expense to an
approved contractor. The City shall approve the material,
supervise the installation, repair or replacement and charge an
inspection fee.
(4) Sewer lines from the curbline to the building, structure or use on
the premises shall be laid, repaired or replaced by and at the
expense of the owner(s) of the premises. All new or replacement
lines must be compatible with the City's sewer lines. The
installation, repair or replacement shall be contracted out by the
owner at the owner's expense to an approved contractor. The City
shall approve the materials, supervise the installation and charge
an inspection fee.
(5) The owner(s) whose premises is receiving sewer services through a
common private sewer line shall be responsible for the
maintenance, operation and cost of repairs of the common sewer
line and shall be severally liable. If the common sewer line which
serves more than one premises or building must be replaced,
service by common sewer line shall be discontinued, and the
owner(s) of each property or premises shall be individually
responsible for the installation of its own private sewer line and
connection to the public sewer line.
(6) If the owner of any premises in the City fails to connect, install,
repair, replace or maintain private sewer lines or meters, etc., as
required by the City, the City may make or cause to be made the
connection, installation, repair or maintenance and bill the owner
of said property for the costs and expenses thereof. The owner of
said property shall be subject to the same penalties for nonpayment
of these costs and expenses as for nonpayment of sewer rents.
(7) It is expressly stipulated that no claim shall be made against the
City by reason of the breaking of any public sewer line or from the
maintenance of the public sewer line or the cleaning or clearing of
a public sewer line or from the shutting off of sewer services.
D. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the premises to the public sewer and all costs and expenses incidental
to the maintenance and repair of the lateral sewer lines from the public
sewer to the premises shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) who
shall indemnify the City for any loss or damage that may directly or
§ 360-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-59
347:713
§ 360-60. Meters or measuring devices; testing and sampling.
§ 360-61. Right of entry. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
The Director or any duly authorized officer under the Director, or the
Executive Director or his agent shall have the right to enter upon any land,
water or premises connected to the sewer system at any reasonable time
or, if an emergency, at anytime, for the purposes of making surveys, studies,
investigations or inspections or for examining pipes and equipment or for
sampling, analyzing and inspecting the quality and quantity of wastewater
or other discharges from the premises into the sewer system or for the
purpose of reviewing and copying any records required to be kept by the
Authority or the City.
§ 360-62. General prohibitions.
No person shall commit any of the following acts:
indirectly be occasioned by the installation or the connection or the
maintenance and repair.
A. When any owner of premises shall install a meter or measuring device
upon proper application to the Director as provided herein, such
installation shall be at the owner's expense, and the owner shall be
responsible for its maintenance and all repairs thereto, whether such
repairs are made necessary by ordinary wear and tear or other causes.
Should repairs to the meter or measuring device be made by the City
upon request of the owner, all bills for such repairs shall be due and
payable at the same time and be collected in the same manner and be
subject to the same penalties for nonpayment as are the bills for
sewerage service. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
B. Measurements, tests and analyses of waste and wastewater of
industrial or permitted users shall be determined in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Cumberland County Utilities Authority.
A permitted and/or industrial user at its own expense and as required
by the Cumberland County Utilities Authority shall install all necessary
sampling and metering devices and other appurtenances or structures
to facilitate observation, sampling or measurement of waste or
wastewater.
C. The Director shall have the right to make reasonable inspection of all
devices or meters installed by owners of the premises. If the Director
discovers a mechanical defect or an error in recording, then the
Director may order the owner to have the same repaired. If the owner
shall not repair or cause to have repaired said meter or device within 10
days, then the Director may have the same repaired, adjusted,
calibrated or replaced, and such costs shall be charged against the
owner and shall be included in the next bill and collected as any sewer
charge. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
§ 360-59 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-62
347:714
§ 360-63. Prohibitions and limitations on wastewater discharges.
§ 360-64. Authority to discontinue service.
A. To uncover any portion of the sewer system or open any manhole except
with the written permission of the Director.
B. To open any public street or place or to break, cut or remove any pipe or
appurtenance of the sewer system except with permission of the
Director.
C. To make or cause to be made any connection with or opening into the
sewer system or alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without permission of the Director.
D. To discharge or cause to be discharged into any sewer system, directly
or indirectly, any groundwater, surface water or rainwater from yards,
areas, courts or roofs or foundation drains except with the permission
of the Director.
A. No person shall discharge, directly or indirectly, deposit, cause or allow
to be discharged or deposited into the sewer system any wastewater,
toxic substances or other substances, except in compliance with the
rules and regulations of the Cumberland County Utilities Authority.
B. The admission of any water or wastewater having the following
characteristics shall be subject to review of the Cumberland County
Utilities Authority:
(1) A five-day BOD concentration greater than 250 parts per million;
or
(2) A suspended solids concentration in excess of 250 parts per million,
by weight; or
(3) Incompatible pollutants, as defined within the Rules and
Regulations of the Cumberland County Utilities Authority; or
(4) Pollutants subject to pretreatment standards of federal and state
government; or
(5) An average daily discharge in excess of 25,000 gallons.
C. No person shall discharge into the sewer system waste or wastewater
substances which are prohibited by or exceed prescribed limits or
which violate restrictions of the Cumberland County Utilities Authority.
D. All industrial users connected to or proposing to be connected to or
discharging into the sewer system will obtain an industrial wastewater
discharge permit in accord with the Rules and Regulations of the
Cumberland County Utilities Authority and shall adhere to such rules
and regulations.
§ 360-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-64
347:715
§ 360-65. Extension of public sewer main within public right-of-way.
A. Whenever the Director or the Executive Director of the Cumberland
County Utilities Authority is of the opinion or has reason to believe that
a person is actually or probably evading or disregarding the provisions
of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the Authority, including
noncompliance with the conditions of an industrial user permit, or there
is the necessity for alterations, extensions or repairs, or there are
discharges into the sewers of any substance liable to injure the
sewerage facilities, the Director or the Executive Director may serve
upon such person personally, or by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, at the last known address, a written notice stating
the nature of the violation, providing a reasonable time for the
satisfactory correction thereof, advising that suspension of sewer
services may occur if the violations or alterations, extensions or repairs
are not corrected. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
B. If the violation, alterations, extensions or repairs are not corrected by
timely compliance, the Director or Executive Director may suspend
sewer services. A person notified of the suspension of sewer services
shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution of wastewater.
Reinstatement may occur at cost to the user upon proof by written
statement that the violations have been corrected, that alterations,
extension, or repairs have been made or that improper discharges have
been eliminated. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
C. The Director or Executive Director may sever the connection or cause
the removal of any sewer line or pipes or drain if the person fails to
comply with the notice of suspension, or if the Director or Executive
Director deems the situation an emergency in that there is an imminent
and substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons or
the environment, the Director or Executive Director shall be authorized
to act without notice and recourse. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-12]
D. Sewer services may be terminated for nonpayment of rent, charges or
fees.
A. Application for an extension of a sewer within the public right-of-way
shall be to the Division of Water and Sewer, who shall consult with the
City Engineer. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009
by Ord. No. 09-04]
B. The applicant shall submit the necessary engineering drawings and/or
other details as are determined to be necessary by the City Engineer or
other appropriate agency.
C. The application and submission shall be reviewed by the City Engineer
and the Cumberland County Utilities Authority, if necessary, and to any
other appropriate or county agency for approval. The City Council shall
determine whether to grant an extension of the public sewer main
§ 360-64 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-65
347:716
§ 360-66. Application and permit for connection, service or repair.
based upon its assessment of the need and ability of the sewerage
system to accommodate such expansion. The City Council may set
reasonable terms and conditions and may make the extension of the
public sewer main as local improvements with costs assessable to
owners of the property abutting said main.
D. Applicants shall be responsible for all costs of the extension project,
including those for assessment, inspection escrow, miscellaneous fees
and costs, permits, costs of excavation and of bonding as may be
required by the City Engineer and City Council or Authority.
E. Final approval of the extension project is dependent upon the applicant
meeting bonding requirements as required by the City Engineer, City
ordinances and CCUA, paying any and all necessary fees, escrows,
costs, bonding expenses, and any other payments associated with the
project.
A. Application for connection or renewal, for repairs and/or replacement
of sewer lines or pipes, for permits or any other sewerage services from
the Division of Water and Sewer shall be in writing to the Division on a
form provided by the Division and signed by the owner or the owner's
agent. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-04]
B. If required, the applicant must secure appropriate state or county
permits, including, in the case of a new connection, a connection fee
permit from the CCUA and necessary permits for opening a state or
county highway or road, as well as permits from the City code
enforcement officers.
C. The application must be obtained and proof of payment of fees,
including the new connection fee of the CCUA, and of expenses,
escrows and all other costs must be provided to the Division prior to the
start of the installation, replacement, repair, construction or
connection. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009
by Ord. No. 09-04]
§ 360-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-66
347:717

ARTICLE VII
Schedule of Charges; Enforcement Procedures and Violations
§ 360-67. Previously established rates and charges.
Rates, rentals, connection fees, tapping fees, or any other fees or charges,
other than those set forth herein, shall remain as previously established by
ordinance.
§ 360-68. Collection of sewer rents, fees and charges; violations;
enforcement.
A. Collection. The Tax Collector of the City of Bridgeton shall have charge
of the collection of the sewerage rents and shall deposit all monies
received in the manner required by law. Sewerage rents shall be
payable quarterly.
B. Delinquent sewer bills and charges. If any sewer rent, fee or charge
shall remain unpaid for a period of 30 days from the date when such
charge shall fall or become due, the Tax Collector may notify the
Director and the City Council of the delinquency for a determination
whether sewer service should be discontinued. If any rate, rental,
connection fee or charge remains unpaid for a period of 30 days,
interest shall accrue at the rate of interest as allowed by law.
[Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12]
C. Rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges as lien on real property.
Rates, rentals, connection fees or other charges levied in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-1 et seq. shall be a first lien or charge against the
property benefitted therefrom. Liens levied in accordance with this
section shall be enforceable in the manner provided for real property
tax liens in Chapter 5 of the Title 54 of the Revised Statutes.
D. Service discontinued. The City may discontinue sewer service to any
property for the failure to pay any amount owing 60 days after the date
the amount is due and payable. Written notice of the proposed
discontinuance of service under this section and the reasons therefor
shall be given within at least 10 days prior to the discontinuance; said
notice may be served personally on the owner of record and all persons
in possession of the property or by letter, certified and regular mail, and
is postmarked at least 10 days prior to the date of discontinuance.
E. Violations. In addition to the imposition of penalties for the violation of
any City ordinance, the City may initiate appropriate legal proceedings
to collect any rents, fees or charges in any court having jurisdiction
thereof or may prosecute any appropriate action for legal and/or
equitable relief in any court of competent jurisdiction. Any complaint
filed for these purposes shall include a claim for costs of such action,
including reasonable attorney fees.
§ 360-67 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-68
347:719
§ 360-69. Application and cost for connection to sewer system and
for repairs.
F. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or the rules and
regulations of the Division or the Authority shall be liable to the City for
any expense, loss or damage that the City occasioned by reason of such
violation. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-04]
G. The remedies enunciated herein are in addition to any remedies of the
Authority.
H. All persons using City sewerage facilities shall be classified by the City
as either residential; commercial, small industrial and institutional
users; correctional facility user; or large industrial user.
A. Application for connection to the sewer system and for installation,
repair or replacement of lateral sewer lines from the public sewer line
shall be to the Division. [Amended 11-21-2006 by Ord. No. 06-12;
12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
B. The charge for a four-inch sewer service from the main sewer line to the
curb shall be as provided in Chapter 149, Fees, Article II, Schedule of
Fees, payable at the time of making application for sewer service. The
charges in this section include charges for breaking the street, opening
the street, overseeing the sewer tap, making permanent repair to the
street and installing the four-inch sewer line.
C. The cost of the connection and of the supervision by the City for a
lateral sewer line over four inches shall be fixed by the City Engineer or
his designee and shall be payable at the time of application. The owner
of the premises shall contract with an approved contractor and pay the
contractor directly for the costs of installation.
D. If required, the applicant must secure any necessary state or county
permits, including any permits for opening a state or county highway or
any permit from the Authority.
E. If, subsequent to an application to the Division to remove a blockage in
a sewer line, the City investigates and/or removes the blockage, and the
Director determines or finds that the blockage was the responsibility of
the owner of the premises, the City shall charge said owner the actual
cost of the investigation and/or service. [Amended 11-21-2006 by
Ord. No. 06-12; 12-1-2009 by Ord. No. 09-04]
§ 360-68 BRIDGETON CODE § 360-69
347:720
Chapter 370
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. III.
Affordable housing — See Ch. 2.
Urban redevelopment — See Ch. 64.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 126.
Fees — See Ch. 149.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 167.
Junkyards — See Ch. 189.
Payment of charges, liens and
assessments — See Ch. 200, Art. II.
Manufactured and mobile homes — See Ch.
212.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 265.
Rental property — See Ch. 277.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 304.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 311.
Water and sewer — See Ch. 360.
§ 360-69 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 360-69
347:721

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 370-1. Long title.
The long title of this chapter is "An Ordinance To Limit and Restrict to
Specified Districts and To Regulate Therein Buildings and Structures
According to Their Construction, and the Nature and Extent of Their Use
and the Nature and Extent of the Uses of Land."
§ 370-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Bridgeton, New Jersey."
§ 370-3. General intent.
The regulations and districts set forth herein are established to implement
the City of Bridgeton Master Plan goals, objectives, and policies; with
consideration given to Plan Endorsement (Visioning) findings. It is the
purpose of this chapter to:
§ 370-4. Establishment of controls.
A. Promote, protect, and improve, in accordance with present and future
needs, the public health, safety, comfort, good order, appearance,
convenience, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of Bridgeton,
New Jersey; and
B. Conserve the value of land, buildings, and resources; to protect the
character and maintain the stability of residential, business and
industrial areas; and
C. Maintain a balanced community that offers a mix of appropriate land
uses that preserves and enhances the City's distinctive community
character and sense of place by encouraging residential home
ownership and expanding permitted uses in commercial districts; and
D. More effectively manage population density so as to mitigate the
burden on City resources and infrastructure; and
E. Revitalize the Central Business District, creating a safe, vibrant
downtown entertainment district; and
F. Provide efficiency and economy in the property development process.
A. New uses and structures. In all districts, from and after the effective
date of this chapter, any new buildings or other structures may be
constructed or altered and used and any tract or parcel of land may be
developed and used only in accordance with the regulations of this
chapter.
§ 370-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-4
347:723
§ 370-5. Establishment of zoning districts. [Amended 9-17-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-06]
In order to carry out the purpose and provisions of this chapter, the City of
Bridgeton is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
R-1 Low-Density Residential
R-2 Medium-Density Residential
R-3 High-Density Residential
R-4 Neighborhood Residential
C-1 Central Business
C-2 Apartment/Commercial
C-3 Hospital-Medical Center
C-4 Neighborhood Business
C-5 Highway Commercial
PMU-1Planned Mixed-Use Overlay
I Industrial
O-1 Park and Open Space
WF Waterfront
§ 370-6. Adoption of Zoning District Map.
B. Existing uses and structures. In all districts, from and after the effective
date of this chapter, any building or other structure, any tract or parcel
of land, and any use conducted within a structure or on a tract or parcel
of land which is not in conformity with the regulations for the district in
which it is located shall be deemed nonconforming and shall be subject
to the regulations of Article IX of this chapter.
A. The Zoning District Map (§ 370-11.1 Attachment 1) was prepared with
reasonable consideration of the existing character of the various areas
within the City of Bridgeton and their respective suitability to their
particular uses.
B. The areas within the City limits assigned to a specific zoning district
whose location of boundaries are established by this chapter and shown
on the official Zoning District Map (Attachment 1), Bridgeton, New
Jersey, dated August 15, 2013, which, together with all explanatory
matter thereon, is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter.
[Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
C. The official copy of the Zoning District Map shall be kept on file with the
Zoning Officer. If, and whenever, changes are made in boundaries or
other matters included on said map, such changes shall be made within
five days after the amendment has been approved by City Council
pursuant to § 370-88.
§ 370-4 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-7
347:724
§ 370-7. District boundary lines, disagreements.
The district boundary lines as shown on the Zoning District Map are
intended to follow the center line of streets, railroad rights-of-way, streams,
alleys, and lot (or property) lines as they exist on plats of record at the time
of passage of this chapter. Where uncertainty exists, the following rules
shall apply:
§ 370-8. Boundary tolerances.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter, the use regulations
applicable to the more restrictive district shall apply.
§ 370-9. Conflict with other government regulations.
Where there is a conflict between this chapter and the regulations of any
state, county or other governmental agency, the strictest regulation shall
apply, unless preempted by such other regulations.
A. Where boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they do not
scale more than 10 feet distant therefrom, lot lines shall be construed to
be such boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
B. On unsubdivided land and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary (unless same is indicated by dimensions
shown on the Official Map, shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing thereon.
C. Where a property is divided between more than one zoning district, the
entire lot (or portion thereof located in the neighboring zone) may be
used for a purpose permitted in either zone upon application for a
conditional use approval by the approving authority, provided that all of
the following conditions are met:
(1) The use contemplated can be best established by using the portion
of the lot in the neighboring zoning district without materially
affecting the adjoining properties.
(2) The site plan shall be appropriate to the adjoining areas.
(3) Prior to hearing the associated application, a set of plans,
specifications, and plot plans shall be filed with the secretary of the
approving authority showing overall dimensions, existing and
proposed buildings, and the relationship of the proposed use to the
streets and adjacent properties and other physical features that
might act as a detriment to the general public welfare.
D. In case of doubt or disagreement concerning the exact location of
district boundary lines, the determination of the approving authority, as
provided in § 370-89 or § 370-91, shall prevail.
§ 370-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-10
347:725
§ 370-10. General interpretation.
§ 370-11. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated herein, the following definitions shall apply:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building or structure subordinate to and
located on the same lot with a main building and designed, intended or used
as an accessory use; the height of an accessory building shall not exceed
20 feet in height, except that a required off-street parking garage which is
accessory to the main building, or any accessory buildings or structures to
the main building of an alternate power producer may exceed 20 feet in
height, but in no case to exceed 250 feet.
ACCESSORY USE — A use conducted on the same lot as the principal use to
which it is related, whether located within the same or accessory structure
or as an accessory use of land; except that, where specifically provided in
the district regulations, off-street parking or loading need not be located
on the same lot; and is a use which is clearly incidental to and customarily
found in connection with such principal use. An accessory use may be either
in the same ownership as the principal use or operated and maintained
on the same lot in a different township substantially for the benefit or
convenience of the owners, occupants, employees, customers or visitors of
the principal use.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE — Any office or business function in which there
is no regular contact with the general public and no materials, products,
goods or prepared foods are stored, manufactured or assembled except for
employees' consumption.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer, with the exception of
preparing and certifying official property lists pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12c, which shall be the Tax Assessor, or in the absence of the Tax
Assessor, shall be the Tax Assessor Clerk.[Amended 10-3-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-25]
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the terms and words listed in this
section and § 370-11 shall have the meanings defined. Words not herein
shall have the meanings given in Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
B. For the purpose of this chapter, the following rules of interpretation
shall apply:
(1) Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(2) Words in the singular case include the plural case, and vice versa.
(3) The words "used" and "occupied" shall be considered to include the
words "or intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied,
or offered for occupancy."
(4) The term "such as" shall be considered as introducing a typical, or
illustrative, designation of items, and shall not be interpreted as
constituting a complete list.
§ 370-10 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-11
347:726
ALLEY — A private or publicly owned thoroughfare other than a dedicated
street.
ALTERATION OF BUILDING — Any change, addition or modification in
construction or arrangement of a building or structure, or change in use
from that of one district classification to another, or removal of a building
from one location to another.
ALTERNATE POWER PRODUCER — A cogeneration facility, windmill or
solar facility which has received qualifying facility status from the
appropriate state or federal regulatory agency.
APARTMENT - EFFICIENCY UNIT — A dwelling unit consisting of not more
than one habitable room, together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary
facilities.
APARTMENT UNIT — A part of a building consisting of one or more rooms
with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent selfcontained
dwelling unit.
APPLICANT — Any private person, persons or any representative of any
private entity, private organization, association, or public agency with legal
authority to make an alteration, addition, renovation, or repair or to
demolish a structure that is governed under this section of the municipal
ordinances.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to the MLUL.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of Bridgeton unless a
different agency is designated by ordinance when acting pursuant to the
MLUL.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A facility providing sleeping or dwelling
accommodations to transient guests in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.5. A
bed-and-breakfast is limited to single-family detached homes with no more
than five lodgers or boarders at any one time. Also known as a "tourist
home."
BOARDINGHOUSE — A building which contains two or more units of
dwelling space arranged or intended for single-room occupancy wherein
personal or financial services are provided to residents, including any
residential hotel or congregate living arrangement pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:13B-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:27.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — The Board established pursuant to the MLUL
and this chapter.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent, temporary, or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — A portion of land covered by buildings and other
roofed structures.
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-11
347:727
BUILDING FACING — The exterior side of a building wall extending from
ground level to roofline.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance of a building measured from
the mean ground elevation at the front of the building to its highest point,
but not including chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks,
antennas, air-conditioning equipment and similar projections; provided,
however, that such projections shall not cover more than 5% of the roof area
and shall be shielded by a parapet wall.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line parallel to the street right-of-way
line bounding an area within which buildings and certain facilities are
prohibited.
BUSINESS SERVICE — An act by which skills of one person are utilized
for the benefit of a business or professional establishment, provided that no
function involves manufacture, cleaning, repair, storage or distribution of
products or goods.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real property or
major construction project.
CAR WASH — A facility for the washing and cleaning of automobiles using
production line methods with a conveyor, blower and other mechanical
devices and/or providing space, material and equipment for a fee to
individuals for self-service washing and cleaning of automobiles.
CELLAR — A story partly above grade level having more than half of its
floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A
cellar shall not be used as a dwelling unit.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use that substantially differs from the previous use
of a building or land.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means
as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and
conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals,
stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
CLINIC — An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight
are admitted for examination and treatment by one physician or dentist, or
a group of physicians and/or dentists, practicing the commonly acceptable
forms of medicine.
COGENERATION FACILITY — All of the components and related facilities
of a plant where electricity and heat are simultaneously produced from a
single fuel source, including without limitation the transmission line and
any and all appliances, parts, instruments, appurtenances, accessories and
other property that may be incorporated or installed in or attached to or
otherwise become part of such plant.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — A business conducted primarily to provide
amusement, entertainment or relaxation to the general public, such as
§ 370-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-11
347:728
motion-picture theaters, bowling alleys, billiard halls, tennis, and miniature
golf.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to a
site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the use
or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common open
space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as
are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITIES — Facilities which are operated and
maintained for the benefit of the general public or a segment of the
population, such as places of worship and related facilities, community
recreation centers, auditoriums, libraries, service organizations such as
the YMCA, transportation terminals, including taxi operations, public and
private schools and the like.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application for development completed as
specified by ordinance, by checklist, and the rules and regulations of the
approving authority and the provisions of all required documents.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in the Zoning Ordinance, and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board. If all conditions cannot be
met, the application must be approved by the Board of Adjustment.
CONTINUING CARE FACILITY — This term, as applied to this chapter,
is intended to include nursing homes, skilled nursing facilities, continuing
care retirement homes, extended care facilities, and similar uses which
provide facilities for the treatment and rehabilitation of human ailments.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of Cumberland County,
New Jersey.
CROSSWALK — A pedestrian walkway which crosses a street at a location
other than that street's intersection with another street.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards adopted by ordinance regulating
material, dimension or engineering specifications.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or other structures, or of any
mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-11
347:729
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — The Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
Ordinance,90 site plan ordinance, Official Map Ordinance or other City
regulation of the use and development of land or amendment thereto
adopted.
DISTRIBUTION — A function involved in the division, dispensation, or
relocation of materials, goods or products.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff during and
after construction or development to minimize erosion and sedimentation,
to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen nonpoint
pollution, to maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions as well as for drainage, and the means necessary for water supply
preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DWELLING — A building, any portion of which is used or intended to be
used exclusively for residential purposes. The following dwelling types are
permitted in various zoning districts in the City (See Attachment 2)91:
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A building designed for
three or more families with the dwellings separated by common walls
and each having its own main entrance in the front of the building.
Single-family attached dwellings can each be located on a separate lot
or one common lot. A single-family attached dwelling is also known as
a "townhouse."
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A building designed
exclusively as a residence for one family on one lot that is not attached
to any other dwelling by any means.
B.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A building designed
for two families living side by side in separate units from each other
by an unpierced wall extending from the basement to the roof having
a common wall with one side yard provided for each dwelling. Singlefamily
semidetached units are each located on a separate lot and are
also known as a "duplex" or "twin."
C.
TWO-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A building designed for two
families with one family living wholly or partly over the other (over/
under) or one family living side by side (duplex) the other and each
having its own main entrance and located on one lot.
D.
FOUR-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A building designed for four
families with two family dwellings located on the ground floor and two
dwellings on the second floor, the dwellings on each floor separated by
a common wall and each dwelling unit having its own main entrance in
the front of the building. A four-family attached dwelling is located on
one lot.
E.
90.Editor's Note: See Ch. 311, Subdivision of Land.
91.Editor's Note: Attachment 2 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-11
347:730
DWELLING UNIT — Any portion of a building used or intended to be used
by one or more individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit
with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN — The harmonious relating of proposed
structures to the terrain and to the existing buildings in the vicinity that
have a visual relationship to the proposed buildings, structures and open
spaces in a design control district.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice and gravity.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit, who are living together as a bona fide, stable
and committed living unit, being a traditional family unit or the functional
equivalent thereof, exhibiting the generic character of a traditional family.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board taken on
a preliminary approved plan after all conditions, engineering plans and
other requirements have been completed or fulfilled and the required
improvements have been installed or guarantees properly posted for their
completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantee.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The land, and space above that land, which
lies below the flood hazard area design flood elevation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:13 et seq., Flood Hazard Area Control Act Rules.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
enclosed floors of a building, including cellars, basements, mezzanines,
penthouses, corridors, and lobbies from the exterior face of exterior walls,
or from the center line of a common wall separating two buildings, but
excluding any space with a floor-to-ceiling height of less than seven feet six
inches or accessory buildings that are not intended for human occupancy
(Reference: 2009 international Building Code, New Jersey Edition, Chapter
1208.2).
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A business conducted primarily for the
retail sale and direct delivery to motor vehicles of fuel and lubricants. Such
business may provide ancillary services such as the lubrication and hand
washing of motor vehicles, minor repairs to motor vehicles, and the sale and
installation of automobile accessories such as tires and batteries.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan showing general land use,
circulation, open space, utilities, stormwater management, environmental
factors, community facilities, type and density of housing, floor area for
nonresidential development, local services, fiscal implications, development
agreement, and phasing for parcels in excess of 100 acres which are
proposed to be constructed as a planned development in accordance with
FOUR-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A building designed for
four families with the dwellings separated by common walls and each
having its own main entrance in the front of the building. A four-family
semidetached dwelling is located on two lots.
F.
G. TOWNHOUSE — See "single-family attached dwelling."
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-11
347:731
the requirements of the MLUL. The term of the effect of a general
development plan approval shall be determined by the Planning Board and
shall not exceed 20 years.
GENERAL HOME OCCUPATION — A profession or business conducted in
a single-family dwelling or in an accessory building by a member of the
family residing on the premises, such profession or business being clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the main building for residential
purposes, conducted entirely within a building, and not changing the
exterior appearance of the building.
GOODS — A finished product(s).
GROUP HOME — Includes any single-family dwelling used in the placement
of 12 children or less pursuant to law, recognized as a group home by
the Department of Children and Families in accordance with rules and
regulations adopted by the Commissioner of Children and Families;
provided, however, that no group home shall contain more than 12 children
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 30:4C-2 and 40:55D-66.
GUEST HOUSE — A boarding- or rooming house containing fewer than
eight units that must be registered in accordance with N.J.A.C. 18:24-3.3.
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — Any enclosed floor area designed and
intended for living, sleeping, dining or kitchen facilities. The term shall
include that portion of an attic having structural headroom of seven feet
six inches or more and floor area located below ground level, provided that
more than 1/2 the wall height is above ground and there exists structural
headroom of seven feet six inches or more. The term is intended to include
bathrooms, laundry areas, storage rooms, hallways and similar space.
HALFWAY HOUSE (or COMMUNITY CORRECTION CENTER (CCC) or
COMMUNITY CONFINEMENT) — A transitional facility that provides
housing to persons who are inmates who have been released, nearing their
release or have been placed into a diversionary program associated with
their sentence wherein such persons participate in gainful employment,
employment search efforts, community service, vocational training,
treatment, educational programs, or similar facility-approved programs
during nonresidential hours for a period of time prior to their full release
into the community.
HAZARDOUS FACILITIES — A building, structure or site or any portion
thereof that is used for the storage, manufacture, or processing of highly
combustible or explosive products or materials that are likely to burn with
extreme rapidity or that may produce poisonous fumes or explosions; for
storage or manufacturing that involves highly corrosive, toxic, or noxious
alkalis, acids, or other liquids or chemicals producing flame, fume, or
poisonous, irritant, or corrosive gases; and for the storage or processing
of any materials producing explosive mixtures of dust or that result in the
division of matter into fine particles subject to spontaneous ignition.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient lodging accommodations for the
general public and which may include additional facilities and services
§ 370-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-11
347:732
such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, personal services and
recreational facilities.
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — That part of the lot that is covered by
impervious surfaces.
INDOOR RECREATION FACILITIES — Recreation facilities such as
handball courts, indoor tennis courts, children's play areas, swimming pools
which are located entirely within a building and intended for the sole use of
the tenants and their families and/or employees of a specific building. Such
areas will qualify as a part of the open space requirements intended by this
chapter.
INTERESTED PARTY —
INTERIOR WALKWAY — A public sidewalk which is not located within or
adjacent to a street right-of-way.
LAND — Property that includes improvements and fixtures on, above or
below its surface.
LANDOWNERS — The legal or beneficial owner or owners. The holder of
an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land, shall be deemed to be landowner for the
purpose of this chapter.
LAUNDROMAT — A business that provides home-type washing, drying and/
or ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
LOADING SPACE — A space located off the street for the parking of trucks
which are loading and unloading goods and objects.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise, as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of two or more intersection streets.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of a lot which is covered by buildings and/
or impervious materials.
LOT DEPTH — The shortest distance measured from the front lot line to the
rear lot line.
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of
New Jersey; and
A.
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether residing
within or without the municipality, whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy
property is or may be affected by any action taken under this act, or
whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy property under this act or under
any other laws of this state or of the United States has been denied,
violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this act.
B.
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-11
347:733
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way. In the case of a corner lot, any portion of the lot extending
along a street line shall be considered lot frontage.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
MAIN WORK SHIFT (MWS) — That period of work in which the greatest
number of employees are present.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements of this chapter,
including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit and cash.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the City of Bridgeton which shall have been duly
adopted by the Planning Board.
MATERIALS — Articles which are components of a future product.
MIXED USE — A building containing residential and nonresidential uses.
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings which contain living or sleeping
accommodations used primarily for transient occupancy and each living or
sleeping unit has an entrance from outside the building.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Bridgeton Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, or governing body when acting pursuant to the MLUL, and any
agency which is created by or responsible to one or more municipalities
when such agency is acting pursuant to the MLUL.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — The law specifying the legal tenets for land
use within the state of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 40:55D et seq.), and typically
abbreviated as NJ MLUL or MLUL.
MUNICIPAL USE — Any use conducted by the City of Bridgeton such as
administrative functions, parks and recreation facilities, and similar uses;
and for the purpose of this chapter, the term "municipal use" is intended
to include the Bridgeton Housing Authority, the Bridgeton Redevelopment
Agency, and similar municipal authorities and departments.
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL — A commercial area, usually located
on an arterial or collector street, providing a mix of convenience retail,
professional offices and services primarily for residents of the surrounding
area. Neighborhood commercial areas promote efficient land use and
walkability, accommodating the automobile but orienting the site design
and architecture to the pedestrian.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of which
was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning
ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
§ 370-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-11
347:734
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure, the size, dimension or
location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment
of a zoning ordinance but which fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
OFFICIAL MAP — A zoning district map adopted by ordinance in
accordance with the MLUL.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within
the properly, of which the lot is a part, which is the subject of a development
application or the closest half of the street or right-or-way abutting the
property of which the lot is a part.
OFF-SITE PARKING — Parking provided for a specific use but located on a
site other than the one on which the specific use is located.
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on the closest half of the abutting street or
right-or-way.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question and excluding any abutting street
or right-of-way.
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a development
application or on the closest half of an abutting street or right-of-way.
OPEN AREA — That portion of a lot which is required to remain uncovered
by buildings or impervious materials except that sidewalks and access
drives located between the building setback line and the street right-of-way
line shall be considered to be open area.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OPEN WATERS — All waters of the state as defined in N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1.4
which generally includes oceans, estuaries, springs, streams, lakes, rivers,
wetlands and bodies of surface water or ground water, whether natural or
artificial.
PARKING SPACE — An area which provides for the temporary storage of
one automobile. Such area may be located on ground level, above ground or
below ground.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purpose of notice, any applicant
for development, the owners of the subject property and all owners of
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-11
347:735
property and government agencies entitled to notice under Section 7.1 of P.
L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12).
PAVED AREA — A portion of land covered with a weatherproof surface for
the use of parking spaces, driveways, streets, sidewalks, patios or terraces
or play areas. In computing paved area, that area covered by buildings shall
be excluded.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, which may be accepted by the
City, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit and cash.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS — Standards adopted by this chapter
regulating noise levels, glare, earthborn or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic
or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive and inflammable
matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening of
unsightly objects or conditions and other similar matters.
PERMANENT ALL-WEATHER SURFACE — Impervious or pervious
pavement, asphalt, concrete, or similar surfaces. This definition does not
include temporary surfaces such as gravel, shale, shells or similar materials
that can be readily moved, graded, distributed or redistributed.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or their personal goods or apparel.
A service provided by a person for the benefit of another providing that
no function involves manufacture, cleaning, repair, storage or distribution
of products or goods, except for cleaning and repairing of clothing and
personal accessories.
PERVIOUS MATERIAL — Material, natural or man-made, which will allow
stormwater to seep through it to the ground surface below, i.e., gravel,
pervious asphalt and similar material.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Bridgeton.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
Sections 34, 36, and 37 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46; 40:55D-48;
and 40:55D-49) prior to final approval after specific elements of a
development plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and the
applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design of a
project illustrating, in a schematic form, its scope, scale and relationship to
its site and immediate environs.
PREPARED FOODS — Foodstuffs and/or drinks which have been cooked,
changed, cleaned or otherwise altered for public consumption.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary use conducted on a lot or within a building
on a specific lot. For the purpose of this chapter, a principal use is one
allowed by right or as a conditional use.
PRIVATE RECREATION FACILITIES — Recreation facilities provided for
the exclusive use of the owners, members, occupants and/or tenants of a
building and their guests.
§ 370-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-11
347:736
PROCESSING — A function involved in the manufacture of materials, goods
or products in which they are not physically changed except for packaging
or sizing.
PRODUCT — Any article whose appearance or composition has been
changed or altered, but not in a completed form for ultimate disposition.
PRODUCTION — A function involved in the manufacture of materials,
goods, or products in which they are physically changed.
PROFESSIONAL CONVERSION — The conversion of a residential building
to a professional use. The conversion is intended to include the commonly
accepted professions of law and medicine and those vocations which imply
advanced knowledge, such as but not limited to engineering, accounting,
architecture and surveying.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office within which is conducted the
operation of a profession, including the commonly accepted professions
requiring licensing or a certificate from an accredited agency of law,
medicine, and those vocations which imply advanced knowledge, such as
but not limited to engineering, accounting, architecture and surveying.
PUBLIC AREAS — Those areas such as public parks, playgrounds, trails,
paths and other recreational areas; public open spaces; scenic and historic
sites; and sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
the drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water
to safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion
and to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges,
to induce water recharge into the ground where practical, and to lessen
nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, Board of Education, state or
county agency, or other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
PUBLIC PARKING GARAGE — A building or other structure such as an
elevated deck used for the parking or storage of privately owned
automobiles but not for the permanent storage of vehicles.
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — An open, off-street land area, including parking
spaces and access and egress drives or aisles and pedestrian walkways,
which land area is used for the parking of vehicles and in which area
no gasoline or automobile accessories are sold and no other business is
conducted.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any public utility regulated by the Board of Regulatory
Commissioners and defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:2-13.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal
agency.
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-11
347:737
REHABILITATION CENTER — A facility that provides short-term, primary
inpatient care, treatment, and/or rehabilitation services for persons
recovering from illness or injury who do not require continued
hospitalization.
RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION — The conversion of a building to contain
more dwelling units than the existing building contained, i.e., a singlefamily
house converted to two or more apartments.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area, including streets, easements and open space portions
of a development.
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) — A strip of land acquired by reservation,
dedication, prescription, or condemnation that is intended to be used as a
public way such as a street, crosswalk, railroad, utility transmission lines or
piping (oil, gas, water, etc.), or other similar uses.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES — The lines that form the boundaries of a ROW.
ROOMING HOUSE — A building which contains two or more units of
dwelling space arranged or intended for single-room occupancy wherein
personal or financial services are not provided to residents, including any
residential hotel or congregate living arrangement pursuant to N.J.S.A
55:13B-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:27.
SCREENING — Any planting or material used to visually obscure the use or
activity on one lot or parcel or tract of land from an adjacent lot or public
right-of-way.
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported from
its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means as a
product of erosion.
SIDEWALK CAFE — A restaurant with tables on the sidewalk in front or on
the side of the premises.
SIDEWALK SALE — Retail sales of a short-term and temporary nature
conducted on the sidewalk or adjacent to the indoor establishment of the
tenant or owner without permanent improvement made to the site.
SIGN — Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, that is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images.
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown
the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily
limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives,
parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting, screening
devices; and any other information that may be reasonably required in order
§ 370-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-11
347:738
to make an informed determination pursuant to an ordinance requiring
review and approval of site plans by the Planning Board.
SPECIAL HOME OCCUPATION — A profession or business, clearly
medically related, conducted in a single-family dwelling or in an accessory
building by a member of the family residing on the premises, such
profession or business being clearly incidental and secondary to the use of
the main building for residential purposes; and conducted entirely within a
building.
STORAGE — A function involving the deposition of materials, goods or
products for safekeeping.
STOREFRONT — The front or facade of a store or shop facing a street at
ground level, usually with display windows.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A cellar
or basement shall not be considered as a story unless 50% or more of the
basement is above grade.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or
other way:
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not classified by the approving
authority as a minor site plan.
A.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development plan of one or more lots which:
Proposes new development within the scope of development
specifically permitted by ordinance as a minor site plan;
(1)
Does not involve planned development, any new street or extension
of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to
Section 30 of P.L. 1985, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42); and
(2)
Satisfies all of the criteria specified on Page 1 of the Bridgeton Site
Plan Checklist.92 [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
(3)
B.
A. Which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
B. Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or
C. Which is approved by official action; or
Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a planning board
and the grant to such board of the power to review plats; and includes
the land between the street lines, improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas
and other areas within the street lines.
D.
92.Editor's Note: Said checklist is on file in the City offices.
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-11
347:739
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use, or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
TOURIST HOME — See "bed-and-breakfast."
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings or
reproduction thereof.
VARIANCE — Permission to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning
ordinance.
WETLANDS — Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or
groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically
adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as
hydrophytic vegetation; provided, however, that wetlands shall be defined
and regulated by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
under Freshwater or Tidal/Coastal Regulations and/or by the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.
WETLANDS TRANSITION AREA — An area of upland adjacent to a
freshwater wetland which minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland or
serves as an integral component of the wetlands ecosystem.
WHOLESALE — Any procedure involving persons who in the normal course
of business do not engage in sales to the general public.
YARD — An unoccupied space that lies between the principal building or
buildings and the nearest lot line.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
A.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land for the creation of
a number of lots specifically permitted by ordinance as a minor
subdivision; provided that such subdivision does not involve:
(1) A planned development;
(2) Any new street; or
The extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to
be prorated pursuant to Section 30 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42, MLUL).
(3)
B.
FRONT — The space extending the full width of the lot between any
building and the front lot line and measured perpendicular to the
building at the closest point to the front lot line. For corner lots, the
yard areas between the building and both intersecting streets shall be
considered front yards.
A.
§ 370-11 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-11
347:740
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer designated to administer
the Zoning Ordinance and issue zoning permits in accordance with the
provisions of Article XI of this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the administrative officer:
§ 370-11.1. Attachments and zoning schedules.
§ 370-11.2. Common regulations and standards.
REAR — The space extending across the full width of the lot between
the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular
to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line. For corner lots,
the yard area opposite the street which is the address of the property
shall be considered the rear yard.
B.
SIDE — A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between
the principal building and the side lot line and measured perpendicular
from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building. For
corner lots, the yard area to the side of the street which is the address
of the property shall be considered the side yard.
C.
Which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building; and
A.
Which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of the Municipal Zoning Ordinance or variance therefrom
duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to the MLUL.
B.
A. Attachments. The following items are attached to this chapter:
(1) Attachment 1, Zoning District Map.
(2) Attachment 1A, Historic District Map [Refer to § 370-29.1(A)].
(3) Attachment 2, Residential Dwelling Types, A pictorial presentation
of the dwelling types defined in § 370-11.
B. Zoning schedules. Any departure from the specifications listed on the
following zoning schedules shall require the approval of a variance:
(1) Attachment 3, Area, Yard, Bulk and Parking Standards.93
(2) Attachment 4, Parking and Loading Standards.94
(3) Attachment 5, Signage Standards.95
(4) Attachment 6, Sign Types Illustrated.96
93.Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
94.Editor's Note: Attachment 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
95.Editor's Note: Attachment 5 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
96.Editor's Note: Attachment 6 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-11 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-11.2
347:741
§ 370-11.3. Severability.
In the event that any portion of this chapter is found to be invalid for
any reason by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be
limited in its effect only to the portion of the chapter actually adjudged
invalid and shall not be deemed to affect the operation on any other portion
thereof.
§ 370-11.4. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon publication after final passage and
approval, as provided by law, and filed with all appropriate government
agencies.
§ 370-11.5. Repealer.
All other ordinances or part(s) of ordinances inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of their
inconsistency.
A. The regulations and standards prescribed in Article VIII of this chapter
shall apply to all zoning districts except where otherwise noted in this
chapter.
B. Extent of applicability.
(1) Before any temporary or permanent change of use, renovation,
installation of any signs, construction of accessory structures,
including but not limited to sheds, garages, porches, fences,
driveways, or any other construction or development, including
excavation of earth, sand, gravel or other natural mineral deposits,
or the stripping of sod or topsoil for other than incidental use of the
premises, for grading such premises, or in connection with the
construction of buildings, the Zoning Officer shall be contacted for
guidance in the proper procedures and applications required to
obtain permits required for performing these activities. Normal
lawn preparation and maintenance is incidental and not subject to
this regulation.
(2) In addition to the above requirements, activities on lands in or
adjoining open waters, wetlands, transition areas and/or flood
hazard areas shall require approval by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection and United States Army Corps of
Engineers, as applicable.
C. Stormwater management.
(1) Recommendations in the City of Bridgeton Municipal Stormwater
Management Plan shall be applied City-wide in projects requiring
approval under this chapter.
§ 370-11.2 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-11.5
347:742
ARTICLE II
Residential Districts
§ 370-12. Statement of intent.
In addition to the goals listed in the preamble and general intent, the
districts established in these regulations are in accordance with the
community goals and land use policies as described in the Bridgeton Master
Plan and are intended to achieve the following:
§ 370-13. R-1 Low-Density Residential District.
A. To provide sufficient space, appropriately located, for residential
development to meet the housing needs of the present and expected
future population of the City within the range of dwelling types and
densities anticipated.
B. To assure light, air and privacy, as far as possible, by controlling the
spacing and height of buildings and other structures.
C. To protect residential areas against hazards of fire, offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, odors, glare or other objectionable influences.
D. To prevent congestion, as far as possible, by regulating the density of
population and the bulk of buildings, and by providing for sufficient offstreet
parking.
E. To protect residential neighborhoods, as much as possible, from heavy
or through traffic.
F. To provide public and private educational, recreational, health and
similar facilities to serve the needs of residents while mitigating
potential negative impacts and incompatible land uses.
G. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accord with a well-considered plan, to promote stable
residential development, to protect the character of any district and its
peculiar suitability for particular residential uses, to conserve the value
of land and buildings and to protect the City tax revenues.
H. To promote residential home ownership and conversion of multifamily
residences back to single-family dwellings.
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of these regulations to establish
districts for low-density residential development primarily for singlefamily
dwellings on large lots.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any R-1 District, land, buildings or premises shall
be used by right for one of the following, but for no others:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling.
§ 370-12 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-13
347:743
§ 370-14. R-2 Medium-Density Residential District.
(b) Municipal uses and buildings.
(c) Public utility uses such as electric substations.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Only those uses customarily incidental to and associated with
those uses by right listed above will be permitted pursuant to
§ 370-58.
(b) Accessory uses shall be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory.
(3) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
when authorized by the approving authority:
(a) Churches or similar places of worship, convents and related
religious facilities subject to § 370-39.
(b) Public, parochial or private schools conducted primarily to
serve the educational needs of the community when not
conducted primarily for profit or gain subject to § 370-40.
(c) General home occupations subject to § 370-51.
(d) Bed-and-breakfasts.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.97
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of these regulations to establish
districts for medium-density residential development allowing a wider
choice of housing types than in R-1 Districts on smaller lots.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any R-2 District, land, buildings or premises shall
be used by right for one of the following, and for no other:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling.
(b) Two-family attached dwelling.
(c) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(d) Municipal uses and buildings.
(e) Public utility uses such as electric substations.
(2) Accessory uses.
97.Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-13 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-14
347:744
§ 370-15. R-3 High-Density Residential District.
(a) Only those accessory uses customarily incidental to and
associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted pursuant to § 370-58.
(b) Accessory uses shall be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory except for the following:
[1] Off-street parking requirements for single-family attached
dwellings constructed on several contiguous lots may be
provided on a parking lot held in collective ownership.
(3) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
when authorized by the approving authority:
(a) Churches or similar places of worship, convents and related
religious facilities subject to § 370-39.
(b) Public, parochial or private schools conducted primarily to
serve the educational needs of the community when not
conducted primarily for profit or gain subject to § 370-40.
(c) General home occupations subject to § 370-51.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.98
A. Specific intent. The specific intent of these regulations is to provide
districts for high-density residential development primarily but not
exclusively for multifamily structures.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any R-3 District, land, buildings or premises shall
be used by right for one of the following and no other:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling.
(b) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(c) Two-family attached dwelling.
(d) Municipal uses and buildings.
(e) Public utility uses such as electric substations.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Only those accessory uses customarily incidental to and
associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted pursuant to § 370-58.
98.Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-14 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-15
347:745
§ 370-16. R-4 Neighborhood Residential District.
(b) Accessory uses shall be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory.
(3) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
when authorized by the approving authority:
(a) Churches or similar places of worship, convents and related
religious facilities subject to § 370-39.
(b) Public, parochial or private schools conducted primarily to
serve the educational needs of the community when not
conducted primarily for profit or gain subject to § 370-40.
(c) Home occupation subject to § 370-51.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.99
A. Specific intent.
(1) It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas for relatively small lot
sizes for the central portion of the City, and to stabilize and protect
the characteristics of the area.
(2) It is the specific intent of these regulations to establish districts for
high-density residential development allowing a wider choice of
housing types than in R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any R-4 District, land, buildings or premises shall
be used by right for one of the following, and for no other:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling.
(b) Two-family attached dwelling.
(c) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(d) Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse).
(e) Municipal uses and buildings.
(f) Public utility uses such as electric substations.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Only those accessory uses customarily incidental to and
associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted pursuant to § 370-58.
99.Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-15 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-16
347:746
(b) Accessory uses shall be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory except for the following:
[1] Off-street parking requirements for single-family attached
dwellings constructed on several contiguous lots may be
provided on a parking lot held in collective ownership.
(3) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
when authorized by the approving authority:
(a) Churches or similar places of worship, convents and related
religious facilities subject to § 370-39.
(b) Public, parochial or private schools conducted primarily to
serve the educational needs of the community when not
conducted primarily for profit or gain subject to § 370-40.
(c) General home occupations subject to § 370-51.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.100
D. Special exceptions to area and bulk regulations.
(1) Lots of record which, on the date this chapter becomes effective,
have less than 6,000 square feet of area and/or less than 50 feet of
width at the building setback line may be occupied only by singlefamily
detached dwellings.
(2) Lot coverage may be increased to 45% on lots developed for singlefamily
attached dwellings if the off-street parking requirement is
met through the use of a common parking lot.
E. Supplemental controls for single-family attached dwellings
(townhouses).
(1) No more than six single-family dwellings may be constructed in one
building.
(2) End walls may not be closer than 25 feet to another building facing.
(3) No more than three dwelling units shall have the same setback line.
(4) Off-street parking shall be provided in rear yards.
(5) Off-street parking may be provided on a common lot, in which case
the maximum aggregate lot coverage may be increased to 45%.
100. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-16 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-16
347:747

ARTICLE III
Commercial Districts
§ 370-17. Statement of intent.
In addition to the general goals listed in the preamble and general intent,
the zoning districts established in these regulations are in accordance with
the community goals, objectives and policies as described in the Bridgeton
Master Plan and are intended to achieve the following:
§ 370-18. C-1 Central Business District.
A. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for the various
types of commercial, residential and service establishments anticipated
by the Master Plan.
B. To assure light and air to the extent possible by controlling the spacing
and height of buildings and other structures.
C. To protect commercial development against intrusive uses which are
incompatible with it and against objectionable influences such as
offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors or glare and from the hazards
of fire.
D. To provide appropriate space for the requirements of present-day
merchandising, including the provisions for off-street parking and safe
circulation of pedestrian and motor traffic.
E. To promote the most desirable use of land and pattern of building
development in accord with a well-considered plan in order to promote
stable commercial development, strengthen the economic base of the
City, protect the character of commercial areas and nearby districts,
conserve the value of land and buildings, and promote municipal tax
revenues.
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of these regulations to establish a
zoning district to serve as the retail core of the City and to protect such
area from the intrusion of uses which can be detrimental to normal
Central Business District functions.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any C-1 District, land, buildings and structures
may be used by right for one or more of the following:
(a) First floor.
[1] Retail sales of goods and food, excluding motor vehicle
sales, parts and service.
[2] Restaurants, eating and drinking establishments and
outdoor cafes.
§ 370-17 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-18
347:749
§ 370-19. C-2 Apartment/Commercial District.
[3] Indoor theaters and galleries.
(b) Second and higher floors.
[1] Municipal uses and buildings.
[2] Public utility uses such as telephone exchange buildings
and electric substations.
[3] Professional and administrative offices.
[4] Insurance companies and realtor offices.
[5] Residential use; provided, a maximum of four residents on
the second floor and a maximum of two residents on the
third and higher floors.
[6] All those uses that are permitted on the first floor.
[7] Personal services.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Only those accessory uses customarily incidental to and
associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted except that parking and loading areas shall be
prohibited.
(3) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
when authorized by the approving authority:
(a) Clubs, lodge halls and fraternal organizations restricted to
those not conducted for gain or profit.
(b) Finance institutions, including banks and savings and loan
companies on the first floor if not located in the storefront nor
occupying greater than 30% of the first floor gross floor area.
(c) Personal services on the first floor, provided that the storefront
contains retail sales displays.
(d) Professional and administrative offices, insurance company
and realtor offices on the first floor if not occupying greater
than 30% of the first floor gross floor area.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.101
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of these regulations to establish a
transition zone surrounding the retail core of the City in order to
promote development of offices, apartments, and retail and service uses
101. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-18 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-19
347:750
§ 370-20. C-3 Hospital-Medical Center District. [Amended
9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
which are complementary and can contribute to the support of the C-1
Central Business District zone.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any C-2 District, land, buildings and structures
may be used by right for one or more of the following:
(a) Retail sales of goods, prepared foods, personal and business
services, excluding motor vehicle sales, parts and service.
(b) Finance institutions.
(c) Professional and administrative offices.
(d) Commercial recreation.
(e) Municipal, county, state and federal buildings and uses.
(f) Hotels and motels.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Only those accessory uses customarily incidental to and
associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted.
(3) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
when authorized by the approving authority:
(a) Clubs, lodge halls and fraternal organizations restricted to
those not conducted for gain or profit.
(b) Apartment buildings, provided that at least 50% of the first
floor is devoted to permitted uses in § 370-19B.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.102
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of these regulations to establish a
district devoted primarily to hospital and related medical and related
residential and commercial uses.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any C-3 District, land, buildings and structures
may be used by right for one or more of the following:
(a) Hospitals and continuing care facilities.
(b) Medical and/or dental offices.
102. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-19 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-20
347:751
§ 370-21. C-4 Neighborhood Business District. [Amended 9-17-2013
by Ord. No. 13-06]
(c) Commercial uses limited to pharmacies, drug stores, and
surgical supply sales.
(d) Medical and dental schools.
(e) Medical research, diagnostic and testing facilities.
(f) Mixed C-3 uses.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Only those accessory uses customarily incidental to and
associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted, including retail food services, personal services,
professional and administrative offices.
(b) Accessory uses shall be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory except that the following
accessory uses may be conducted on another lot:
[1] The off-street parking requirement may be located on a
separate lot held in the same ownership as the principal
use, provided it meets all the conditions of § 370-63.
[2] Dormitories, rooms and apartments clearly accessory to
hospitals, clinics and medical schools and operated solely
for the benefit of staff, employees and students of
hospitals, clinics and medical schools may be located on a
separate lot held in the same ownership as the principal
use.
[3] Laundry facilities, heating plants and similar maintenance
functions may be located on a separate lot held in the same
ownership as the principal use.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.103
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of these regulations to establish
commercial districts to serve the everyday personal needs of the City's
residents at locations which are convenient to established residential
neighborhoods.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any C-4 District, land, buildings and structures
may be used by right for one or more of the following:
103. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-20 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-21
347:752
§ 370-22. C-5 Highway Commercial District.
(a) Retail sales of goods, with the exception of motor vehicles,
prepared foods and/or personal services, including
laundromats.
(b) Professional offices.
(c) Banking facilities.
(d) Insurance and realty offices.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Only those accessory uses customarily incidental to and
associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted.
(b) Accessory uses shall be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory except that the following
accessory uses may be conducted on another lot:
[1] The off-street parking requirements may be located on a
separate lot used jointly by two or more principal uses,
provided it meets all the conditions of § 370-63.
[2] Trash and garbage storage areas and pickup stations
serving two or more principal uses, provided such storage
areas are completely enclosed by solid brick or concrete
block walls having a minimum height of six feet. Material
similar to concrete block may be used for wall
construction. Such enclosures shall be covered with a wire
mesh or screening in such a way as to prevent paper and
similar materials from being blown outside the enclosure
by wind. Such areas shall have a concrete floor. All
garbage storage shall be in airtight, verminproof
containers. No storage of trash or garbage will be
permitted outside the enclosure at any time. All enclosures
will be buffered from view from streets and adjacent
properties by a dense planting of evergreen shrubs and
trees.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.104
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of these regulations to confine
highway-oriented commercial uses to very specific locations so that
uses which are generally incompatible with and can readily have a
blighting influence on sound residential development do not spread
haphazardly throughout the City, and to better control ingress and
egress to the City's major roadways from such uses.
104. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-21 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-22
347:753
§ 370-22.1. PMU-1 Planned Mixed-Use Overlay District.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Use by right. In any C-5 District, land, buildings and structures may
be used by right for one or more of the following:
(a) Motor vehicle sales, service, parts, repairs and body shops.
(b) Car wash.
(c) Heavy equipment and farm machinery sales and services.
(d) Storage and distribution facilities.
(e) Commercial recreation facilities, including drive-in theaters.
(f) Retail and wholesale sales and service facilities, including
drive-in facilities.
(g) Hotels and motels.
(h) Gasoline service stations.
(2) Accessory uses. Only those accessory uses customarily incidental
to and associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted, except the sale and dispensing of motor fuel, lubricants,
and auto accessories for installation on the premises may be
allowed as an accessory use to automobile repair garages and
automobile sales facilities, provided that the requirements of
§ 370-58C of this chapter are met. [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord.
No. 13-06]
(3) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
when authorized by the approving authority:
(a) Clubs, lodge halls and fraternal organizations restricted to
those not conducted for gain or profit.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.105
D. Supplemental regulations in addition to those specified in Article VIII.
(1) No outdoor display of merchandise, including automobiles, heavy
equipment and the like, will be permitted in the area of a lot
between the building setback line and the street right-of-way line.
(2) Access driveways shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet from
adjoining lot lines, 30 feet from intersecting street right-of-way
lines, and there shall be a minimum distance of 35 feet between
access driveways.
105. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-22 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-22.1
347:754
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of the PMU-1 Planned Mixed-Use
District to provide the opportunity for planned residential
neighborhoods that include a variety of housing types and subsidiary
commercial and professional office uses as set forth below. The
objectives of the PMU-1 regulations and standards are to encourage
innovative development to achieve a variety of building types, layout
and siting under a comprehensive plan of development. The PMU-1
encourages comprehensive planning for large tracts of land within the
context of the City and the region, as it permits flexibility in the mix of
uses, but provides standards to ensure integrated building design,
quality architecture, efficient circulation, protection of natural
resources and an attractive pedestrian environment. Such design
standards will have a beneficial effect upon the health, safety, general
welfare and morals of the City and neighboring communities consistent
with smart growth and sustainable development concepts and
principles. For parcels not developed in accordance with the Planned
Mixed-Use Overlay District, the underlying zoning district regulations
shall apply.
B. Permitted uses.
(1) Residential.
(a) Single-family detached.
(b) Single-family semidetached.
(c) Single-family attached.
(2) Neighborhood commercial uses such as retail stores, professional
offices, banks, restaurants and personal services that meet a
demand in the community and that respond to the pedestrian as
well as passing motorists.
C. Accessory uses. Only those accessory uses and structures customarily
incidental to the principal uses are permitted, subject to the standards
set forth in this section and at § 370-58.
D. Prohibited uses.
(1) Adult bookstores.
(2) Bars/saloons when not associated with a restaurant.
(3) Junkyards and salvage yards.
(4) Motor vehicle sales, service, parts, repairs and body shops.
(5) Gasoline service stations.
(6) Body piercing and tattoo parlors.
E. Bulk, area and parking regulations as specified in § 370-11.1,
Attachment 3.106
§ 370-22.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-22.1
347:755
F. General requirements.
(1) A general development plan, including a phasing plan and
proposed schedule, shall be submitted in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1 and 40:55D-45.2, and
§ 311-6.1. [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
(2) The uses proposed may not exceed the following percentages,
proportionate to the overall development:
(a) For tracts ranging from 25 to 50 acres, a minimum of 10% and
a maximum of 35% of the overall site area must be dedicated to
commercial uses as outlined below. For tracts 50 acres and
above, a minimum of 5% of the overall site area must be
dedicated to commercial uses. Where uses are mixed within
the site design, the applicant should present a calculation
evidencing that the requirement is met.
(b) Of the residential units proposed, not more than 50% of the
total number of units may be attached townhouses and not
more than 30% may be semidetached twins. A minimum of 40%
must be single-family units.
G. Design standards and submission requirements. The submission
requirements and design standards set forth in this subsection shall be
in addition to the prevailing requirements set forth within the City's
Zoning Ordinance and shall apply to all development and
redevelopment projects in the District.
(1) Site orientation and design.
(a) Spatial relationships between buildings, public and semipublic
spaces and other structures should be designed to relate to one
another, both functionally and visually. Features such as
courtyards, greens, quadrangles, pedestrian and bicycle
pathways, which encourage pedestrian activity and incidental
social interaction among users, shall be incorporated into the
site design. The site should be designed to reinforce street
frontages, and main entryways should be emphasized to create
a sense of identity with special landscape features and
appropriately scaled signage and architectural accents.
(b) Buildings shall define the streetscape through the use of detail,
building articulation and massing. The streetscape shall be
generally continued across side yard setback areas between
buildings by using landscaping. The streetscape shall also be
reinforced by shade trees and may be further reinforced by
walls, streetlamps and other street furniture.
106. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-22.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-22.1
347:756
(c) Buildings on corner lots shall be considered significant
structures, since they have at least two facades visibly exposed
to the street. Such buildings may be designed with additional
height and architectural embellishments, such as corner
towers, to emphasize their location.
(d) Sidewalks must be installed along all public streets and along
all major private drives. Sidewalks along streets shall be a
minimum of four feet wide (this does not apply to service
roads).
(e) To the extent possible, new streets shall connect with existing
streets and with each other, and, where practical, the
possibility of future roadway connections with adjacent
properties shall be maintained. Where street connections are
not feasible, pedestrian connections should be established,
especially to accommodate walking school children.
(2) Common open space. A minimum of 10% of the gross residential
area shall be reserved for common open space and passive or
active recreational purposes. Passive common open spaces should
be accessible to residents of the neighborhood, and a network of
interconnected greenways should be established where possible. A
minimum of 25% of the required open space area shall be usable,
meaning that it shall not be encumbered by wetlands or other
environmental constraints. Active recreation facilities sufficient to
serve the needs of the proposed residential dwellings shall be
provided on site, or if sufficient recreation facilities exist in the
immediate vicinity, and if approved by the City Council, a
contribution to City recreation facilities may be made in lieu.
(3) A comprehensive stormwater management plan shall be developed
for the entire project area, including residential and commercial
uses. Stormwater quality basins should be designed as integrated
landscape features whenever possible.
(4) Landscaping. A comprehensive landscape plan shall be prepared
by a licensed professional landscape architect that provides for
shade, buffering to adjacent uses, planting beds within parking
areas, foundation plantings adjacent to buildings, preservation of
existing healthy vegetation where possible, and other landscaping
elements designed to complement and enhance the overall site and
building design.
(a) At main entryways, massed landscaping, architectural features
and appropriate signage shall be utilized to create visual focal
points and to add to the creation of a sense of place.
(b) Shade trees shall be installed along road frontages and
internal access drives at intervals of no less than 40 feet.
§ 370-22.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-22.1
347:757
(c) There shall be a landscape island at least nine feet in width at
the terminus of each parking row, and landscaped islands shall
be placed at intervals throughout the parking area for every 12
linear spaces.
(d) Head-on parking spaces for commercial uses should be
separated by a landscaped island at least four feet in width.
(e) Each parking lot island must contain at least one shade tree
along with shrubs and ground cover. Where trees are not
possible due to the presence of a light post or underground
utilities, shrubs shall be installed.
(f) Planted berms shall be utilized to enhance buffers between
incompatible uses and to shield loading and service activities
in the commercial portions of any development. If needed,
walls designed to match the architecture may be erected to
screen loading areas. The site must also comply with the
requirements of § 370-62G regarding screening and buffering.
(5) Lighting.
(a) Streetlights and lighting along pedestrian pathways shall be
pedestrian-scaled, contextually appropriate fixtures and shall
be consistent with fixtures designated by the City as suitable
for streetscapes within the PMU-1.
(b) Streets and open space shall be provided with adequate
lighting while minimizing adverse impacts, such as glare and
overhead sky glow, on adjacent properties. House-side shields
shall be provided where abutting a residential use.
(c) Along all pedestrian paths, along drive aisles and within
courtyards, decorative lampposts shall be provided at regular
intervals but not greater than 100 feet on center.
(d) Lighting on residential streets and within parking areas should
be no greater than 200 feet apart per side and should be
located at the intersections and corners. Lighting standards
shall be consistent throughout the development. If individual
lampposts equipped with photo sensors are provided at each
driveway, the need for streetlights between intersections may
be eliminated.
(e) Residential porch, patio, or balcony lighting and yard post
lighting is encouraged to augment street lighting design and to
create a sense of safety and community.
(f) Light fixtures attached to the exterior of a building shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, materials, colors, and
details of the building and shall comply with the local building
codes. The type of light source used on the exterior of
§ 370-22.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-22.1
347:758
buildings, signs, parking areas, pedestrian walkways, and
other areas of a site, and the light quality produced shall be the
same or compatible to adjacent site lighting fixtures. Facades
shall be lit from the exterior, and, as a general rule, lights
should be concealed through shielding or recessed behind
architectural features. Lighting of roof forms such as cupolas
or other special roof forms is permitted. Mounting brackets
and associated hardware should be inconspicuous.
(6) Architectural plans consisting of floor plans and elevations of areas
visible to the general public and site design plans, including all
public and semipublic space, should be submitted. The features,
scale and details of the buildings and streetscape shall demonstrate
a comprehensive design approach.
(a) Architectural standards for residential development. All
development shall have a coherent architectural style,
vocabulary and color scheme.
[1] For single-family detached homes, no more than 50% of
the first floor horizontal width of the front facade may be
consumed by garage doors.
[2] For single-family homes, rear garages are recommended.
At least 50% of the garages shall be set back a minimum of
six feet behind the front building wall.
[3] The following materials shall be permitted for facades:
[a] Wood, cement board or vinyl siding and shingles.
[b] Simulated clapboard.
[c] Brick.
[d] Indigenous stone and cultured stone.
[e] Cast stone.
[f] Architectural masonry.
[g] Exterior insulation finish systems (EIFS).
[h] Stucco.
[4] Front facades of 50% of the townhouses shall be partially
faced in masonry material, i.e., brick, stone or stucco, on
primary elevations a minimum of eight feet above grade
which face front and side streets and pedestrian mews.
Architectural variation must be provided to distinguish the
units from one another. Elevations out of primary public
view can be made of other materials. Projecting windows
may also be made of materials other than masonry.
Portions of side elevations away from the public view need
§ 370-22.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-22.1
347:759
not include masonry material. Where the end of a building
faces the street, the side elevation shall receive treatment
similar to the front elevation and shall respond to the
street.
[5] No more than two townhouses attached to one another
may have the same building setback. Offsets must be at
least three feet.
(b) Specific architectural requirements for commercial
development.
[1] Proposed buildings shall avoid long, continuous,
uninterrupted wall and roof planes. Building wall offsets
shall be provided to relieve the visual effect of a simple or
long wall. In addition, other architectural projections and
recesses must be incorporated to create additional
interest. The roofline shall vary in heights and
architectural treatment, and flat rooflines shall by masked
by facade treatments that vary in height. Sloped elements
of the roofline or the appearance of same shall be
incorporated to enhance the overall appearance and form.
[2] Where the rear or side facade of a building faces a public
roadway, highway or main access drive, a combination of
facade treatments, berms, landscaping, and the use of
decorative screening walls must be utilized to shield the
loading and building service areas from public view and to
present an attractive facade to customers and passersby.
[3] Enclosures for trash and recyclables should be large
enough to fit all of the containers required for the
proposed uses and shall be designed to match or
complement the building facade. Trash and recycling
enclosures shall not be located in the principal front yard
and shall be surrounded by landscaping sufficient to
screen the area.
[4] Facade treatment and facade materials for commercial
buildings.
[a] Buildings shall be clad in brick or stucco, stone, or a
combination thereof a minimum of three feet from
grade.
[b] Stucco or EIFS shall have either a smooth or textured
finish and in a color or colors that complement the
other facade materials.
[c] Buildings using wood/cement board or vinyl siding
shall have between 3.5 inches and six inches
exposure.
§ 370-22.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-22.1
347:760
[d] Corner boards shall not be less than four inches or
more than eight inches and shall protrude from the
siding surface to create a shadow line.
[5] Storefronts are an integral part of a building. Ground floor
retail, service, and restaurant uses shall have large-pane
display windows. Such windows shall be framed by the
surrounding wall and may not exceed 75% of the total
individual elevation area. Buildings with multiple
storefronts shall be unified through the use of
architecturally compatible materials, colors, details,
awnings, signage, and lighting fixtures.
(7) Design standards for signs.
(a) Each commercial and recreational use shall be permitted one
facade/wall sign not to exceed 10% of the principal front wall
area and not to exceed 30 square feet. In the case of a
freestanding building, two facade/wall signs will be permitted
on different facades.
(b) Signs affixed to the exterior of a building shall be
architecturally compatible with the style, composition,
materials, colors, and details of the building, as well as with
other signs used on the building or in its vicinity. The use of
coordinated awnings and decorative light fixtures is
encouraged.
(c) Signs shall fit within the existing facade features and shall not
interfere with door and window openings, conceal
architectural details or obscure the composition of the facade
where they are located.
(d) Sign colors should be compatible with the colors of the
building facade. A dull or matte finish is recommended for
reduction of glare and enhancement of legibility.
(e) Signs shall be either spotlighted or backlit with a diffused light
source. Light shall not significantly spill over to other portions
of the building or site. Backlighting shall illuminate the letters,
characters, or graphics on the sign, but not its background.
Warm fluorescent bulbs may be used to illuminate the interior
of display windows. Neon signs or flashing lights are not
permitted.
(f) Signs shall be mounted so that the method of installation is
concealed. Signs applied to masonry surfaces should be
mechanically fastened to mortar joints only and not directly
into brick or stone. Drilling to provide electrical service should
also follow the same rule.
§ 370-22.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-22.1
347:761
(g) Each residential development may have a monument
identification sign located at the entryways, a maximum of 20
square feet and set back a minimum of 10 feet from the rightof-
way line.
(h) One directional sign not to exceed 20 square feet to direct
visitors to the various commercial and community destinations
is permitted. Such sign may not interfere with traffic
circulation and shall not be designed to advertise.
(8) Streets, alleys and sidewalks.
(a) Cross sections of proposed streets shall be submitted depicting
the range of street widths, patterns and styles that will make
up the framework of streets. Streets, alleys and sidewalks are
important public spaces and should be complemented with
pedestrian plazas and other elements to enhance the
pedestrian experience.
(b) Sidewalks a minimum of four feet wide must be installed along
all public streets and along all major private drives. Sidewalks
in front of commercial uses shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide
and 12 feet wide if outdoor cafes are contemplated.
(c) Sidewalks and pedestrian accessways shall be designed to
protect the pedestrian from vehicular traffic and to facilitate
and encourage movement among the various uses. Trees and
flower boxes should be installed at intervals along walkways.
§ 370-22.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-22.1
347:762
ARTICLE IV
Industrial District
§ 370-23. Statement of intent.
In addition to the general goals listed in the preamble and general intent,
the district established in these regulations is in accordance with the
community goals and land use policies as described in the Bridgeton Master
Plan and is intended to achieve the following:
§ 370-24. I Industrial District.
A. To provide sufficient spaces in appropriate locations to meet future
needs for industrial activity.
B. To insure that the land most suitable for industrial and related activities
will be available for such uses.
C. To protect surrounding uses by separating them or buffering them from
industrial uses and activities.
D. To promote the most desirable use of land and direction of building
development in accord with a well-considered plan which will promote
stable industry, strengthen the economic base, protect the character of
particular industrial areas and their peculiar suitability to particular
uses, conserve the value of land and buildings, and protect local tax
revenues.
E. To encourage industrial development which prevents offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, odor, glare, hazards of fire or other objectionable
effects.
A. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In I Districts, land, buildings or premises may be
used by right for the following subject to meeting § 370-61,
Performance standards:
(a) Activities involving cleaning, distribution, processing,
production, repair, storage or testing of materials, goods and/
or products.
(b) Building materials sales yards, including timber, plumbing and
heating, roofing and similar materials.
(c) Contractors' equipment storage yard or building or rental of
equipment commonly used by contractors.
(d) Municipal uses and buildings.
(e) Research and experimental laboratories.
(f) Wholesale activities.
§ 370-23 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-24
347:763
(g) Storage warehouses.
(h) Utility installations such as gas pumping stations, electric
transformer stations, equipment buildings, maintenance shops
and the like.
(i) Alternative power producers.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Accessory uses shall be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory.
(b) Only those accessory uses customarily incidental to and
associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted, except that the following uses, when clearly
accessory to the principal use, may be permitted as accessory
uses:
[1] Restaurant or cafeteria facilities for employees.
[2] Medical facilities for employees.
[3] Fire apparatus and equipment areas and/or buildings.
[4] Retail sale of goods and products manufactured,
assembled or processed on site.
[5] Administrative offices.
(3) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
when authorized by the approving authority:
(a) Any of the above permitted uses that do not meet all the
performance standards in § 370-61.
(b) Retail sales with a minimum floor space of 5,000 square feet
per use.
B. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.107
C. Supplemental regulations in addition to those specified in Article VIII.
(1) Access driveways shall be a minimum distance of 20 feet from
adjoining lot lines, 30 feet from intersecting street right-of-way
lines, and there shall be a minimum distance of 35 feet between
access driveways.
(2) The applicant shall provide written proof upon application for a
zoning permit or provide testimony for the approving authority that
the requested use:
107. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-24 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-24
347:764
(a) Will not result in the dissemination of dust, smoke, smog,
observable gas, fumes, odors, or other atmosphere pollutions,
noise, glare, heat or vibration beyond the limits of the
Industrial District.
(b) Will not result in hazards of fire, explosion or other physical
hazards to any adjacent buildings or any plant growth, wildlife,
or marine life adjacent to the site of the use.
(c) Will provide proper waste management of all waste, refuse or
accumulations of any such nature.
(d) Will comply with all the performance standards in § 370-61.
§ 370-24 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-24
347:765

ARTICLE V
Open Development Districts
§ 370-25. Statement of intent.
In addition to the general goals listed in the preamble and general intent,
the zoning districts established in these regulations are in accordance with
the community goals, objectives and policies as described in the Bridgeton
Master Plan and are intended to achieve the following:
§ 370-26. O-1 Park and Open Space District. [Amended 9-17-2013
by Ord. No. 13-06]
A. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for the various
types of public and semipublic recreation, conservation and other open
space uses.
B. To provide sufficient space for the expansion of existing public facilities.
C. To protect the natural environment from ill-conceived development.
D. To protect public health, safety and welfare from certain natural
disasters.
E. To permit and encourage the retention of open land uses located and
designed to constitute harmonious and appropriate physical
development of the City of Bridgeton.
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of these regulations to establish
districts specifically for recreation facilities, conservation of natural
amenities, public education facilities and certain semipublic uses which
require vast areas of open land and in such quantity as to provide for
the expansion and future development of these uses.
B. Use regulations.
(1) Uses by right. In any O-1 District, land, buildings and structures
may be used by right for one or more of the following:
(a) Public parks, playgrounds, playfields or reservations.
(b) Recreation buildings, community centers, auditoriums,
stadiums, bathing beaches, swimming pools and similar uses.
(c) Commercial recreation facilities.
(d) Golf courses; public and/or membership clubs.
(e) Zoos, aviaries, aquariums, conservatories, arboretums,
botanical gardens, wildlife refuges and similar uses.
(f) Public schools, libraries, museums and similar public
education facilities.
§ 370-25 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-26
347:767
§ 370-27. WF Waterfront District.
(g) Municipal uses and buildings.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Accessory uses shall be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory.
(b) Only those accessory uses customarily incidental to and
associated with those uses by right listed above will be
permitted.
C. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.108
A. Specific intent. It is the specific intent of these regulations to establish
controls for the use of waterfront property which includes floodplains,
wetlands and adjacent uplands and to protect areas subject to and
necessary for floodwaters and tidewaters in order to:
(1) Combine, with present zoning requirements, certain uses and
restrictions to promote the general health, welfare and safety of the
community.
(2) Prevent the erection of structures in areas unfit for human usage
by reason of danger from flooding, unsanitary conditions or other
hazard.
(3) Minimize danger to public health by protecting the water supply
and promoting safe and sanitary drainage.
(4) Reduce the financial burdens imposed on the community, its
governmental units and its individuals by frequent and periodic
floods and overflow of lands.
(5) Permit certain uses which can be appropriately located in the
waterfront as herein defined and which will not impede the flow of
floodwaters, or otherwise cause danger to life and property at or
above or below their locations within the floodplains.
(6) Permit only those uses in the waterfront compatible with the
preservation of natural conditions which are conducive to the
maintenance of constant rates of water flow and improvement of
water quality throughout the year by:
(a) Withholding rapid water runoff contributing to downstream
flooding;
(b) Providing area for groundwater absorption for maintenance of
the subsurface water supply; and
108. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-26 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-27
347:768
(c) Assuring that the uses by right do not contribute to the
reduction of water quality, including improper wastewater
runoff from farms and pastures to downstream water bodies.
(7) Provide sufficient drainage courses to carry abnormal flows of
stormwater in periods of heavy precipitation.
(8) Permit watercourse improvement as approved by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Delineation of environmentally sensitive areas within the Waterfront
District. The limits of the Waterfront District as delineated on the
Zoning District Map (§ 370-11.1, Attachment 1109) include the following:
(1) Areas subject to intermediate regional tidal flood as defined by the
Corps of Engineers, United States Army, and such areas having an
elevation of 9.1 feet above mean sea level.
(2) Areas mapped as tidal marsh and alluvial land by the United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
(3) Areas located between the center line of a stream bed and a line
located 50 feet from and parallel to the stream bed.
(4) Areas of New Jersey Department of Environmental Protectionregulated
freshwater and tidal wetlands.
C. Use regulations.
(1) Use by right.
(a) Cultivation including reforestation and harvesting of crops
according to recognized soil conservation practices.
(b) Pasture; grazing land.
(c) Outdoor plant nursery; orchard.
(d) Private and public recreation use such as parks, day camps,
picnic groves, golf courses, hunting, fishing and boating clubs,
marinas and restaurants when connected to a public sewer
system.
(e) Harvesting of any wild crops such as marsh hay, ferns, moss, or
berries.
(f) Game farm, fish hatchery (excluding rearing structures),
hunting and fishing reserves.
(g) Wildlife sanctuary; woodland preserve; arboretum.
(h) Outfall structures for sewage treatment plants; sealed public
water supply wells.
109. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-27 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-27
347:769
(i) Flood retention dams and dikes, and culverts and bridges as
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and other applicable approving authorities.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Accessory uses customarily incidental to and associated with
those uses by right listed above will be permitted only upon
approval of the approving authority.
(b) Accessory uses shall be conducted on the same lot as the
principal use to which it is accessory.
(3) Conditional uses. The following conditional uses may be permitted
when authorized by the approving authority:
(a) Public utilities. [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
D. Use restrictions.
(1) The use of land within the Waterfront District for pipelines for
transmission of petroleum and petroleum products, junkyards,
outdoor storage of vehicles and/or materials is expressly
prohibited.
(2) The filling of marshlands, removal of topsoil or relocation of any
watercourse shall be prohibited except with approval from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and/or United
States Army Corps of Engineers as applicable.
E. Area and bulk regulations as specified in § 370-11.1, Attachment 3.110
F. Supplemental regulations in addition to those specified in Article VIII.
(1) Parking spaces, parking lots, access drives, sidewalks and other
similar areas shall be constructed with porous material unless
authorized by the approving authority or the City Engineer or other
professional engineer approved by the approving authority.
110. Editor's Note: Attachment 3 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-27 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-27
347:770
ARTICLE VI
Historic District
§ 370-28. Establishment of Historic District Commission.
An advisory Historic District Commission is established for the protection,
enhancement and preservation of districts, sites, buildings and structures
of historic, cultural or architectural value within the City of Bridgeton.
§ 370-28.1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall mean and include:
ADDITION — A new improvement as part of, or added to, an existing
improvement that changes the exterior architectural appearance of any
individually designated historic landmark or any structure within a
designated historic district.
ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL — An approval issued by the Administrative
Officer in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER (HISTORIC) — The person designated to
administer historic project review applications with the Historic District
Commission.
AESTHETIC — The general term for considerations of such specific
architectural and visual values as size, shape, mass, scale, relationship
of solids to voids, rhythm, balance, symmetry, asymmetry, color, texture,
design and decoration, etc.; aesthetic considerations may be appropriate to
individual sites, buildings or structures or to groups of sites, buildings or
structures in relation to one another and to their surrounding context(s).
AFFECTING A LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT — Any development
activity which alters the architectural appearance of an historic landmark
or any improvement within an historic district, including demolition of
structures on an historic landmark property.
ALTERATION (HISTORIC) — Work done on any improvement that
constitutes a visible change of the architectural appearance of an
improvement and that is not formally defined as an addition.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE — Any element or part of a structure visible
from the outside, including, but not limited to, the style and placement of all
windows, doors, cornices, brackets, porch spindles, railings, shutters, roof;
also the type, color and texture of the building materials, signs and other
decorative and architectural elements; also the architectural style, overall
appearance, design or general arrangement of a structure.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The certificate issued by the
Administrative Officer required prior to undertaking rehabilitation,
restoration, renovation, alteration, repair or demolition within an historic
district or on an individually designated historic structure and its accessory
buildings or structures, pursuant to this article of the municipal ordinances.
§ 370-28 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-28.1
347:771
CULTURAL LANDSCAPE — A geographically definable area such as a park,
which combines natural and constructed features of the environment, in
which the natural features may predominate, but where the agency of
human culture or development has been a force in shaping the visible
natural features. A cultural landscape may in whole or part be designated as
an historic district wherever such natural and cultural and historic features
combined are significant to a period or event or series of events in the
history, prehistory, or culture of a city, county, state, or nation.
CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE — Denotes an importance or value ascribed to
a particular site, building, structure, landmark or place by a community
or part of a community (e.g., a particular ethnic community) beyond what
may be typically or readily defined as historical or architectural; or it may
be a value that is not or is not yet affirmed by expertise in those fields
but is reflected in oral or community tradition. Cultural significance may
also be ascribed to sites, structures, buildings, landmarks, or places for the
synergistic effect of their combined historical, social and/or architectural
associations.
DEMOLITION — Partial or total razing or destruction of any historic
landmark or of any improvement within an historic district, or of any
structure on an historic landmark property.
DISREPAIR — The condition of being in need of repairs; a structure or
building in poor condition.
HISTORIC DISTRICT —
An area of the City of Bridgeton to which the criteria in Subsection A(1),
(2) and (3) all apply, or to which the criterion in Subsection A(4) alone
applies:
Has a special character or special historic, cultural, or aesthetic
interest or value.
(1)
Represents a distinct cultural feature or combination of features
or cultural landscape related to history, or exhibits one or more
periods or styles in architecture or development in the history of
the City, county, state or nation.
(2)
By reason of such features to constitute a distinct section of the
City.
(3)
Has been designated as an historic district pursuant to the
provisions of this article and of prior statutory provisions governing
the designation and protection of historic landmarks.
(4)
A.
Resources within an historic district shall be classified as Key,
Contributing or Noncontributing, and to the extent possible shall be so
classified in the resource documentation, and are defined as follows:
KEY — Any buildings, structures, sites or objects which would
individually qualify for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places.
(1)
B.
§ 370-28.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-28.1
347:772
HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION — The body which, for the purposes of
this chapter, acts as the Historic Preservation Commission as cited in the
MLUL., and as set forth in Bridgeton City Ordinance Nos. 83-21 and 89-11.
HISTORIC DISTRICT MAP — A map of the City depicting the appropriate
tax blocks and lots contained within the Historic District, and which shall
be marked to identify the location of designated historic landmarks, historic
landmark sites and historic districts.
HISTORIC LANDMARK — Any improvement which has been designated
as an historical landmark pursuant to the provisions of this article. Such
designation means that, in part or whole, such landmark improvement has
a special character or special historic or aesthetic interest or significance
as part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City,
county, state or nation.
HISTORIC LANDMARK SITE — Any parcel or part thereof on which an
historic landmark is situated or which itself constitutes a landmark; the
historic landmark site pursuant to the provisions of this article. This shall
also include all primary and accessory structures or buildings located on the
subject property.
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or any part thereof installed upon real
property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the location of
such construction of installation for a period of not less than 120 continuous
days.
INVENTORY — A list of historic properties determined to meet the criteria
of significance as specified herein. Additionally, it shall include all of the
buildings, structures, sites, streetscapes and districts identified in the
Bridgeton City Historic Sites Survey, prepared for the City of Bridgeton
by Hugh J. McCauley Associates in July and August 1979. This shall also
include any cultural resource inventory prepared subsequently which shall
have used criteria for such an inventory determined professionally
appropriate and acceptable at the time of the work.
MAJOR APPLICATION — Any application for a certificate of appropriateness
which:
CONTRIBUTING — Any buildings, structures, sites, objects or
landscape features which are integral components of the historic
district either because they date from a time period for which the
district is significant, or because they represent an architectural
type, period, method, or cultural feature for which the district is
significant.
(2)
NONCONTRIBUTING — Buildings, structures, sites or objects
which are not integral components of the historic district because
they neither date from a time period for which the district is
significant nor represent an architectural type, period or method or
a cultural feature for which the district is significant.
(3)
§ 370-28.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-28.1
347:773
MINOR APPLICATION — Any application for a certificate of
appropriateness which:
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — The established criteria for evaluating
the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60.4 et seq.
NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES — The official list,
maintained by the United States Department of the Interior, National Park
Service, of districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects significant in
American history, architecture, archeology, engineering and culture.
NOTICE PERIOD — The period of time, during an application involving
demolition, in which an official notice must be given in the manner and form
prescribed in this article.
OBJECT — A thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historic, or scientific
value that may be, by nature of design, movable yet related to a specific
setting or environment.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR WORK — The repair of any
deterioration, wear or damage to a structure or any part thereof in order
to-return the same to its condition prior to the occurrence of such
deterioration, wear, or damage with in-kind material and quality of
workmanship, and in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code.
PRACTICAL — In reviewing an application for a certificate of
appropriateness, consideration must be given by the Historic Preservation
Commission of what effect applying the criteria of the municipal historic
preservation ordinance, or the Secretary of Interior's Standards, regarding
the preservation, rehabilitation, restoration or reconstruction of an historic
resource will have and how it will impact the applicant's ability to use
the property. Demonstration that meeting these criteria is not practical
must include sufficient evidence or provide sufficient reasons explaining
this negative impact. The Historic Preservation Commission cannot take
financial hardship into account as a reason.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of applying measures necessary
to sustain the existing form, integrity and materials of a property. Work,
including preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the property,
Involves demolition or removal of a designated building or structure,
addition to a designated building or structure or construction of a new
structure in an historic district; or
A.
Otherwise falls within the criteria for major applications set forth in
§ 370-31A(3)(b)[1].
B.
Does not involve demolition or removal of a landmark or building within
the district, addition to a building or construction of a new structure in
an historic district; or
A.
Meets the criteria for a minor application, set forth in
§ 370-31A(3)(b)[2].
B.
§ 370-28.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-28.1
347:774
generally focuses upon the ongoing maintenance and repair of historic
materials and features rather than extensive replacement and new
construction. New exterior additions are not within the scope of this
particular activity; however, the limited and sensitive upgrading of
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems, and other code-required
work to make properties functional is appropriate within a preservation
activity.
RECONSTRUCTION —
REHABILITATION — In general, the repair, renovation, alteration or
reconstruction of any building or structure in accordance with the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code. As applied to historic structures,
rehabilitation work preserves or restores, or takes into account those
proportions or features which convey its historical, cultural or architectural
values of a structure or on which its integrity as an historic structure relies.
REMOVAL — To partially or completely cause a structure or portion of a
structure to change to another location, position, station or residence.
REPAIR — For the purposes of this chapter, any work done on an historic
structure or improvement which cannot be defined as an addition to the
improvement, and which does not, by virtue of changing its exterior historic
architectural appearance, constitute an alteration.
REPLACEMENT — The act or process of replicating any historic or
architecturally defining exterior architectural feature with the same
materials (or with materials that satisfactorily simulate the appearance of
the original) in order to substitute for a feature that has been deteriorated
or extensively damaged.
REPLACEMENT IN KIND — The act or process of replicating any historic
exterior architectural feature to substitute for the existing and deteriorated
or extensively damaged architectural feature with the same materials as the
original feature.
Any project where the extent and nature of the work is such that the
work area cannot be occupied while the work is in progress and where
a new certificate of occupancy is required before the work area can be
reoccupied. Reconstruction may include repair, renovation, alteration
or any combination thereof. Reconstruction shall not include projects
which comprise only floor finish replacement, painting or wallpapering,
or the replacement of equipment or finishings. Asbestos hazard
abatement and lead hazard abatement projects shall not be classified
as reconstruction solely because occupancy of the work area is not
permitted.
A.
As specifically applied to historic sites and structures, reconstruction
shall also mean the act or process of depicting or reconstructing by
means of new construction the form, features and detailing of a
nonsurviving site, landscape, building, structure or object, or a site that
has otherwise lost its historic integrity, for the purpose of replicating its
appearance at a specific period of time and/or in its historic location.
B.
§ 370-28.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-28.1
347:775
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately depicting the form,
features, and character of an historic property as it appeared at a particular
period of time by means of the removal of features inappropriate to that
period and the reconstruction of missing but appropriate features. The
limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical and plumbing
systems and other code-required work to make properties functional is
appropriate within the scope of restoration activities.
SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR'S STANDARDS — The publication issued
by the United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service,
entitled: "The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties as the Guidelines for Preserving, Rehabilitating,
Restoring and Reconstructing Historic Buildings," issued in 1995 and
revised from time to time.
SITE — Any place where a significant event or pattern of events occurred. A
site may also be the location of a ruined building, structure, or object if the
location itself, and/or the objects found therein, possess historic, cultural,
or archaeological significance. Both primary and accessory buildings and
structures may be included as or within sites. Besides including structures
and improvements, a site may be the location of prehistoric or historic
occupations or activities that may be marked by physical remains; or a site
may be a place designated as the symbolic focus of a significant event or
pattern of events.
STREETSCAPE — The overall visual character of the street, including,
but not limited to, the architecture and architectural character, building
rhythms, setbacks and height, fences, and storefronts. The character of
a streetscape is also affected by signs, lighting, parking areas, materials,
sidewalks, curbing and landscaping.
§ 370-29. Commission composition; qualifications; terms; removal
and vacancies; records and meetings.
A. The Commission shall consist of five members and two alternates who
shall serve without compensation and who shall be appointed by the
Mayor. All Commission members shall be residents of the City of
Bridgeton, except as noted in § 370-29(C). To the extent available in the
community, the Mayor shall appoint professional members from the
disciplines of planning, cultural anthropology, conservation, landscape
architecture, architecture, history, architectural history, prehistoric
archaeology and historic archaeology who meet the standards
contained in the National Park Service Professional Qualification
Standards. The Mayor can request from the New Jersey State Historic
Preservation Office an exemption from this requirement by
demonstrating that a reasonable effort has been made to appoint
qualified professionals. Information on the credentials of a proposed
Commissioner should be attached to requests submitted to the Mayor
for approval of appointment, and remain on file with the Administrative
Officer and the Mayor thereafter. Vacancies on the Commission are to
be filled with qualified members within 60 days.
§ 370-28.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-29
347:776
B. The initial terms of office of the first Commission members shall be for
one, two, or three years to be designated by the Mayor in making such
appointments in the following manner: Three of such members shall be
appointed for terms of one year, two of such members shall be
appointed for terms of two years, and two of such members shall be
appointed to terms of three years. The terms of each such member shall
expire on December 31 of the last year of each such member's term and
upon the appointment and qualification of such member's successor.
The terms of appointment of succeeding Commission members shall be
for four years each, to expire on December 31 of the last year of such
succeeding member's term and upon the appointment and qualification
of such member's successor. The initial terms of the alternate members
shall not exceed two years, and, thereafter, the term of an alternate
member shall be two years.
C. Regular members of the Historic District Commission shall include at
least one member of each of the following classes who may reside
outside of the municipality: Class A - a person who is knowledgeable in
building design and construction or architectural history; and Class B -
a person who is knowledgeable or with a demonstrated interest in local
history. Of the regular members of the Commission a total of at least
one less than a majority shall be Class A and B. Those regular members
who are not designated as Class A or B shall be designated Class C.
Class C members shall be citizens of the municipality who shall hold no
other municipal office, position or employment except for membership
on the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. Alternate members shall
meet the qualifications of Class C members. At the time of appointment
or reappointment of the members of the Commission, such members
shall be designated by class and the alternate members as "Alternate
No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
D. Each year, all members of the Commission should attend a conference
or training workshop on historic preservation issues or a related field.
E. The Mayor may remove any member of the Commission for defined
cause or written charges served upon such member and after a hearing
thereon at which hearing the member shall be entitled to be heard in
person or by counsel. A vacancy on such Commission occurring other
than by expiration shall be filled in the same manner as an original
appointment.
Attendance. Board members shall be deemed to have vacated their
appointment when they fail to attend and participate at meetings
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1 based on six consecutive weeks or for
three consecutive regular meetings without being excused.
F. Information on the credentials of the Commission members and on any
special consultants shall be kept on file with the Administrative Officer
and the Secretary of the Commission and remain available to the public
on request.
§ 370-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-29
347:777
G. Officers, staff and expenditures.
(1) The Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
members. The Commission shall also appoint a Secretary who may
or may not be a member of the Commission or a municipal
employee. The Commission shall be governed by Robert's Rules of
Order. At least three members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. The Commission shall
adopt, subject to formal approval by the Mayor and City Council,
rules for the transaction of its business, in the form of bylaws,
which shall provide for the identification of the time and place of
holding regular meetings and for the calling of special meetings by
the Chairman or at least four regular members of the Commission
and all other operations of the Commission. All meetings of the
Commission shall be governed by the New Jersey Open Public
Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq. The Commission shall be
governed in its formal operations by its bylaws, or in the absence of
formally adopted bylaws, by Robert's Rules of Order.
(2) Pursuant to the requirements of N.J.S.A 40:55D-108:
(a) The City Council shall make a provision in its budget for
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Commission to
include application fees and escrows.
(b) The Commission may employ, contract for and fix the
compensation of experts and other staff and services as it shall
deem necessary.
(c) Expenditures shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the
City Council.
(3) The Commission may appoint, pro tem, a recognized professional in
the field of architectural history, historic preservation and planning
to advise the Commission on matters before it, as it may deem
necessary to assist in rendering decisions, pursuant to this chapter.
(4) The Commission Chair and, in the absence of the Chair, the Vice
Chair shall serve as the presiding officer for all Commission
meetings, and shall establish the agenda for those meetings.
(5) The Secretary shall keep a record of the proceedings of the
Commission, including attendance, voting records, resolutions, and
any findings, determinations and decisions. The Secretary shall
also be responsible for preparing all letters and other
correspondence for the Commission, having the appropriate
member(s) of the Commission sign the correspondence and mailing
and/or distribution of such correspondence.
(6) The Commission shall adopt and promulgate such procedures as
are necessary and proper for the effective and efficient
§ 370-29 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-29
347:778
§ 370-29.1. Responsibilities, powers and duties.
The Commission shall have the following responsibilities, powers and
duties:
performance of its assigned duties. This includes establishment of
standing committees, subcommittees or ad-hoc committees.
H. The Historic Preservation Commission may create, adopt and publish
bylaws as needed for its further operation.
A. Within one calendar year of the adoption of this article, the Commission
shall prepare and adopt an Historic District Map pursuant to § 370-30
which shall be referred to the Planning Board for inclusion in the
Master Plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b and to the City Council for
inclusion as Attachment 1A of this chapter.111
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A.40:55D-110, the approving authority shall refer an
applicant to the Historic Commission to obtain a certificate of
appropriateness. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-111, the Historic
Commission shall submit a report of its finding on the application to the
approving authority. When appropriate, the Historic Commission may
designate a member to attend the approving authority meeting to
testify orally at the hearing on the application and to explain any
written report which has been submitted.
C. To evaluate properties included in the community-wide inventory
against the criteria for the National Register of Historic Places and, for
those not yet included, prepare nominations for the consideration of the
State Historical Preservation Officer. Inventory material shall be:
(1) Compatible with the New Jersey Historic Sites Inventory.
(2) Accessible to the public, except that access to archaeological site
locations shall be restricted.
(3) Updated periodically.
D. To review proposed nominations for properties or sites to be included in
the New Jersey or National Register according to the following process:
(1) Whether the nomination materials are received or initiated by the
Commission, the Commission shall promptly notify the State
Historic Preservation Office and forward a copy of the nomination
to the state agency;
(2) Within 45 days of receipt or initiation of the nomination, the
Commission shall allow a reasonable opportunity for public
comment on the nomination by publicly announcing when the
nomination will be discussed and conducting the discussion at a
111. Editor's Note: Upon adoption of the Historic District Map, Attachment 1A will be included
as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-29 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-29.1
347:779
public meeting that complies with the requirements of the New
Jersey Open Public Meetings Act;112
(3) In considering a National Register nomination that is normally
evaluated by a professional in a specific discipline, if that discipline
is not represented on the Commission, the Commission must seek
expertise in this area;
(4) The Commission shall prepare a report as to whether or not such
property, in its opinion, meets the criteria of the National Register.
Within 60 days of notice from the State Historic Preservation Office
that a nomination is technically complete, the Mayor shall transmit
the report of the Commission with recommendations to the State
Historic Preservation Office.
E. To amend, from time to time, as circumstances warrant, the landmark
designation list and Historic District Map in the manner set forth in
§ 370-30.
F. To report at least annually to the approving authority and City Council
on the state of historic preservation in the City and recommend
measures for improvement. Such a report shall address, at a minimum,
any properties added to either the New Jersey or National Registers of
Historic Places; areas in the community that the Commission
determines may be experiencing development pressures that would
impact historic landmarks or historic districts; buildings or structures
that the Commission may be considering for local designation.
G. To collect and disseminate material on the importance of historic
preservation and preservation techniques and make available such
materials to interested citizens and applicants, and to prepare and
distribute a design guidelines booklet addressing the specific design
needs of individually designated buildings and structures and such
buildings and structures within a designated historic district.
H. To advise upon request all interested citizens, applicants, municipal,
county and state agencies regarding goals and techniques of historic
preservation as it relates to the preservation of the heritage of the City.
I. To adopt and promulgate such procedures not inconsistent with this
article as are necessary and proper for the effective and efficient
performance of the duties assigned herein. This shall include the
establishment of standing committees, subcommittees or ad-hoc
committees.
J. To advise the approving authority, upon request, as to any applications
before them which are not within but which may substantially affect or
impact any historic district or individually designated historic
landmark.
112. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6.
§ 370-29.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-29.1
347:780
§ 370-30. Designation of historic landmarks, historic landmark
sites and historic districts.
K. To carry out such advisory, educational and informational functions to
promote historic preservation in the City and to consult with such other
agencies or organizations as deemed necessary and appropriate on all
matters pertaining to the protection and preservation of the City's
cultural resources.
L. To undertake a review of all Section 106 (National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966) applications for projects within the City and for those
projects outside of the City but which may have a physical or visual
impact on the cultural resources of the City. The Commission shall
develop, in a timely manner, a report on its findings and submit the
same to the State Historic Preservation Office, and the approving
authority hearing the application for development.
M. To undertake the review of all applications for a certificate of
appropriateness in accordance with § 370-31.
N. To not undertake independent enforcement actions outside of the
application review process.
O. To memorialize the decisions and findings made on all matters brought
before the Commission through adopted resolutions.
A. Survey. The Commission shall maintain a comprehensive survey of the
City of Bridgeton to identify historic landmarks, historic landmark sites
and historic districts that are worthy of protection and preservation.
The original basis of this survey shall be the buildings, structures, sites,
objects and districts identified in the Historic Sites Survey prepared for
the City of Bridgeton by Hugh J. McCauley Associates in July and
August 1979. The survey shall include and incorporate any
subsequently designated cultural resources or authorized cultural
resource inventory that was prepared using criteria determined
professionally appropriate and acceptable at the time of the work. The
designation list and map shall be incorporated into the Bridgeton City
Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance as required by the MLUL.
B. Criteria for designation. The criteria for evaluating and designating
historic landmarks, historic landmark sites and historic districts shall
be guided by the National Register Criteria. The Commission or any
person may recommend designation of historic landmarks, historic
landmark sites or historic districts within the City that they believe to
be in accordance with the National Register criteria, and that in
addition to possessing integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
and workmanship are at least 50 years old and meet one or more of the
following criteria:
(1) Possess character, interest, or value as part of the development,
heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, state or nation; or
§ 370-29.1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-30
347:781
(2) Are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or
(3) Are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or
(4) Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method
of construction, architecture, or engineering; or
(5) Are identified with the work of a builder, designer, artist, architect
or landscape architect whose work has influenced the development
of the City, state or nation; or
(6) Embody elements of design, detail, material or craftsmanship that
render an improvement architecturally significant or structurally
innovative; or
(7) Possess a unique location or singular physical characteristics that
make a district, or landmark or site an established or familiar visual
feature; or
C. Procedures for designation. [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No.
13-06]
(1) Any person, Commission member, or the Commission itself, may
initiate the designation of an historic landmark, historic landmark
site or historic district. Persons wishing to make a nomination shall
contact the Commission Secretary and file a nomination packet
that contains the following information:
(a) Photographs in both color and black and white of the proposed
individual property or resource for which landmarking is
sought; or, if a district, a building-by-building or site-specific
inventory with photographs in color and black and white of all
properties or resources within the proposed district; and
(b) A copy of the Municipal Tax Map defining the boundaries of the
site or resource or district, or specifying the location of the
property on which it is situated; and
(c) A written description of the physical character, condition and
visible details of the proposed landmark, site, or district; and
(d) A written statement of significance of the resource, site or
district, employing the criteria set forth in this chapter.
(2) Following receipt of a complete nomination to propose an historic
landmark, historic landmark site or historic district, the
Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the proposed
designation as promptly as possible. At least 20 days prior to the
public hearing, the Commission shall, by personal service or
certified mail, perform the following:
§ 370-30 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-30
347:782
(a) Notify the owner(s) of record of any and all properties that
have been proposed for historic landmark or historic landmark
site designation, or that are located within a district that has
been proposed for historic district designation, that the
property is under consideration for such designation and the
reasons therefor;
(b) Advise the owner(s) of record of the significance,
consequences and rights to contest such designation;
(c) Advise the owner(s) of record of the date, time and location of
the hearing;
(d) Serve any further notices as may be required under the
provisions of the MLUL;
(e) Cause public notice of the hearing to be published in the
official newspaper of the City;
(f) Assure that a copy of the nomination report is made available
for public inspection in the municipal offices of the Municipal
Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
(3) At the public hearing, the Commission shall review the nomination
report and accompanying documents. Interested parties shall be
given the opportunity to be heard and to comment on the proposed
nomination for designation.
(4) If the proposed nomination is approved by the Commission, then
the Commission shall forward a report concerning the proposed
historic landmark, historic landmark site or historic district to the
City Council, which shall contain a statement and reasons for the
Commission's recommendations. The City Council shall then
consider whether to adopt or reject the proposed historic
designation(s). If adopted, the corresponding landmark, site, or
district shall then be subject to those procedures and statutes
which apply to a change of a zoning designation and the adoption,
revision or amendment of any development regulation.
(5) All other requirements of the MLUL regarding adoption of
development regulations shall be followed.
(6) Upon adoption of an ordinance by the City Council designating an
historic landmark, historic landmark site or an historic district, the
designation shall supplement rather than supersede the existing
zoning district in which the affected historic landmark, historic
landmark site or historic district is located. At that time, the
designation list and map shall be incorporated into the Bridgeton
City Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance as required by the MLUL.
(7) Designated properties shall also be noted as such on the records
for those properties maintained by the approving authority, City
§ 370-30 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-30
347:783
§ 370-31. Design review of demolition, relocation, alteration and
new construction; certificate of appropriateness.
Construction Official, the City Tax Assessor and the Municipal
Clerk. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-20]
D. Amendments. Amendments to historic landmark, historic landmark site
or historic district designations may be made in the same manner as
they were adopted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Certificate of appropriateness.
(1) When required. A certificate of appropriateness shall be required
before any work is commenced on any historic landmark, any
historic landmark site or improvement within an historic district,
whether or not a permit is required for such work, including but not
limited to the following:
(a) Changing the exterior appearance of any building, structure,
site, object or improvement by addition, reconstruction,
alteration or replacement, including the replacement of
windows and doors, except for the activities described by
Subsection A(2) below.
(b) Demolition of any building, structure, site, object or
improvement.
(c) Relocation of a principal or accessory building, structure,
object or improvement.
(d) Any addition to or new construction of a principal or accessory
building, structure, object or improvement.
(e) Painting or repainting the exterior surfaces, with exception as
described in Subsection A(2) below.
(2) When not required. A certificate of appropriateness shall not be
required:
(a) Before a permit is issued by the Zoning Officer for changes to
the interior of a structure, unless that interior has been
specifically landmarked in its own right, or if the interior
change will affect the appearance of the exterior of the
building.
(b) For any strictly in-kind repair or exact replacement of any
existing improvement.
(c) For repainting in the existing color or color palette, if this was
previously approved by the Commission. If this was not
previously approved, a certificate of appropriateness shall be
required. In the event that the color or exterior surface
material of the improvement shall be changed as a result of
§ 370-30 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-31
347:784
such repainting, repair or exact replacement, a certificate of
appropriateness shall be required, as in Subsection A(1)(a)
above.
(d) For work contemplated that, in the opinion of the Commission
(or the Administrative Officer acting in its behalf), constitutes
"ordinary maintenance and repair" as defined by this chapter.
In such cases, if a permit is required for the proposed work, the
Commission or Administrative Officer shall promptly notify the
Zoning Officer that a certificate of appropriateness is not
required as a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit, and has
been waived.
(3) Application procedures.
(a) Except for the circumstances described in § 370-31A(2)(a) and
(b) above, no work shall be performed on any historic
landmark, historic landmark site or on any building, structure,
object, site or improvement located within an historic district
until either a certificate of appropriateness has been issued by
the Commission's Administrative Officer, or if forwarded to the
Commission for determination, until the Commission has either
approved such work or determined that no certificate of
appropriateness is necessary because the proposed work
constitutes "ordinary maintenance and repair" pursuant to this
chapter.
(b) All applicants shall complete and submit a preapplication form
for a certificate of appropriateness, as adopted by the Historic
District Commission, not less than 10 calendar days before a
regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission. The
Administrative Officer may waive this time requirement if, in
his judgment, the application is of an emergent nature. The
Administrative Officer shall in all cases be responsible for
receiving and processing the preapplication form and assuring
that it is accompanied by the necessary supporting documents.
The Administrative Office shall review the preapplication form
and documents and classify the application in accordance with
the scope of work for which approval is being sought.
[1] If the action for which the certificate of appropriateness is
requested will substantially affect those characteristics of
the district listed on the district's landmark designation,
the Administrative Officer shall classify the application as
a major application, and be guided by the process as set
forth in § 370-31A(5).
[2] If the action for which the certificate of appropriateness is
requested will not substantially affect the building,
structure or district as stated in § 370-31A(3)(b)[1] above,
then the Administrative Officer shall classify the
§ 370-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-31
347:785
application as a minor application, and be guided by the
process as set forth in § 370-31A(4).
(4) Process for minor applications.
(a) Minor applications may be heard and decided by the
Administrative Officer as soon as they are classified as such
and the Administrative Officer has determined that the
supporting documentation is complete. If the Administrative
Officer judges the minor application to be of sufficient
complexity or uncertainty in its effect, however, the
Administrative Officer may pass it on to the Commission for
evaluation and review at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
(b) The Administrative Officer shall maintain a brief, running
inventory of the applications adjudged to be minor that have
received certificates of appropriateness during the interval
between Commission meetings, and provide this to the
Commission Chair before each regular meeting.
(c) The Administrative Officer shall also determine whether or not
an adjacent property may be affected by the proposed
undertaking, even if the undertaking is judged to be minor. If
so, the Administrative Officer may order, as a condition of final
approval, that the applicant send notice of the Commission's or
Administrative Officer's actions to such owners of adjacent
properties, by certified mail with return receipt. The adjacent
property owners will then have 30 calendar days from the date
of receipt to file a written objection with the Administrative
Officer.
(d) If no objections are received, the approval of the minor
application shall be deemed final. If written objection is
received, the Administrative Officer shall refer the matter to
the Commission for its consideration or reconsideration and
decision at the next regularly-scheduled meeting. Any objector
will have full rights to present evidence and to cross-examine
witnesses or the applicant. The Commission shall hear and
decide any objection within 45 calendar days of its receipt by
the Administrative Officer.
(5) Process for major applications.
(a) Major applications shall be heard and decided by the
Commission within 45 calendar days following the
determination of the application deemed administratively
complete by the Administrative Officer, or any extension of
time that has been mutually agreed upon by both the applicant
and the Commission.
(b) In addition to those items required to be submitted as a part of
a complete application, if the application is deemed by the
§ 370-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-31
347:786
Administrative Officer to be of sufficient impact on
surrounding properties, the applicant shall also submit:
[1] A copy of the certified list of property owners within 200
feet of the subject property, as issued by the City Tax
Assessor, and a certificate that all such property owners
have been sent a certified return mail notice of the
application not less than 10 calendar days prior to the
hearing on the application.
[2] Proof of publication of the legal notice that appeared in the
officially designated newspaper of record at least 10
calendar days prior to the hearing on the application.
(c) The Historic District Commission may advise the applicant and
make recommendations in regard to the appropriateness of the
proposed action and may grant approval upon such conditions
as it deems appropriate within the intent, purposes and
standards of this chapter and as may be contained in the "The
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of
Historic Properties as the Guidelines for Preserving,
Rehabilitating, Restoring and Reconstructing Historic
Buildings."
(d) Should final action on an application not take place within the
prescribed or agreed-upon time frame, the application shall be
deemed to have been approved.
(e) The Commission may require the submission by the applicant
of such additional materials as it reasonably requires in order
to make an informed decision; absent those materials, the
Commission may judge the application to be incomplete, and
carry over the application to the next meeting or next mutually
agreed-upon date without affecting the prescribed forty-fiveday
period for a decision.
(f) The Commission shall clearly set forth its decision with its
findings of fact and conclusions in reference to the particular
application.
(g) If an application is approved, the Historic Preservation
Commission shall grant the issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness and, through the Administrative Officer,
provide the same to the applicant along with a certified copy of
the resolution.
(h) In any instance where the Commission disapproves an
application, the Commission, through the Administrative
Officer, shall notify the applicant with a certified copy of the
resolution of that determination. A summary of the
Commission's action, with the full language of the resolution,
§ 370-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-31
347:787
shall be published in the official minutes of the Commission,
and be made available on request.
(i) In the case of a major application, where the Commission is
persuaded by visual evidence, its own or the applicant's, that
the proposed addition, removal or alteration is not sufficiently
visible from any viewing-point normally accessible to the
public to adversely impact the historic viewscape, the
Commission may by majority vote of the full authorized
membership grant a certificate of appropriateness on that
basis.
(j) In the case of the Commission granting an applicant approval,
approval with conditions or denial, a summary of the
Commission's action shall be published in the official
newspaper of record.
(6) Requirements for a complete major application.
(a) An application for a certificate of appropriateness, or for a
determination of nonnecessity of a certificate of
appropriateness, shall be accompanied by appropriate
sketches, drawings, photographs, descriptions or other
information as required by the Administrative Officer or the
Commission, or as specified in the application checklist. The
information should include existing or prior conditions
proposed to be altered, projected future appearance of the
structure or site after alterations, additions, changes or new
construction are complete. Wherever possible, the application
shall include both historical and contemporary photographs of
the exterior of the landmarked site or structure.
(b) An application for demolition shall include historical and
contemporary photographs of the exterior and interior of the
building or structure in question, if possible.
(7) Form of recommendations issued for major or minor applications
that come before the Commission.
(a) The Commission shall recommend to the Administrative
Officer either the approval, approval with conditions or denial
of the application for a certificate of appropriateness.
(b) The Commission shall explain in writing the reasons for its
recommendation, and otherwise provide information sufficient
to instruct the Administrative Officer on how to guide the
applicant in meeting the expectations of the Commission's
recommendations. The explanation shall focus the effect of the
proposed undertaking on the landmark's historic and/or
architectural significance as set forth in the criteria of this
chapter.
§ 370-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-31
347:788
(c) The Administrative Officer shall follow the recommendations of
the Commission.
(8) Length of validity of a certificate of appropriateness.
(a) A certificate of appropriateness shall be valid for a period of
two calendar years from the date it is issued by the
Commission's Administrative Officer.
B. Applications for demolition.
(1) The Commission shall first consider whether preservation of the
historic landmark in place is feasible or, failing that option, whether
preservation of the historic landmark at another location is feasible
and practical. In determining whether preservation of the historic
landmark in place is feasible, the following factors shall be
considered:
(a) Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its
historical or architectural value is such that its removal would
be detrimental to the public interest.
(b) Its status with regard to the New Jersey and National Registers
of Historic Places; i.e., whether it is individually listed or
eligible to be listed; whether it is a part of a registered or
eligible historic district, and whether, within that district, it is a
key, contributing or noncontributing building.
(c) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon
design, craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be
reproduced or could be reproduced only with difficulty.
(d) The extent to which its retention would promote the general
welfare by maintaining and increasing real estate values,
generating business, creating new jobs, attracting tourists,
students, writers, historians, artists and artisans, attracting
new residents, encouraging study and interest in studying
architecture and design, educating citizens in American
culture and heritage or making the municipality a more
attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(e) The probable impact of its removal upon the ambience of the
historic district, if it is within an historic district.
(f) Whether the site contains any extant archaeological resources.
(g) Whether the historic landmark represents the last or best
remaining example of its kind in the City that possesses
research potential or public education values.
(h) Whether the historic landmark can be preserved by protecting
its location from disturbance.
§ 370-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-31
347:789
(i) Whether redesign of the development proposal to avoid impact
can result in the preservation of the building or structure in
question.
(j) The historic, architectural, aesthetic and social significance of
the structure or building and/or importance and uniqueness to
the City and the extant archaeological resources.
(k) Whether protective measures will result in the long-term
preservation of the historic landmark.
(l) Whether the steps necessary to preserve the historic landmark
are feasible and practical.
(2) In the event that the Commission determines that preventing
demolition is not feasible and recommends that the demolition of a
listed or contributing historic landmark be approved, the following
steps shall be taken:
(a) The applicant shall be responsible for preparing and
submitting to the Commission a completed set of drawings and
photographs of the historic landmark that meet the standard
established by the Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS),
as administered through the United States Department of the
Interior. The photographs are to be taken by a professional
photographer, shall be eight-inch-by-ten-inch black and white
prints made on archival quality photographic paper and be
taken from large format (four-inch-by-five-inch minimum size)
negatives.
(b) The drawings and photographs shall be submitted to the
Commission for review and acceptance. Prior to the
municipality issuing the formal certificate authorizing the
demolition, the applicant shall have submitted two sets of
drawing prints and one set of reproducible Mylar prints; and
two sets of eight-inch-by-ten-inch black and white
photographic prints and the large-format negatives from which
the prints were made.
(c) These requirements may be waived by the Historic District
Commission if the demolition involves a noncontributing
building or structure within a designated historic district.
(3) In the event that the Commission recommends denial of an
application for a certificate of appropriateness to demolish an
historic landmark or a building, structure, site, object or
improvement located in an historic district, the owner shall be
entitled to raze or demolish the same, provided that all of the
following requirements have been fully met prior to the formal
demolition permit being issued by the City:
§ 370-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-31
347:790
(a) Appeal to the New Jersey State Superior Court. The owner has
applied for the necessary certificate of appropriateness and
has received notice of the denial of same from the
Administrative Officer and has appealed to the New Jersey
State Superior Court.
(b) If the New Jersey State Superior Court overturns the denial
issued by the Administrative Officer, then the applicant will be
responsible for completing the documentation components
stipulated in § 370-31B(2) above prior to the formal demolition
permit being issued by the City.
(c) Attempt at sale for fair market value. The owner presents
evidence that prior to seeking demolition for a period of at
least 365 days thereafter (the "offer period"), and at a price
reasonably related to its fair market value, made a bona fide
offer to sell such building, structure, site, object or
improvement and the land pertaining thereto to any person,
entity, organization, government or political subdivision
thereof which gives reasonable assurance that it is willing to
preserve the building, structure, site, object or improvement
and the land pertaining thereto. This offer period may have a
start date that is before or after the application to demolish,
but the date must be documented.
(d) Demolition notice posted and publication. The owner has
caused a notice of any proposed demolition, clearly readable
by the public, to be posted on the exterior premises of the
building, structure, site, object or improvement throughout the
notice period. The actual size and location of the notice sign
shall be determined jointly by the Commission and the
applicant at a public meeting on the application.
(e) In addition, the applicant shall publish a notice in the officially
designated newspaper of the City setting forth the following:
[1] The applicant's intent to demolish, including a description
of the subject property by block and lot number, as well as
by physical location, and a brief written description of the
building, structure, site, object or improvement to be
demolished, using its common or well-known name, if it
has one; and
[2] The applicant's proposed use of the property following
demolition; and
[3] The proposed time frame(s) associated with the
demolition; and
[4] A statement indicating the applicant's willingness to
consider any and all bona fide offers to sell the property to
§ 370-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-31
347:791
any person who wishes to preserve the building, structure,
site, object or improvement; and
[5] The owner's name, address, and telephone number where
the owner may be reached during normal business hours
by any interested person who wishes to discuss the
proposed demolition and/or make an offer to purchase the
property as set forth above.
(f) The notice shall be published as follows:
[1] At least once within the first 10 days of the notice period;
and
[2] At least once within the period of time that is not less than
10 nor more than 15 days prior to the expiration of the
notice period; and
[3] At least once each 20 days between the above first and last
notifications.
(g) At the conclusion of the notice period, if the applicant still
wishes to demolish the subject building, structure, site, object
or improvement, it shall, prior to performing the demolition,
perform the following:
[1] Advise the Commission in writing, by certified return mail,
of its intention to proceed with the demolition; and
[2] Certify in writing to its compliance with the provisions of
§ 370-31B(2) and (3)(b), relating to photographic and
drawing documentation and to the three-hundred-sixtyfive-
day offer period, respectively; and
[3] Provide the Commission with a copy of the notices that
appeared in the officially designated newspaper(s) of the
City and a listing of all of the dates on which the said
notice(s) appeared in the newspaper(s); and
[4] Advise the Commission in writing as to whether any
interested persons submitted an offer or offers to purchase
the property, whether during the three-hundred-sixty-fiveday
offer period or following the newspaper notices
referenced above, and set forth the terms and conditions
relating to said offer(s) and the results of any negotiations
pertaining thereto; and
[5] File copies of the affidavits of publications relating to all
newspaper notices with the Commission.
(h) Notice period. The period of time during which the notice must
be given in the manner set forth shall be known as the "notice
period," which shall commence on the 10th day following the
§ 370-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-31
347:792
date of the notice of denial of the appeal from the New Jersey
State Superior Court, and such notice period shall run for a
period of time of 60 days.
(4) Assignment. The rights granted by a certificate of appropriateness
to demolish a building or structure cannot be reassigned.
(5) Expiration of approval.
(a) In cases where demolition is approved, the certificate of
appropriateness shall be valid for one year from the date of the
Commission approval of the application. The one-year approval
shall not be extended.
(b) At the time of issuance of the certificate of appropriateness to
demolish, the Zoning Officer shall designate the period of time,
within the one-year approval period, within which demolition
must be completed.
(6) Approval after change of circumstances. If, at any time during the
notice period, a significant change in circumstances occurs that
can be shown beyond reasonable doubt to demand immediate
action to protect the health and safety of the public, the
Commission may be called upon to approve a certificate of
appropriateness to demolish, in which event, a permit from the
Construction Official shall be issued within 10 business days
thereafter.
C. Removal of an historic landmark out of the municipality.
(1) In regard to an application to move an historic landmark within an
historic district or an individually designated historic landmark to a
location outside the City, the following matters shall be considered,
in addition to the criteria set forth in § 370-31B:
(a) Whether the historic landmark can be relocated and still retain
its historic significance.
(b) Whether the historic landmark is sufficiently well preserved
and structurally stable to sustain the relocation.
(c) Whether alternative locations that are compatible with the
historic landmark are available.
(d) Whether it is feasible and practical to relocate the historic
landmark.
(e) Whether the relocation will result in the long-term
preservation of the historic landmark.
(f) The rationale for not retaining the historic landmark at its
present location and the probable impact of its removal upon
the ambience of the historic district.
§ 370-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-31
347:793
D. Removal of an historic landmark to another location within the City.
(1) The following matters shall be considered in addition to the criteria
listed in § 370-31B when moving an individually designated historic
landmark or any building or structure in an historic district to a
new location within the City:
(a) Whether the historic landmark can be relocated and still retain
its historic significance.
(b) Whether the historic landmark is sufficiently well preserved
and structurally stable to sustain the relocation.
(c) Whether alternative locations that are compatible with the
historic landmark are available.
(d) Whether it is feasible and practical to relocate the historic
landmark.
(e) Whether the relocation will result in the long-term
preservation of the historic landmark.
(f) The rationale for not retaining the historic landmark at its
present location and the probable impact of its removal upon
the ambience of the historic district. Consideration must be
given to the site where the building or structure is to be
relocated.
(2) Following the relocation of the historic landmark to another site in
the City, the Commission shall retain jurisdiction on the building
and site for purposes of review of any future development activity
in terms of alteration, addition or demolition. The tax block and lot
number of the new site shall be added to the list of designated
historic properties and shall be included on the Historic District
Map, as defined in this chapter.
E. Alterations and additions. The following factors shall be considered for
an application for alterations and/or additions affecting an individually
designated historic landmark, site or a building or structure within a
designated historic district:
(1) Design and materials. The proposed design and materials shall
conform to the building's original architectural style.
(2) Original qualities. The distinguishing original qualities or character
of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be
destroyed. The removal of alteration of any historic material or
distinctive architectural features shall be avoided.
(3) Acquired significance. Changes that have taken place in the course
of time are evidence of the history and development of a building,
structure or site and its environment. These changes may have
§ 370-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-31
347:794
acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall
be recognized and respected.
(4) Repair versus replacement. Deteriorated architectural features
(e.g., windows, doors, shutters, trim, siding, etc.) shall be repaired
rather than replaced, wherever possible, using the Secretary of the
Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and appropriate guidelines
developed in keeping with these Standards by the National Park
Service. In the event replacement is necessary, the new material
should match the material replaced in composition, design, color,
texture, and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of
missing architectural features should be based on accurate
duplications of features substantiated by historic, physical, or
pictorial evidence rather than conjectural designs or the
availability of different architectural elements from other buildings
or structures.
(5) Design of alterations or additions. Contemporary design for
alterations and additions to existing properties shall not be
discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy
significant historic, architectural, or cultural material and such
design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and
character of the property, neighborhood, or environment. The
proposed addition cannot exceed more than 25% of the total abovegrade
enclosed and livable square footage of the existing building
or structure.
(6) Character of alterations. Wherever possible, new additions and
alterations to buildings or structures shall be done in such a
manner that if such additions or alterations were to be removed in
the future, the essential form and integrity of the structure would
be unimpaired.
(7) Synthetic siding. Synthetic siding is not permitted on key buildings.
Synthetic siding may be used to resurface facades of low public
visibility on contributing buildings that were originally wood-sided
only if the substitute siding is similar in design, width and texture
to the original siding and will not endanger the physical condition
and structural life of the original building. Architectural trim must
be retained, and packing out of window and door frames is
specifically prohibited.
(8) Window and door openings.
(a) Size, location and style. The number, size and locations of
original window and door openings shall be retained. Window
and door openings shall not be reduced to fit stock material.
New window and door openings shall not be added on
elevations that are subject to view from a public street. The
replacement window or door shall be of the same style and
type that was originally used on the building or structure.
§ 370-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-31
347:795
(b) Metal windows. Where appropriate to the building or structure
in question, metal windows shall be permitted to match the
metal windows which were used when the building or
structure was originally built.
(c) Key buildings. Fiberglass-clad, vinyl-clad and aluminum-clad
windows and doors are not acceptable on key buildings. New
wood windows and doors shall be historically and
architecturally correct for the building or structure.
(d) Contributing buildings. Fiberglass-clad, vinyl-clad and
aluminum-clad windows and doors are not acceptable on the
front facades of contributing buildings. Non-wood-surfaced
window sashes, frames and doors and door frames may be used
on side and rear exposures of low public visibility on
contributing buildings that were originally wood windows and
doors when the substitute windows and doors are similar in
design, width, height and texture to the original wood windows
or doors and will not endanger the physical condition and
structural life of the building or structure. Pure vinyl windows
are not permitted.
(e) Noncontributing buildings. Non-wood-surfaced window
sashes, frames and doors are acceptable as replacement
windows or doors on noncontributing buildings. Pure vinyl
windows are not permitted.
(f) Trim and adornments. Architectural trim and adornments must
be retained. Wrapping and/or packing out of wood frames of
windows and doors is specifically not permitted.
F. New construction. The following factors shall be considered for new
construction on vacant lots or replacements affecting an historic
landmark, site, or an improvement within an historic district:
(1) Height. The height of the proposed buildings shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(2) Proportion of building's front facade. The relationship of the width
of the building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually related.
(3) Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the
width of windows to the height of windows in a building shall be
visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(4) Rhythm of spacing of buildings on streets. The relationship of the
building to the open space between it and adjoining buildings shall
be visually compatible with the buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
§ 370-31 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-31
347:796
§ 370-31.1. Emergency review.
(5) Rhythm of entrance and/or porch projections. The relationship of
entrance and porch projections to the street shall be visually
compatible with the buildings and places to which they are visually
related.
(6) Relationship of materials, texture and color. The relationship of
materials, texture and color of the facade and roof of a building
shall be visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
the buildings to which they are visually related.
(7) Roof shapes. The roof shape of a building shall be visually
compatible with buildings to which it is visually related.
(8) Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building, such as walls,
open-type fencing and evergreen landscape masses, shall form
cohesive walls of enclosure along a street, to the extent necessary
to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(9) Scale of building. The size of a building, the mass of a building in
relation to open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and
balconies shall be visually related.
(10) Directional expression of front elevation. A building and/or
structure shall be visually compatible with buildings and/or
structures to which it is visually related in its vertical character,
horizontal character or nondirectional character.
(11) Exterior features. A building and/or structure's related exterior
features such as lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks, driveways,
satellite dishes, solar panels and parking areas shall be compatible
with the features of those structures to which it is visually related.
(12) Rhythm of solids to voids on facades fronting on public places. The
relationship of solids to voids in such facades of a building shall be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
G. Permit review. It shall be the duty of all municipal officials reviewing
permit applications involving real property or improvements thereon to
determine whether such application involves any activity which should
also be the subject of an application for a certificate of appropriateness
and, if it should, to inform the Historic District Commission, the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment and the applicant
regarding the need to make such an application to the Commission.
A. When a structure or improvement requires immediate repair to
preserve the continued habitability of the structure and/or the health
and safety of its occupants or others, emergency repairs may be
performed in accordance with the Uniform Construction Codes, without
§ 370-31 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-31.1
347:797
§ 370-32. Procedures for review of site plans, subdivisions and
variance applications.
first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness. Under such
circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such as are
necessary to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the
structure or others and/or to maintain the habitability of the structure.
Where feasible, temporary measures to prevent further damage should
be used, provided these measures are reversible without damage to the
structure.
B. The property owner shall make a request for the Commission's review
simultaneously with the onset of the emergency work. The request shall
be made to the Administrative Officer. Such emergency work shall be
permitted only if the Administrative Officer certifies the immediate
necessity for such permit issuance. Upon notice to the full Commission
by telephone, personal contact or other appropriate means of
communication, at least three members of the Commission shall
convene as soon as possible, and such convening members shall
proceed to review the certificate of appropriateness application as
provided in this chapter. The Commission shall conduct the emergency
meeting in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq.). A certificate of appropriateness may be issued following
a majority vote of the members of the Commission convened at such an
emergency meeting.
C. No work in addition to the emergency repairs shall be performed on the
structure until an appropriate application for a certificate of
appropriateness is made and approval is obtained from the Commission
after referral of the request by the Construction Official.
A. In conjunction with all applications presented to the approving
authority for site plan, subdivision or variance approval(s) that relate to
land, buildings or structures within the established historic districts or
for any buildings, structures, sites or objects designated as an historic
landmark pursuant to this chapter, an applicant shall also submit a copy
of such application to the Historic Preservation Commission for review
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110. Such an application shall solely
pertain to the proposed development review.
B. The application shall be scheduled for review by the Historic
Preservation Commission at its next regular scheduled meeting, and
preferably before it is scheduled to be heard by the approving authority.
Upon completion of its review, the Commission shall forward a report of
its findings to the approving authority recommending an approval (with
or without conditions) or recommending denial. The recommendations
shall be in the form of a written report conveyed to the approving
authority. The report shall also set forth the reasons for the specific
recommendations based upon the criteria contained in this chapter and
also the Guidelines of the Secretary of the Interior.
§ 370-31.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-32
347:798
§ 370-33. Effect of certificate of appropriateness; approval; denial;
appeal.
C. The Historic Preservation Commission shall provide its advice through
the Commission's delegation of one of its members or staff to testify
orally at the hearing on the application and to explain any technical
comments or recommendations as outlined in the written report.
D. The Commission's recommendations shall focus on how the proposed
undertaking would affect a landmark's historic or architectural
significance, and shall be guided by the documents submitted by the
applicant, the standards and design criteria for review of applications
established in this chapter, and the Guidelines of the Secretary of the
Interior.
E. Neither approving authority shall take action on any development
application request affecting an historic landmark or an improvement
within a designated historic district without first reviewing and giving
significant weight and consideration to the Commission's
recommendations. In considering the Commission's recommendations,
the approving authority shall also be guided by the review criteria
established by this chapter and the Guidelines of the Secretary of the
Interior.
A. Within 45 days of a submission of an administratively complete
application for a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic District
Commission shall report to the Administrative Officer summarizing its
actions relative to the application. Its report may recommend issuance
of the certificate of appropriateness, with or without conditions, or may
recommend denial of the certificate of appropriateness. Failure to
report within the forty-five-day period, or any extended time limit
agreed upon jointly by the Commission and the applicant, shall be
deemed to be constituted as a report to the Administrative Officer in
favor of issuance of the certificate of appropriateness and without the
recommendations of conditions to the certificate of appropriateness.
B. A certificate of appropriateness which permits new construction,
demolition, relocation, alteration, additions, nonordinary repairs or
replacements affecting an historic landmark shall be conditioned upon
the appropriate treatment of the resources.
C. The work authorized by the certificate of appropriateness must be
initiated within one year from the date that the certificate is granted. If
a construction permit is required for such work, the certificate of
appropriateness shall be valid for the life of the construction permit and
any extensions thereof. For the purposes of this section, a certificate of
appropriateness shall be deemed invalid if the work ceases for a period
of six months after commencement of work. Reasonable extensions may
be granted by the Historic District Commission based upon appropriate
persuasive evidence.
§ 370-32 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-33
347:799
§ 370-34. Violations and penalties.
Any exterior work undertaken on an individually designated historic
landmark or improvement or an historic landmark or improvement within
a designated historic district for which a certificate of appropriateness is
required without first having obtained such a certificate of appropriateness
shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
fines and penalties as provided by law in the Code of the City of Bridgeton
for violation of local ordinances and subject to the following:
§ 370-35. Interpretative statement.
D. An applicant for a certificate of appropriateness who is dissatisfied with
the actions of the Administrative Officer in denying the certificate of
appropriateness or in issuing the certificate of appropriateness with
objectionable conditions may appeal that action to the City Zoning
Board of Adjustment within 30 calendar days from the date of the
Administrative Officer's written decision. This right of appeal is limited
to the applicant only.
A. Upon learning of the violation, the Zoning Officer shall personally serve
upon the lot owner where the violation occurred a notice describing the
violation in detail and giving the owner 10 calendar days to abate the
violation by restoring the landmark or improvement to its prior state. If
the owner cannot be personally served within the municipality with said
notice, a copy shall be posted on site and a copy sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner at his last known address as it
appears on the municipal tax rolls.
B. In the event that the violation is not abated within 10 calendar days of
service or posting on site, whichever is earlier, the Zoning Officer shall
issue a summons and complaint, returnable in the municipal court,
charging violation of this article. Each separate day that the violation
exists shall be deemed to be a new and separate violation.
C. The penalty for violation shall be as follows:
(1) For each day, up to 10 days: not more than $100 per day.
(2) For each day, 11 to 25 days: not more than $125 per day.
(3) For every day after the 25th day: not more than $150 per day, up to
a maximum of $5,000.
D. In the event that any action which would permanently change adversely
the landmark or historic district, such as demolition or removal, is
about to occur without issuance of a construction permit, the Zoning
Officer is hereby authorized to apply to the Superior Court of New
Jersey for such injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent the
destruction of any historic landmark, historic landmark site or
improvement within an historic district.
§ 370-33 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-35
347:800
§ 370-36. (Reserved)
A. Nothing contained within this article shall supersede the powers of
other local legislative or regulatory bodies or relieve any property
owner of complying with the requirements of any other state statutes or
municipal ordinances or regulations.
B. In the event of any inconsistency, ambiguity or overlapping of
requirements between the provisions of this article and any other
requirements enforced by the municipality, the more restrictive shall
apply, to the effect that state and/or federal legislation has not
preempted the municipality's power to enforce more stringent
standards.
C. These article requirements should not be viewed as requiring or
prohibiting the use of any particular architectural style, rather the
purpose is to preserve the past by making it compatible with and
relevant to the present. To that end, new construction in or near an
historic building, structure, object or site should not necessarily
duplicate the style; rather it should be compatible with and not detract
from the building, structure, site, object, neighborhood and its
environment.
§ 370-35 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-36
347:801

ARTICLE VII
Conditional Use Controls
§ 370-37. Statement of intent.
It is the purpose of the controls contained within this article to provide
special regulations for particular uses which may, under certain conditions,
be conducted within the various zoning districts. Each section has
particular controls and requirements which must be satisfied before the
conditional uses are permitted; and it is the intent of this article that these
particular controls and requirements are additional to those imposed by
Article X, Site Plan Review.
§ 370-38. Procedure.
§ 370-39. Churches and related religious facilities.
A. Submission.
(1) The applicant shall submit to the Zoning Officer a completed zoning
permit application in accordance with the procedure in § 370-86,
including a sketch, plan or survey as required by the Zoning Officer.
(2) The Zoning Officer will determine if a zoning permit can be issued
or whether Planning or Zoning Board approval is required.
(3) If approved, a zoning permit will be issued. If denied, the applicant
may submit an application to the applicable approving authority, as
directed by the Zoning Officer.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Places of worship, including churches, synagogues, temples, or
chapels.
(2) Religious education buildings, but not parochial schools.
(3) Recreation buildings when accessory to worship activity.
(4) Residences when related to worship activity, such as parish house,
manor, or convent.
B. Area and bulk regulations. All area and bulk regulations of the
prevailing zoning district shall apply with the following exceptions:
(1) The minimum lot size shall be one acre; however, if the sanctuary
shall have space for more than 500 persons, one additional acre
shall be required for each additional 100 persons or portion thereof
in excess of 500.
(2) The minimum building setback, side yard and rear yard shall be 50
feet.
(3) The maximum lot coverage shall be 70%.
§ 370-37 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-40
347:803
§ 370-40. Schools.
§ 370-41. Bed-and-breakfasts.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Public schools.
(2) Parochial schools.
(3) Private nonprofit schools.
B. Area and bulk regulations. All area and bulk regulations of the
prevailing zoning district shall apply with the following exceptions:
(1) The minimum lot size shall be based upon the following minimum
standards for school sites:
(a) Elementary: 10 acres.
(b) Junior high: 20 acres.
(c) Senior high: 35 acres.
(d) In addition to the above acreage, there shall be one acre of
land for each 100 students.
(2) The minimum building setback, side yard and rear yard shall be
100 feet.
(3) The maximum lot building coverage shall be 30%.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Bed-and-breakfast in accordance with the definition herein and in
N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.5.
B. Area and bulk regulations. All area and bulk regulations of the
prevailing zoning district shall apply.
C. Supplemental regulations.
(1) Parking shall be accommodated on the lot(s) on which the bed-andbreakfast
is located.
(2) The external appearance of the structure shall remain residential in
nature.
(3) The use shall not interfere with other uses permitted in the zone in
which the property is located.
(4) One off-street parking space shall be provided for each rental unit
plus two required spaces for the residence of the person
conducting the establishment. Additional parking shall be provided
§ 370-40 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-41
347:804
§ 370-42. through § 370-50. (Reserved)
§ 370-51. General home occupations.
§ 370-52. through § 370-56. (Reserved)
for employees. A reduction in the number of rental units may be
required if the impacts of the parking cannot be mitigated.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Personal and repair services.
(2) Professional and business offices.
B. Area and bulk regulations. All area and bulk regulations of the
prevailing zoning district shall apply.
C. Supplemental regulations.
(1) The area used for the practice of a home occupation shall occupy
no more than 25% of the total floor area excluding basements and
attics of the practitioner's dwelling unit.
(2) Parking shall be in accordance with § 370-63.
(3) No person other than a resident may practice the occupation.
(4) No more than one person shall be employed by the practitioner of
the occupation to provide secretarial, clerical or other assistance.
(5) No manufacturing, repairing or other mechanical work shall be
performed in any open space.
(6) No activity shall be conducted in such a way that noise, odor, dust,
vibration, electromagnetic interference, smoke or any radiation of
any kind shall be noticeable at or beyond the property lines.
(7) No storage of materials or products in any open areas shall be
permitted.
(8) No advertising signs are permitted.
§ 370-41 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-52
347:805

ARTICLE VIII
Common Regulations and Standards
§ 370-57. Statement of intent; applicability.
§ 370-58. Accessory uses.
A. Statement of intent.
(1) It is the purpose of this article to provide common regulations on
certain activities or conditions and to provide common standards
affecting the construction of property improvements which are not
subject to specific zoning districts.
(2) Nothing herein shall be interpreted as providing limitations on
specific controls delineated in prevailing zoning districts.
B. Extent of applicability.
(1) The controls imposed within this article shall be held to apply
uniformly throughout the City except as may be otherwise noted in
the various zoning district regulations, Articles II through V of this
chapter.
(2) In cases where there is a conflict between these regulations and
state or federal regulations governing the same condition, the more
strict regulations shall apply.
A. Single- and two-family dwelling accessory uses.
(1) Open parking spaces shall not be:
(a) Located within the area between the building setback line and
the street right-of-way line or, in the case of a corner lot,
between the side yard line and the street right-of-way line.
(b) Located closer than 25 feet to an alley or within any street.
(c) Paved with an inappropriate material. If such material is
pervious asphalt, crushed stone or similar material, the paved
area may be considered to be part of the open space
requirement.
(2) One detached garage and/or carport per lot shall be permitted
which shall not be:
(a) Temporary in nature.
(b) Located within 25 feet of any rear alley or street right-of-way
line.
(c) Located between the front building setback line and the street
right-of-way line.
§ 370-57 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-58
347:807
(d) Located within the minimum side yard of the prevailing
district.
(e) Located within 10 feet of the rear lot line.
(3) One storage shed, tool room, animal shelter or other outbuilding
shall be permitted per lot which shall not be:
(a) Greater than 15 feet in height.
(b) Located within five feet of the rear or side yard if less than 100
square feet in size.
(c) Located within 10 feet of the rear or side yard if greater than
100 square feet in size.
(d) Permitted between the building setback line and the street
right-of-way line or within 60 feet of any street right-of-way
line.
(e) Placed on a temporary floor or be placed directly in contact
with the ground. A permanent floor of concrete slab or other
solid foundation is required.
(f) Used for non-household pets when used as animal shelters.
When used as a structure for household pets, only two animals
are permitted.
(g) Used for keeping of animals for sale, hire or food production.
(4) Patios, paved terraces and open porches shall not contain
impermeable surfaces within 10 feet of any property line.
(5) Pools and ponds and private recreation facilities.
(a) Wading pools, flower ponds or other artificial ponds having an
average depth of less than 18 inches and a surface area of less
than 115 square feet shall be permitted as an accessory use.
[1] The pool or pond may be permanent, collapsible, or
portable.
[2] No pool or pond shall be located closer than 10 feet to any
property line, nor located between the building setback
line and the street right-of-way line.
[3] Any pool or pond, permanent, collapsible or portable,
having an average depth of 18 inches or greater and/or a
surface area of more than 115 square feet shall meet the
swimming pool requirements of Subsection A(5)(d)[1][a]
through [d] and the Uniform Construction Code.
(b) Permanent recreation facilities such as tennis courts and
swimming pools shall not be used for commercial purposes.
§ 370-58 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-58
347:808
(c) All area and bulk regulations of the prevailing zoning district
shall apply except the following:
[1] Swimming pools and related walkways and fences shall be
located 10 feet from any property line.
[2] Tennis courts and similar large-scale courts and their
required fenced areas may be located partly within
required yard areas, provided no court or fenced area is
located less than 15 feet from a property line and is not
located between the building setback line and the street
right-of-way line.
[3] Swimming pools and paved recreation courts shall be
considered a part of lot coverage limitation.
(d) Supplemental regulations.
[1] Private swimming pools.
[a] A permanent pool, portable pool or collapsible pool
and related walkways and fences shall not be
constructed, installed, located or maintained within
10 feet of any property line, nor nearer to any street
line upon which the residence fronts than the existing
setback line of said residence building, but in no case,
regardless of building setback line, shall a pool be
located less than 40 feet from the front street line,
and, in the case of a corner lot, a pool shall not be
constructed any closer to the side street line than the
distance to the street at the front of the residence.
[b] The installation of a pool shall conform to all
regulations of the Zoning Ordinance and Uniform
Construction Code.
[c] No private pools shall be used in such a manner as to
create a nuisance to other property owners in the
vicinity.
[d] All waters from the pool shall be discharged in such a
manner that another person's property is not
damaged or affected by the discharge of the said
water. Water may be discharged from a swimming
pool into a street or nearby storm drain.
[2] Outdoor floodlighting for recreational facilities and/or
activities in any district shall not create a nuisance to
other property owners. Outdoor floodlighting must be
approved by the Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a
permit for the erection of such lighting. Application for
such shall be made in writing to the Zoning Officer. Such
§ 370-58 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-58
347:809
application shall include a sketch showing the proposed
lighting standards, the direction and intensity of lighting,
all adjacent property lines and other such information as
may be necessary to enable the Zoning Officer to
determine whether the lighting complies with this chapter
and otherwise minimizes interference with adjacent
properties and use.
(6) Agriculture.
(a) Only individual gardens for home consumption shall be
permitted.
(b) Gardens shall not be located between the building setback line
and street right-of-way line.
(c) Farm animals and/or domesticated animals, which have
historically been used for the production of agricultural
income, including but not limited to sheep, chickens, goats,
swine, horses, and cows, shall not be permitted within the City
limits.
B. Apartment dwelling accessory uses.
(1) Parking lots for the exclusive use of tenants and employees:
(a) Shall meet or exceed the requirements of § 370-63.
(b) Shall not be located between the building setback line and the
street right-of-way line or closer than 25 feet to any properly
line.
(2) Parking garages and/or decks for the exclusive use of tenants and
employees:
(a) Shall conform to the requirements of § 370-63.
(b) Shall be located underground, in the same building as the
apartments or in a separate building.
(c) Shall conform to the architectural design of the main building
where a separate building is constructed for parking.
(d) Shall be accessed from an alley, private street or driveway.
(e) Shall not be located closer to any property line than 30 feet.
(3) Loading facilities.
(a) Loading berths shall be provided on lot and shall conform to
the requirements of § 370-64.
(b) Loading areas shall be physically separated from tenant and
employee parking facilities.
§ 370-58 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-58
347:810
(4) Recreation areas.
(a) Outdoor recreation facilities shall be located in landscaped
yards or may be located on roof decks when properly protected
by a parapet wall and/or fencing.
[1] Outdoor recreation areas except for landscaped gardens
and sitting areas shall be located at least 30 feet from any
street right-of-way line and 25 feet from any other
property line.
[2] Play lots shall be provided with benches for adults.
[3] Play lots shall be surrounded by fencing or an ornamental
brick wall, either of which shall be four feet in height.
[4] Tennis courts and basketball courts shall be surrounded by
a fence 10 feet in height.
(b) Outdoor swimming pools shall be subject to the requirements
of Subsection A(5)(d)[1][a] through [d] and the Uniform
Construction Code.
(5) Tenant laundry facilities shall not exceed more than 1/4 of the floor
area of any single floor.
(6) Storage facilities shall be located indoors only.
C. Commercial and industrial accessory uses.
(1) Parking lots for the exclusive use of customers and employees:
(a) Shall meet or exceed the requirements of § 370-63.
(b) Shall not be located between the building setback line and the
street right-of-way line or closer than 10 feet to any property
line. [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
(c) Shall contain clearly marked and/or separated employee
parking from customer parking.
(d) Shall be located on the same lot as the use to which it is
accessory except where specifically noted in the zoning district
regulations.
(2) Parking garages and/or decks for the exclusive use of customers
and employees:
(a) Shall conform to the requirements of § 370-63.
(b) Shall be located underground, in the same building as the
principal use or in a separate building.
§ 370-58 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-58
347:811
§ 370-59. Temporary uses.
No temporary use shall be permitted except by special permit issued by the
Zoning Officer. Should a permit be denied, the applicant may seek recourse
through the Board of Adjustment.
(c) Shall conform to the architectural design of the main building
where a separate building or structure is constructed for
parking.
(d) Shall not be located closer to any property line than 25 feet
except where the parking facility is an integral part of the main
structure on the lot.
(3) Loading facilities.
(a) Loading berths shall be provided on the same lot.
(b) Loading areas shall be physically separated from customer and
employee parking facilities.
(4) Storage facilities:
(a) In C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 Commercial Districts, merchandise
storage shall be located in the same building as the principal
use.
(b) In all C-5 Commercial Districts and Industrial Districts, storage
may be provided in a separate building or, when appropriate,
outdoor storage may be used.
(5) Merchandise display.
(a) No outdoor display of merchandise shall be permitted within
the C-1 District without a special permit.
A. Construction office and building or yard for construction materials and
equipment.
(1) Such office, materials and equipment shall be incidental and
necessary to actual construction in the district.
(2) Permits issued for this purpose shall be valid for a period not longer
than six months, except:
(a) Upon application, the Zoning Officer may renew such permits
for a period of six months.
(b) Not more than four successive periods shall be permitted at
the same location.
(c) If a construction trailer is to be relocated within the site, the
Zoning Officer is to be contacted for approval.
B. Temporary sales office.
§ 370-58 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-59
347:812
§ 370-60. (Reserved)
§ 370-61. Performance standards.
No use shall be permitted within the City of Bridgeton which does not
conform to the following standards of use, occupancy and operation. The
following standards are established as the minimum requirements to be
maintained within the City of Bridgeton, provided they do not conflict with
existing state or federal regulations.
(1) Such office shall be incidental and necessary for the sale or rental
of real property.
(2) Such office shall be located on the same property offered for sale or
rent; except, in the case of a subdivision or similar land
development, such office shall be located within the development
being constructed and offered for sale.
(3) Permits issued for this purpose shall be subject to the same time
limitations as set forth in Subsection A(2) above; except where a
sample home in a subdivision is used as a temporary sales office,
the applicable permit may be extended, upon application, for such
additional six-month periods as necessary to accomplish complete
sale of the properties in the subdivision or development.
(4) No temporary sales office shall be utilized as a sales office for
properties other than those specified in the original permit.
C. Temporary storage facilities such as on-site storage containers,
dumpsters, and collection bins. Any container placed for more than one
day needs a special permit. Placement, number and duration of such
facilities shall be at the discretion of the Zoning Officer.
D. Temporary parking area.
(1) Such parking areas shall be permitted for special events only.
(2) No temporary parking area shall be established in any residential
zoning district.
A. Noise. No use shall emit noise or vibrations along or beyond the
property on which the use is located that exceeds applicable state or
federal regulation.
B. Odor. No emission of odorous gases or materials in such quantity as to
be offensive at the lot line.
C. Air pollution. Air pollution control shall be in accordance with the Code
of New Jersey N.J.A.C. 7:27 et seq.
D. Water pollution.
§ 370-59 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-61
347:813
§ 370-62. Design, development and safety standards.
(1) No liquid waste materials shall be discharged into a private
disposal system, stream, or into the ground except as permitted by
the Board of Health or state or federal agencies.
(2) Solid waste shall be properly contained to prevent the breeding of
rodents and insects and the discharge of the waste from the
containment area onto the property.
E. Electromagnetic interference. No activities shall be permitted which
produce electromagnetic interference in excess of standards prescribed
by the Federal Communications Commission.
F. Radiation. No activity shall exceed the radiation or contamination limits
set forth in Title 10, Part 20, of the Code of Federal Regulations (10 CFR
20).
G. Glare or heat. No operation shall produce glare or generate heat
beyond the property line of the lot on which the operation is located.
H. Fire and explosion hazards. Any activity involving the use and/or
storage of flammable or explosive materials, or that may produce
flammable or explosive vapors, shall be conducted pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:70, the Uniform Fire Code (or other applicable regulations), which
may require automatic sprinkler protection and other safety devices.
I. Vibration. No ground vibration shall be perceptible at any point on or
beyond any lot line on which the use is located.
A. Physical setting and building location.
(1) The natural terrain and existing attractive features of the lot or
development site shall be incorporated into the development.
Natural features such as rock outcrops, streams and areas of
woodland and natural shrubs shall be preserved to the extent
possible.
(a) The approving authority may waive this requirement to the
extent necessary to allow for an economically feasible
development at the time it reviews the site plan.
(2) Existing trees over five-inch caliper shall not be removed except by
approval of the Planning Board, and such trees which are removed
with the approval of the Planning Board shall be replaced on the lot
by new trees, if required by the Planning Board, of the type, size
and amount as specified by the Planning Board.
(3) The developer shall replace natural growth of trees and shrubs
removed in the process of developing the lot or lots as directed by
the Planning Board.
§ 370-61 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-62
347:814
(4) Topsoil removed during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas
of the lot or lots.
(5) Buildings, roads, utilities and stormwater management features
shall be located to minimize environmental impacts to the site and
off-site and downstream resources.
(6) Building improvements shall consider the potential for shared
access to roads and utility easements on lands to be developed at a
future date.
(7) No more than one principal building may be erected on a lot
without approval from the approving authority.
(8) Every part of a required yard setback or required open space shall
be open and unobstructed to the sky; except as follows:
(a) The following projections into yards or courts may be
permitted, provided that the maximum projection specified
herein below shall not be exceeded:
[1] Cornices and eaves may project not more than two feet.
[2] Belt courses, sills, stormwater leaders, and similar
ornamental or structural features may project not more
than one foot.
[3] Awnings serving a door or window may project not more
than 3.5 feet.
[4] A chimney, smoke stack or flue may project into a required
rear yard, provided that the horizontal section of the
projection shall not exceed five square feet.
[5] Open fireproof fire escape stairway into a rear or side
yard, provided such projection shall not exceed four feet.
[6] Other projections when specifically permitted in the
various zoning district regulations.
B. Vehicular access and traffic control, parking and pedestrianways.
(1) Driveways and private streets. All driveways and private roads
constructed from the effective date of this chapter shall comply
with the following regulations:
(a) No driveway, service street or private road shall enter a public
street at a point that is closer than 75 feet to intersecting
streets as measured from the center line of the paralleling
street.
(b) No driveway or private street may enter into an arterial street
as shown on the Arterial and Collector Road Map in the
§ 370-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-62
347:815
Pedestrian and Vehicular Circulation Element of the Bridgeton
Master Plan except in the C-5 Commercial District or as
permitted by the approving authority upon site plan approval.
[1] The approving authority, upon advice of the City Engineer
and/or the Department of Public Safety, may request such
traffic control devices as acceleration or deceleration
lanes, turning lanes and lane markings, and yield or stop
signs.
(c) No driveway or private street used for interior traffic
circulation shall have traffic lanes less than 10 feet in width.
(d) All driveways and private streets shall be so designed that they
cannot be used as a through street.
(e) That portion of a driveway or private street located between
the street cartway and the street right-of-way line shall be
paved with a permanent all-weather surface.
(f) Curb cuts shall be constructed to standards acceptable to the
City Engineer and shall have a minimum width of 10 feet and a
maximum width of 20 feet in residential districts and a
maximum width of 35 feet in other districts.
(g) No driveway or private street shall be constructed within three
feet of a building or pedestrian walkway unless a raised curb is
provided.
(2) Visibility at intersections. Sight triangles at all street and driveway
intersections shall comply with the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards.
(3) New streets, private roads, driveways and parking facility
entrances and exits shall enter public streets at an angle of 90° to
the extent possible, but in no case shall the angle of entrance be
less than 75° or greater than 105°.
(4) All streets to be dedicated and private roads shall be constructed in
conformance with City regulations or to standards set forth by the
City Engineer.
(5) The approving authority may request that acceleration and
deceleration lanes, turning lanes and such traffic control devices as
stop signs, yield signs and the like be provided in the interest of
public safety.
(6) Off-street parking and loading standards and requirements
contained in § 370-11.1, Attachment 4, Zoning Schedule — Parking
and Loading Standards113 shall be considered to be minimum;
however, nothing herein shall prevent the development of parking
113. Editor's Note: Attachment 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-62 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-62
347:816
and loading facilities in excess of the aforementioned requirements
or to higher standards than prescribed by this chapter.
(7) Pedestrianways, where provided, shall be protected from vehicular
traffic by a raised curb and shall be separated from streets, private
roads, and driveways and, to the extent possible, parking areas by a
grass strip or landscaped area of not less than three feet.
(8) Sidewalks along dedicated streets and along private roads shall be
constructed to City standards.
C. Lighting.
(1) All pedestrian walkways, parking lots, driveways, and private
streets shall be provided with a lighting system that provides a
minimum of one footcandle at any point during the hours of
operation.
(2) All nighttime illumination provided for any use, including, among
others, parking lots, stadia, ball fields, playgrounds, playing fields,
and game courts, shall be installed in such a manner that no light
shines directly into a residential lot, except such residential lot as
the lighting is so provided, or into a public right-of-way and shall
further be installed so that no glare is perceptible at the property
lines.
(3) No elevated floodlights will be permitted on parking lots located in
or adjacent to residential zones or existing residential, hospital and
convalescent home uses.
D. Outdoor storage.
(1) Outdoor storage of any type shall not be permitted unless such
storage is a part of the normal operations conducted on the
premises subject to standards for the prevailing zoning district
and/or performance standards.
(2) Any article or material stored temporarily outside an enclosed
building as an incidental part of the primary operation shall be so
screened by opaque ornamental fencing, walls or evergreen
plantings that it cannot be seen from adjoining public streets or
adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on the ground
level.
(3) All organic rubbish or storage shall be contained in airtight,
verminproof containers which shall also be screened from public
view.
(4) All such storage shall be located behind the building setback line.
(5) Any establishment which furnishes carts or mobile baskets as an
adjunct to shopping shall provide definite areas within the required
§ 370-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-62
347:817
parking space areas for storage of said carts, and each designed
storage area shall be clearly marked for storage of shopping carts.
E. Retaining walls. No retaining walls shall be constructed without
satisfactory drainage provision or at a height exceeding six feet unless a
continuous four-foot-high protecting fence is provided on top within one
foot of the wall edge.
F. Fencing.
(1) No fence exceeding four feet in height shall be erected between the
street right-of-way line and the cartway line or between the
building setback line and the street right-of-way line. No fence shall
be erected in any sight triangle required at street and driveway
intersections required by Subsection B(2) of this section.
(2) No fence shall be erected within one foot of a property line if
erected by one property owner.
(3) If a fence is erected jointly by more than one property owner, the
fence may be erected on the separating property line.
(4) No fence shall be erected which is higher than six feet above grade
level except as provided elsewhere in this chapter.
G. Screening and buffering.
(1) A planted visual barrier, or landscape screen, shall be provided and
maintained by the owner or lessee of a property between any
district and contiguous residentially zoned districts, except where
natural or physical man-made barriers exist.
(2) This screen shall be composed of plants and trees arranged to form
both a low-level and a high-level screen.
(a) The high-level screen shall consist of trees planted with
specimens no younger than three years in age, and planted at
intervals of not more than 10 feet.
(b) The low-level screen shall consist of shrubs or hedges planted
at an initial height of not less than two feet and spaced at
intervals of not more than five feet. The low-level screen shall
be placed in alternating rows to produce a more effective
barrier.
(3) All plants not surviving three years after planting must be replaced.
(4) The approving authority may require additional screening and/or
setback in order to protect the public welfare and to provide for
additional public safety.
H. Landscaping and improvements.
§ 370-62 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-62
347:818
(1) Any part or portion of the site which is not used for buildings, other
structures, loading or parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks, and
designated storage areas shall be planted with an all-season
ground cover and shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs in
accordance with an overall landscape plan and shall be in keeping
with natural surroundings.
(2) A replacement program for nonsurviving plants should be included.
(3) The site plan must show a satisfactory method of irrigating all
planting areas. This may be either by a permanent water system or
by hose.
(4) All lots shall have at least 10 feet of grass or other approved ground
cover, as measured from the street right-of-way line, excepting
paved access areas.
(5) For major site plans or major subdivisions having an assessed
valuation greater than $100,000, at least 1% of the assessed
valuation of the entire development shall be expended in providing
a combination of plantings, site amenities or exterior building
improvements at appropriate locations according to an overall site
plan.
I. Drainage.
(1) No natural watercourse may be moved, altered or otherwise
changed without prior approval from the appropriate county and
state agencies and/or departments.
(2) All lots shall be graded so that surface water drains away from all
buildings and other structures constructed thereon.
(3) Swales shall be provided to prevent the encroachment of surface
water from one lot to another.
(4) A lot or lots which have sufficient acreage or which have natural
conditions that require the installation of a stormwater drainage
system shall be provided with such system by the developer and
such system shall be installed to specifications provided by the City
Engineer.
(5) Stormwater roof drains shall not discharge directly over a
sidewalk, driveway or parking area.
(6) Natural drainageways shall be protected from siltation by the
installation of diversions, sediment basins and/or similar erosion
and sedimentation controls and by the mulching or seeding of
exposed and/or disturbed areas during construction.
(7) Normal surface water runoff shall be minimized to facilitate
groundwater recharge to the extent possible but not to the extent
§ 370-62 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-62
347:819
§ 370-63. Off-street parking regulations and standards.
that such water remains impounded for a period longer than 24
hours.
J. Exception to height regulations.
(1) The height limitations as set forth in this chapter shall not apply to
church spires, belfries, domes, public monuments, observation
towers, radio and television towers, windmills, chimneys, smoke
stacks, flagpole masts, aerials, tanks and other projections neither
intended nor used for human occupancy.
(2) No structure shall be hereafter erected that is less than 7 1/2 feet
in height.
K. Historic District review. Any parcel proposed for development which
also falls wholly or partially within the Historic District or which
includes an historic landmark within its boundaries must submit the
proposal to the Historic District Commission for review and
recommendation.
L. Air safety and zoning for the area immediately surrounding any airport.
An airport safety zone shall be established and activities therein shall
be regulated at any airfield pursuant to N.J.A.C. 16:62-1.1 et seq.
According to the New Jersey Department of Transportation, Division of
Aeronautics, the LiCalzi Airport was closed and deactivated in July
2009.
A. General requirement.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Attachment
4, Zoning Schedule — Parking and Loading Standards.114
(2) In addition to off-street parking standards shown in Attachment 4,
ADA parking shall be provided in compliance with the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA).115
B. Location of off-street parking for dwellings.
(1) No area located within any street right-of-way shall be computed in
determining off-street parking requirements.
(2) Spaces may be located parallel or perpendicular to each other.
(3) Driveway area may be used to compute the required spaces only
when individual driveways are provided for each dwelling; garages
or carports shall not be required in any zoning district.
114. Editor's Note: Attachment 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
115. Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 370-62 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-63
347:820
(4) All parking compounds serving more than two dwelling units shall
have marked parking spaces.
(5) All parking compounds serving apartment and townhouse
dwellings shall be so located that no parking space is more than
400 feet from a building entrance as measured along the provided
walkway.
(6) All parking spaces provided for dwellings shall be located on the
same lot as the dwelling use except as may be otherwise permitted
in the zoning district regulations.
C. Location of off-street parking for nonresidential uses.
(1) All spaces for nonresidential uses shall be provided within 600 feet
of the main access to the use.
(2) When practical difficulties prevent the establishment of off-street
parking facilities upon the same lot with the use or building to be
served, the approving authority may, after public hearing and
notice and subject to appropriate conditions, permit the following
exceptions:
(a) Required off-street parking facilities may be established on
another lot or parcel, provided such substitute facility is
located within a six-hundred-foot radius of the building or
premises to which such facilities are appurtenant;
[1] Such off-street parking facilities and accessways shall be
reserved for such use by deed covenants or agreements
which subject their control to the City under conditions
approved by the approving authority and the City Solicitor.
(b) When there is a publicly owned off-street parking facility or a
privately owned parking facility which is permanently
established by agreement with the City for public use, which
facility is conveniently located and within a six-hundred-foot
radius of the building or premises to be served, such facility
may be utilized to meet a portion of the off-street requirement
as provided in Subsection D below.
(3) No parking facility may be located between a building setback line
and the street right-of-way line.
D. Calculation of parking space.
(1) Parking stalls shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet in size.
(2) When the calculated number of parking spaces results in a
fractional space, that fraction up to 1/2 shall be disregarded and
any fraction over 1/2 shall require one parking space.
§ 370-63 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-63
347:821
(3) Uses other than dwellings located within a six-hundred-foot radius
of a municipal parking facility or a privately owned public parking
facility may include spaces provided in such facility as a part of the
off-street parking requirement up to 50% of the capacity of such
facility; provided that:
(a) No part of the capacity thus assigned shall have been
apportioned by the approving authority to satisfy the parking
requirements of another building or use.
(b) Any parking spaces thus apportioned shall not be considered
as available to another building or use unless the approving
authority shall determine that the two premises are clearly
used at different times of the day or week.
(c) Such apportionment shall not give rights in or title to such
parking facility.
(d) In granting such exceptions the approving authority shall
satisfy itself that no undue hardship upon property in the
vicinity will result.
E. Design and safety standards.
(1) All off-street parking facilities required by this section shall be
paved, drained, lighted and maintained by the owner or lessee, in
accordance with Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(2) Such facilities shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of
pedestrians and vehicles.
(3) In the interest of safety, such facilities shall have adequate means
of access to and egress from a public street except:
(a) No parking facility shall enter from or provide exit to an
arterial street as shown on the Arterial and Collector Road
Map in the Pedestrian and Vehicular Circulation Element of the
Bridgeton Master Plan. [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No.
13-06]
(4) The paved surface of a driveway, aisle or parking space in a parking
area shall not extend nearer than three feet to any property line
abutting on a street.
(5) Parking areas that abut or are opposite (across the street from) a
residential district or use shall provide adequate buffering to avoid
reflection and glare into the abutting or opposite residential district
or use.
(6) Parking spaces shall be clearly delineated by painted lines or
markers.
§ 370-63 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-63
347:822
§ 370-64. Off-street loading regulations.
(7) If parking spaces are indicated by lines with angles other than 90°,
then traffic lanes shall be restricted to one way with suitable
markings permitting head-in parking.
(8) Stalls shall be provided with bumper guards or wheel stops when
necessary for safety or protection of adjacent structures or
landscaped area.
(9) Short-term, customer and visitor parking spaces shall be
differentiated from long-term employee spaces by suitable
markings.
(10) A curbing shall be provided to separate parking areas, streets,
driveways and pedestrian walkways.
(11) Surface drainage shall be connected to the existing or proposed
drainage system.
(12) All vehicular entrances and exits to parking areas shall be clearly
designated for all conditions by appropriate signs.
(13) All parking facilities which will be used at night shall be provided
with a lighting system.
(a) Such lighting system shall furnish a minimum of 1.0 footcandle
at any point during hours of operation.
(b) All lighting shall be completely shielded from traffic on any
public street.
(14) If off-street parking provides space for 50 or more cars, then at
least 5% of the paved area shall be maintained in plantings.
(15) Required open space in off-street parking facilities shall be
maintained in pervious material.
(16) The number of required parking spaces in off-street parking
facilities shall not be reduced.
A. General requirements.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Attachment
4, Zoning Schedule — Parking and Loading Standards.116
(2) No building or structure shall be erected or altered in any district
for the uses listed on Attachment 4 unless loading space for the
accommodation of trucks is provided on the premises in
accordance with the regulations contained herein.
116. Editor's Note: Attachment 4 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-63 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-64
347:823
(3) In buildings which have more than one use, square footage per use
shall be calculated to determine the number of loading spaces
required.
(4) For any calculated loading space less than one, the approving
authority shall determine whether a loading space is required
based on use and location.
B. Location.
(1) Loading berths shall be located within the main building or on the
same lot.
(2) With the exception of passenger loading, no loading shall be
permitted between the building setback line and the street right-ofway
line or within the street right-of-way.
(3) Loading areas shall be separated from customer and visitor parking
areas.
C. Design and safety standards.
(1) The minimum size of a loading space (berth) shall be 12 feet in
width and 45 feet in length, and such space shall have a vertical
clearance of at least 14 1/2 feet, except loading spaces for a funeral
home may be reduced in size to 10 feet by 25 feet and vertical
clearance reduced to eight feet.
(2) All loading space shall be paved with a permanent all-weather
surface.
(3) Off-street loading facilities shall be drained to prevent damage to
abutting property and/or public streets and alleys.
(4) Off-street parking and loading areas shall be maintained in a clean,
orderly, and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or
lessee and not used for the sale, repair, dismantling, or servicing of
any vehicle, equipment, materials, or supplies.
D. Screening and buffering.
(1) In all districts, all permitted or required open off-street loading
berths which are located on lots adjacent to the boundary of a
residence district shall be screened from all adjoining lots in
residence districts, including lots situated across a street, by
either:
(a) A strip at least four feet wide, densely planted with shrubs or
trees which are at least four feet high at the time of planting
and which are of a type which may be expected to form a yearround
dense screen at least six feet high within three years; or
(b) A wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence of fire-resistant
material, at least six feet high but not more than eight feet
§ 370-64 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-64
347:824
§ 370-65. Signs.
above finished grade. Such wall, barrier, or fence may be
opaque or perforated, provided that not more than 50% of the
face is open.
(2) In addition, such screening:
(a) Shall be maintained in good condition at all times;
(b) May be interrupted by normal entrances and exits; and
(c) Shall have no signs hung or attached thereto other than those
used for identification and in accordance with the regulations
of § 307-65.
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
and sign classifications apply:
AWNING SIGN — Any sign structure made of cloth or metal with a
metal frame attached to a building and projecting over a thoroughfare
where used in a nonresidential zone that may only specify the business
name on its valance.
BILLBOARD SIGN — Any sign erected or maintained for the purpose of
displaying outdoor advertising by means of posters, pictures, pictorial
and reading matter supported by uprights placed in the ground and not
attached to any part of a building.
CANOPY SIGN — A sign attached to the underside of a canopy; see
figure below.
DIGITAL DISPLAY SIGN (DDS) — A ground or pylon sign erected for
the purpose of displaying information or an image using any form
of electronic technology such as light-emitting diodes (LED). Typical
DDS examples include electronic message centers (ECM), on-premises
DDSs, and off-premises digital billboards.
FREESTANDING SIGN — Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building
or structure.
GROUND SIGN — Any sign supported by uprights or braces placed
upon the ground and not attached to any building.
§ 370-64 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-65
347:825
ILLUMINATED SIGN — Any sign which has characters, letters, figures,
designs or outline illumination by electric lights or luminous tubes as a
part of the sign.
LIGHT TRESPASS — That amount of the level of illumination
(illuminance) which a light source on one property shines onto another
property measured in footcandles (or lux).
LUMINANCE — A measure of the perceived brightness of a surface as
measured in nits or candela per square meter (cd/m2).
MARQUEE — Any hood or awning of permanent construction projecting
from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over
a thoroughfare, including attached signs. Marquee signs shall be
permitted for the advertising of activities carried on, or within, the
premises to which they are attached, provided that such premises shall
be limited in use as theaters.
MONUMENT — Any freestanding sign whose entire bottom is in
contact with the ground.
NONTRADITIONAL BILLBOARD — The use of any individual, animal,
or device, with or without text, characters, letters, figures, graphics,
or designs intended to attract attention is considered a sign and is
regulated by this chapter.
POLITICAL SIGN — A temporary sign announcing or supporting
political candidates or issues in connection with any national, state, or
local election.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign easily moved from place to place (with
or without a stand) having no permanent attachment to the ground,
building or structure. Illuminated portable signs shall be prohibited.
PROJECTING (BLADE) SIGN — Any sign attached to a building or
other structure extending beyond the exterior wall of the building or
structure, and whose sign face is perpendicular to the exterior wall.
PYLON (FREESTANDING) SIGN — Any sign which is supported by one
or more supports and is not attached to any building or structure and
whose lowest portion of the sign facing is 10 feet (or more) above
ground level.
REPAIR — For the purposes of this chapter, the following activities
are not considered sign repairs: the maintenance of signs (including
replacement), without substantial change, of any parts or supports, or
repainting signs without change of text, design or size of any sign,
provided that the sign is not removed from the wall or the structure
supporting it.
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly
upon or over the roof of any building with the principal sign support on
the roof structure. Roof signs are prohibited.
SIGN — The collective term that describes a structure (or posted
notice) on which information or graphics are displayed and affixed
§ 370-65 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-65
347:826
directly onto exterior walls, windows (inside or outside surface), or
other surfaces of any structure. Signs may include any announcement,
declaration, demonstration, display, illustration or insignia used to
advertise or promote the interests of any person (or business) when
placed out-of-doors in view of the general public.
SIGN AREA — Shall be interpreted as the entire face of a sign,
including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding, but
not including the support structure. In the case of freestanding letters,
it shall be the area contained between the highest and the lowest points
of any of the extremity points of the first and last letters.
Sign Area = (A) x (B)
SIGN FACING — Shall be interpreted as the message is displayed or
illustrated.
STREET CLOCK — Any timepiece erected upon a standard upon the
sidewalk, or on the exterior of any building or structure, for the
convenience of the public.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign, banner, pennant, flag, valance or
advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, inflatable,
cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or without frames,
intended to be displayed for a short period of time only and shall be
permitted only by special approval of the Mayor and Council.
WALL SIGNS — All signs which are placed against a building or other
structure and attached to the exterior front, rear or side wall of any
building or other structure so that the display surface is parallel with
the plane of the wall. Signs painted on an exterior of a wall shall be
deemed to be wall signs subject to this chapter. They shall advertise
only the permitted use, products, or service on the premises on which
they are displayed.
WINDOW SIGN — A permanent sign painted onto a windowpane inside
a window solely for the purpose or effect of identifying a building or
business from the sidewalk or street.
B. Interpretations.
(1) Any sign noticeable from any portion of a street, or from the side or
rear lot lines, shall be subject to these regulations.
§ 370-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-65
347:827
(2) Unless exempted by § 370-65C(6), it shall be unlawful for any
person to erect, repair, alter or relocate any sign or other
advertising structure as defined in this chapter, without first
discussing the need for a permit from the Zoning Officer and
making payment of the fee required by Article XI, § 370-86.
(3) Pursuant to Subsection B(2) above, the following activities are not
considered sign repairs: the maintenance of signs (including
replacement), without substantial change, of any parts or supports,
or repainting signs without change of text, design or size of any
sign, provided that the sign is not removed from the wall or the
structure supporting it.
(4) It is the direct responsibility of the person, business, entity, or
agency whose name or service appears on any sign placed within
the City limits to ensure compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. The use of a third party to place signs shall not obviate this
responsibility.
C. Sign permits.
(1) Application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by
the Zoning Officer, which (depending upon the sign type) may
require supplemental information as determined by the Zoning
Officer.
(2) A permit application fee (§ 149-36) shall be paid by the applicant
before the Zoning Officer begins the application review.
(3) Permit review and approval.
(a) Once the Zoning Officer determines the permit application to
be complete, the application will be approved or denied within
10 business days.
(b) If the work authorized under an approved sign permit has not
been completed within one year after the permit issue date, the
permit shall become null and void.
(4) Sign inspection.
(a) Within the City limits the Zoning Officer may inspect any sign
for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is in compliance with
this chapter of the Municipal Code.
(b) Should the sign be in violation of this chapter, the property
owner (or sign permit holder at the discretion of the Zoning
Officer), shall pay an inspection fee as required by § 149-36 to
meet the expense of the sign inspection.
(c) No inspection fee shall be charged during the calendar year in
which a sign is erected.
§ 370-65 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-65
347:828
(5) Unlawful signs.
(a) If the Zoning Officer determines that any sign regulated herein
is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter, a
notice of violation shall be issued to the property owner (or
sign permit holder at the discretion of the Zoning Officer)
pursuant to § 370-87.
(b) Any sign deemed to present an immediate threat to public
safety or property may be removed summarily and without
notice.
(c) If the property owner (or permit holder) fails to remove or alter
the structure so as to comply with the standards herein set
forth within 20 calendar days after such notice, that sign may
be removed or altered to comply by the Zoning Officer at the
expense of the permit holder or property owner.
(d) Failure to pay the costs relative to § 370-65C(5)(c) within 30
days shall cause a lien to be added to the associated property
tax bill for the unpaid amount.
(e) The Zoning Officer shall refuse to issue a permit to anyone who
refuses to pay costs so assessed.
(6) Exemption from permits and fees. The permit and fee provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to the following signs; provided,
however, that said signs shall be subject to the provisions of
§ 370-65F:
(a) Real estate signs not exceeding 12 square feet in area which
advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises upon which
said signs are located only.
(b) Professional nameplates not exceeding six inches in height or
18 inches in length for lawful occupants of the premises under
this chapter.
(c) Bulletin boards or signs not over 16 square feet in area for
public, charitable or religious institutions when the same are
located on the premises of said institutions.
(d) Signs denoting the architect, engineer or contractor, or
prospective structure use when placed upon a work site,
provided they are:
[1] Not greater than 32 square feet in area; and
[2] Set back at least 15 feet from the curb; and
[3] Removed either within 24 hours after the final certificate
of occupancy is issued, or within five calendar days after
§ 370-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-65
347:829
the architect, engineer or contractor is no longer working
at the property, whichever is the shorter period.
(e) Occupational signs denoting only the name and profession of
an occupant in a commercial building, public institutional
building or dwelling house, and not exceeding two square feet
in area.
(f) Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of
erection when cut into any masonry surface or when
constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials.
(g) Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, danger, and such temporary, emergency or
nonadvertising signs.
(h) Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies.
(i) Holiday decorations and lights.
(j) Signs of any governmental agency deemed necessary to the
public welfare.
(k) Events sponsored solely by the City of Bridgeton.
(l) Events sponsored, or cosponsored, by a local nonprofit
organization held for the benefit of the Bridgeton residents at
large which is open to the public free of charge.
D. Removal of certain signs.
(1) Upon termination of any occupancy of any premises, it shall be the
duty of the property owner to require that any signs used in
connection with that occupancy be removed from the premises
within five days after termination of said occupancy.
(2) Any sign which no longer advertises an operational business, or a
product being sold, shall either be taken down and removed by the
owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building or
structure upon which such sign may be found; or, cause to have the
advertising (message) displayed to be covered such that it is no
longer visible within 20 calendar days after written notification
from the Zoning Officer.
(3) Failure to comply with such notice within the time specified by the
notification shall authorize the Zoning Officer to cause the removal
of such sign. Any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the
owner of the building or structure to which such sign is attached.
E. General restrictions.
§ 370-65 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-65
347:830
(1) No utility pole or tree located in any public right-of-way or public
easement shall be used for the posting of signs, except for those
required by the City for the enforcement of traffic ordinances.
(2) No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this chapter
shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner
as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by
reason of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal or device; or which makes use of the words "stop," "look,"
"drive-in," "danger" or any other word, phrase, symbol or character
in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic. This
shall not prohibit signs in private parking lots as directed by the
approving authority.
(3) No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent
free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. No
sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(4) No nonresidential sign, permanent or temporary, located on the
inside of a window shall occupy more than 25% of the aggregate
area of said window. Such signs, if temporary, shall not remain
more than 30 days.
(5) Any sign, object or device of which all or any part is in motion by
any means is prohibited. Fluttering, rotating or other moving
devices set in motion by movement of the atmosphere are also
prohibited. This provision is intended to include spinners, banners,
nongovernmental flags or similar devices, etc., except for flags
required by law.
(6) No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained in such a manner
as to cover or intrude upon any architectural features of a building
such as windows, columns, moldings, or any major decoration or
similar feature.
F. Number of signs. Each nonresidential use may have the following
number and types of on-site signs:
First Floor
Second (and higher)
Floors
Zone Type Number Type Number
C-1, C-2 Awning;
window;
projecting;
wall
2 signs, but
no more than
1 of any type
Window 1 sign
Multiple signs on
the same floor
shall be uniform
in size and
appearance.
C-3, C-4,
C-5, I
Wall 1 per street N/A None
§ 370-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-65
347:831
First Floor
Second (and higher)
Floors
Zone Type Number Type Number
Freestanding 1 N/A None
Window 1 N/A None
G. Content of signs. In order to preserve the residential character of the
community and to facilitate the improvement of its commercial and
industrial nature in a safe and orderly manner, no commercial outdoor
advertising signs, billboards or other signs which are not expressly and
directly related to the business being conducted on the premises and
which do not conform to the applicable requirements and standards set
forth in other sections of this chapter shall be permitted. [Amended
9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
H. Illumination of signs.
(1) Where illumination of signs is permitted, the use of a shielded or
indirect nonflashing light (preferably white), or an interior sign
light with a translucent face shall be required to reduce undue
glare, or offensive or annoying light to surrounding residents.
(2) The use of red, green, or amber is not permitted when:
(a) An illuminated sign is located in the same line of vision as a
traffic control signal.
(b) Fluorescent paint is used on highly reflective surfaces.
(3) Illuminated tubing or light strings outlining roofs, doors, or wall
edges of a building are not permitted.
(4) All lighting associated with signs shall be extinguished by 11:00
p.m., or at the close of the corresponding business, whichever
occurs last. The Zoning Officer may authorize extended lighting
hours to assist in property protection with the recommendation of
the Chief of Police.
(5) Gooseneck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs
and wall signs; provided the reflectors have lenses that concentrate
the illumination on the sign area so as to prevent glare upon the
street or surrounding properties.
(6) Floodlights at ground level or located within 12 feet of ground level
shall be located and shielded so as to prevent any glare or blinding
effect upon any lane of moving traffic.
(7) No illuminated sign shall interfere with radio, television, Wi-Fi
reception, electrical appliances, or road or highway visibility.
(8) Marquee signs may be illuminated along the front or side by
interior or indirect illumination, whose source shall not extend
§ 370-65 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-65
347:832
beyond the surface of the side on which the illumination is
installed.
(9) The illumination of portable signs by any means is prohibited.
I. Size, height, and location limitations (refer to § 370-11.1, Attachment
5).117
J. Sign identification. Every sign (or other advertising structure) shall
have the associated sign permit number painted in a conspicuous place
thereon, in letters not less than one inch in height.
K. Nonconforming signs.
(1) Every sign or other advertising structure lawfully in existence on
the adoption of this chapter shall not be repaired, altered or moved
unless it is made to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall have the authority to compel the removal
or correction of such sign deficiency within 20 calendar days after
notification of such violation.
L. Digital display signs.
(1) The displayed message cannot change more than once per minute.
(2) Messages cannot change with the use of scrolling, flashing, fading
or other similar effects.
(3) The digital sign must have automatic dimming software or solar
sensors that reduce luminance during nighttime hours to the level
specified in Subsection L(4)(a).
(4) The luminance level of a DDS shall be verified with a calibrated
luminance measuring instrument not to exceed the following
parameters:
(a) During daylight hours 1,000 nits.
(b) During nighttime hours 150 nits.
(5) Light trespass onto a property at the property line as measured by
a calibrated illuminance measuring instrument shall not exceed:
(a) 0.1 lux in (or onto) a residential zone.
(b) 1.0 lux in a nonresidential zone.
(6) The message must be one color and can only be amber, green, blue
or white.
(7) The message area of the electronic display cannot be more than
50% of the total area of the sign.
117. Editor's Note: Attachment 5 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 370-65 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-65
347:833
(8) Animation effects such as flashing, moving, blinking, or chasing are
prohibited on all signs.
(9) The requirements of § 365-65L(3) and (4) shall be verified
biennially, and a report (on company letterhead, signed by the
person qualified to use the instrumentation) specifying the actual
measurement values shall be delivered to the Zoning Officer.
(10) To control light pollution, off-premises DDSs shall be extinguished
automatically no later than 11:00 p.m. each evening until dawn.
Signs for establishments that operate or remain open past 11:00
p.m. may remain on no later than 1/2 hour past the close of the
establishment.
M. Political (election) signs.
(1) Temporary election signs may be erected on private property
subject only to the size and location of such signs not being within
the public right-of-way and such signage not interfering with the
passage of pedestrians or motor vehicles, nor shall such signage be
located on private property such as to create a hazard to pedestrian
or vehicular traffic.
(2) No permission, permit, or payment of a fee shall be required to
erect signs which convey political speech. Such signs may include,
but are not limited to, election signs, signs which express a political
message or belief, or signs of similar content.
(3) Election signs shall be removed by the political candidate, political
supporter or property owner, as the case may be, following any
election not later than five days thereafter.
(4) In the event that a person or entity is desirous of continuing to
leave an election sign in place longer than five days following an
election, then such person or entity shall be required to file an
application with the Clerk of the City of Bridgeton or a statement
with the Clerk of the City of Bridgeton stating that such person or
entity is both aware of the existence of a political sign on its or their
property and wishes to continue to have such sign or signs remain
on the premises.
§ 370-65 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-65
347:834
ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 370-66. Statement of intent.
§ 370-67. Nonconforming uses.
A. The zoning districts established by this chapter are designed to satisfy
the general zoning intent pursuant to § 370-3.
B. The regulations set forth in this article are intended to allow the
continuation, expansion or change in nonconforming uses, structures or
lots.
A. Continuation.
(1) Lawful uses located either within a building or other structure or
part thereof, or on the land, or in combination of both, which, at the
effective date of this chapter, become nonconforming, may be
continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful, including
subsequent sales of the property.
(2) Whenever a zoning district shall be changed, any existing
nonconforming use in such changed district may be continued.
B. Expansion.
(1) A nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged or increased, nor
shall any nonconforming use be extended to occupy a greater area
of land than that occupied at the effective date of this chapter, nor
shall any such nonconforming use be moved in whole or part to any
other portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such
nonconforming use without approval from the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
C. Changes in use.
(1) A nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use
pursuant to § 370-86.
(2) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any other type of
nonconforming use without the approval of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
D. Discontinuance of nonconforming use. A nonconforming use shall be
considered to be discontinued if:
(1) The use involving a structure or land is discontinued for 12
consecutive months and the requisite legal intent is demonstrated
to confirm the termination of the use.
(2) The subsequent use of the discontinued nonconforming use,
building, structure or land shall be in conformity with the
§ 370-66 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-67
347:835
§ 370-68. Nonconforming buildings or structures.
§ 370-69. Nonconforming signs.
provisions of this chapter unless a variance is granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Continuation. A lawful nonconforming building or other structure may
continue to be used so long as all other conditions remain lawful,
including subsequent sale of the building or structure.
B. Alteration, enlargement and repair of nonconforming buildings.
(1) Normal maintenance, minor alteration, and remodeling of a
nonconforming building or structure is permitted, provided that
such repairs, alterations and remodeling do not substantially
increase the degree of nonconformity of the building nor extend the
nonconforming use.
(2) Nonconforming buildings and structures containing
nonconforming uses shall not be moved, added to or enlarged upon
in any manner without the approval of the Zoning Officer pursuant
to § 370-86.
C. Damage or destruction.
(1) If a nonconforming building or a building or structure containing a
nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means to the
extent that the foundation is destroyed or damaged and is no longer
structurally sound, as deemed by a licensed structural engineer,
such building or structure shall not be moved, rebuilt or
reconstructed except in conformity with the regulations of this
chapter unless reconstructed, within one year after such damage,
and upon the same plan and with the same cubical content as that
of the original building or structure.
A. Continuation. Signs may be continued to be used only if they are
properly maintained and do not impose a hazardous condition which
may adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the community.
B. Structural alterations. Unless permitted by the Zoning Officer pursuant
to § 370-86, no nonconforming sign shall be:
(1) Moved to another position on the building or lot on which is
located.
(2) Structurally altered in terms of its area, mounting or attachment to
any building or structure.
C. Damage or destruction. In the event that any nonconforming
advertising sign, billboard or commercial advertising structure is
damaged, it may be restored or replaced pursuant to § 370-86.
§ 370-67 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-69
347:836
§ 370-70. Nonconforming lots of record.
§ 370-71. through § 370-73. (Reserved)
D. Discontinuance of signs. Whenever any use of building or structure or
land or of a combination of buildings, structures and land ceases, all
signs accessory to such use shall be removed in accordance with
§ 370-65D.
A. Permitted uses of nonconforming lots.
(1) Lots of record which are nonconforming in the residential district
may be used for single-family detached dwellings:
(a) Provided the yard and building setback line requirements can
be met, and
(b) There is no adjacent property available to make the property
compliant or to reduce the extent of nonconformity.
(2) Such lot must be in separate ownership and not form part of a
continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.
§ 370-69 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-71
347:837

ARTICLE X
Site Plan Review
§ 370-74. Statement of intent.
§ 370-75. Extent of applicability.
A. It is the specific intent of this chapter to provide the approving
authority, City Council and its various agencies, departments and
boards the assurance that the purposes set forth in the preamble of this
chapter will be carried out with regard, but not necessarily limited, to
the following:
(1) Preservation of the landscape and natural features;
(2) Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and
loading;
(3) Drainage;
(4) Screening, landscaping and the location of structures;
(5) Exterior lighting needed for safety reasons in addition to any
requirements for street lighting;
(6) Conservation of energy and use of renewable energy sources;
(7) Recycling of designated recyclable materials; and
(8) The Master Plan, Vision Report and the MLUL.
B. In addition, this chapter provides a means to coordinate municipal and
county development requirements.
A. Site plan review and approval shall be required before any change of
use, or before any excavation, removal of soil, clearing of a site or
placing of any fill on lands contemplated for development, and, except
as hereinafter provided, no building permit shall be issued for any
building, including accessory structures, unless a site plan is first
submitted and approved by the reviewing board, and no certificate of
occupancy shall be given unless all construction and development
conforms to the plans as approved by the approving authority.
B. Site plan approval shall not be required for any detached one- or twodwelling-
unit buildings or any uses accessory thereto, such as a private
garage or storage shed incidental to residential uses; but this shall not
limit the requirements for submission and approval of subdivision plans
as otherwise required by municipal ordinances.
C. The approving authority may waive site plan approval requirements if
the construction or alteration or change of occupancy or use does not
affect existing circulation, drainage, relationship of buildings to each
§ 370-74 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-75
347:839
§ 370-76. Procedure.
§ 370-77. through § 370-80. (Reserved)
§ 370-81. Performance and maintenance guarantees.
§ 370-82. Variances.
Variances will be processed in accordance with MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25
and 40:55D-70.
other, landscaping, buffering, lighting and other considerations of site
plan review.
D. Alterations involving normal maintenance or replacement such as a
new roof, painting, new siding or similar activity are exempt from site
plan review.
E. Site plan review shall not be required prior to the demolition or removal
of any structure or building which the Construction Official and/or Fire
Chief has determined to be a hazard to the public health, safety, or
welfare.
A. Submission.
(1) The applicant shall complete and submit to the approving authority
secretary 16 copies of the land development application, site plan
checklist, the site plan, and all supporting documents and data.
(2) The land development application and site plan checklist are
available in the Office of Development and Planning.
B. Review procedures shall be in accordance with the MLUL as follows:
(1) Preliminary site plan approval: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.
(2) Minor site plan approval: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.1.
(3) Final site plan approval: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50 and 52.
(4) General development plan: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1 et seq.
A. The performance guarantees and maintenance guarantee shall be
provided in accordance with MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, Guarantees
required; surety; release.
B. Upon the recommendation of the City Engineer and/or City Solicitor,
the amount of any guarantee may be reduced by City Council by
resolution.
§ 370-75 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-83
347:840
§ 370-83. Application fee and escrow required.
Application fees and escrows shall be payable in accordance with Chapter
149, Article I.
§ 370-83 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-83
347:841

ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 370-84. Statement of intent.
It is the purpose of this article to describe the entities that manage and
regulate the requirements of this chapter.
§ 370-85. Zoning Officer.
§ 370-86. Zoning, sign and temporary use permits.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer
who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
City Council.
B. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be as follows:
(1) Review, approve, or deny all applications for all permits required by
this chapter.
(2) Issue approved permits within the provisions of this chapter or
conditions specified by approved resolutions of the approving
authority. No permit of any kind as provided in this chapter shall be
granted by the Zoning Officer for any purpose except in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Record and file all zoning permit applications, together with the
plans, documents and other papers accompanying such
application.
(4) Collect all zoning permit fees required by this chapter.
(5) Inspect nonconforming uses, buildings and signs and keep a
current filed record of existing nonconforming uses and buildings
as a public record.
(6) Investigate alleged violations of this chapter immediately upon the
receipt of a properly filed written complaint and take the
appropriate action based on the investigation which may include a
notice of violation.
(7) Prepare and issue monthly reports listing all zoning permits
applied for and the associated fees paid and notices of violations. A
copy of the report shall be filed with City Council and the City Tax
Assessor.
C. Any appeal from a decision or action of the Zoning Officer shall be made
to the approving authority.
A. Zoning permit.
(1) A zoning permit shall be required pursuant to § 370-11.2.
§ 370-84 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-86
347:843
§ 370-87. Notification of violation and penalties.
(2) The applicant shall complete and submit to the Zoning Officer an
original of the zoning application and all supporting documents and
data.
(3) Zoning applications are available in the Zoning Office.
B. Sign permits.
(1) A sign permit shall be required pursuant to § 370-65.
C. Temporary use permit. The Zoning Officer shall issue permits for
temporary uses as specified by § 370-59.
D. Schedule of fees. [Amended 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 13-06]
(1) Zoning permit and application fees are listed in Chapter 149, Fees,
Articles I and II.
(2) All such fees shall be paid in full at the time the permit application
is presented at the Zoning Office.
(3) The Approving Authority shall take no action on applications or
appeals until the appropriate fees have been paid in full.
(4) Permits shall be issued only after all fees have been paid.
E. Permits and application expirations.
(1) Expiration of permits shall be as per § 370-59.
A. When the Zoning Officer finds a violation of any provision of this
chapter, he shall issue a notice of violation to the person responsible
indicating the nature of the violation and the action necessary to
correct it.
B. Any person who observes a potential violation may file a written
complaint to the Zoning Officer stating the basis of the complaint.
C. Upon receipt of a written complaint, the Zoning Officer shall investigate
the complaint and take appropriate action.
D. Penalties.
(1) Any person who receives a notice of violation of this chapter or an
order from an approving authority shall abate the violation within
five business days of receipt of certified mail, regular mail and/or
personal service of notice of the violation.
(2) Any person who fails to take the actions ordered by a notice of
violation, served either personally or by certified or regular mail,
shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 1, Article III, General
Penalty.
§ 370-86 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-87
347:844
§ 370-88. Amendments and biennial review.
§ 370-89. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(3) Each and every day that such violation continues shall be
considered a separate violation of this chapter.
A. The requirements of this chapter may be amended or repealed by
ordinance as provided by the provisions of the MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
B. The City Solicitor shall be responsible for a biennial review of the MLUL
to ensure the Municipal Code currently meets the legal requirements of
the MLUL for sections that have been added, revised or repealed.
A. Establishment of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. A Zoning Board of
Adjustment is hereby created and shall have all the powers and
authority of Article 9 of N.J.S.A. 40:55D.
B. Membership of the Board.
(1) The Board shall consist of seven members who meet the eligibility
requirements and terms as specified in the MLUL pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.
(2) There shall be two alternate members appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the governing body as per the MLUL pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq.
(3) Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the
consent of the governing body for the unexpired term only.
C. Organization of the Board.
(1) The Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
regular members and select a Secretary who may or may not be a
member of the Board of Adjustment or a City employee.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt such rules and
regulations as it may deem necessary to govern its procedure and
consistent with the MLUL and local ordinances.
(3) Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and
at such other times as the Board may determine and shall be open
to the public.
(4) The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions.
§ 370-87 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-89
347:845
§ 370-90. Public hearings: Planning and Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
Each Board shall hold public hearings with public notice, conduct,
testimony, and decisions in accordance with the MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D et
seq.
§ 370-91. Planning Board.
(5) Each decision of the Board shall be recorded by resolution adopted
by the Board and shall fully set forth the circumstances of the case
and the findings on which the decision is based.
(6) All records and minutes shall be immediately filed in the office of
the Board by case number together with all documents pertaining
thereto and shall be a public record.
D. Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 et seq. Typically these powers include but may not
be limited to hearing and deciding:
(1) Interpretation of the ordinance or Zoning Map.
(2) Appeals made by any administrative officer.
(3) Bulk variances.
(4) Use variances.
E. Reports, expenses, appeals, continuation, time for decision,
modifications on appeal, stay of proceedings, and other powers. These
processes shall be as specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D, Articles 9 and 10.
A. Establishment of the Planning Board. A Planning Board is hereby
created and shall have all the powers and authority of Article 2 of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D.
B. Membership of the Board.
(1) The Board shall consist of nine members who meet the eligibility
requirements and terms as specified in the MLUL pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq.
(2) There shall be two alternate members appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the governing body as per the MLUL pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 et seq.
(3) Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the
consent of the governing body for the unexpired term only.
C. Organization of the Board.
§ 370-89 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-91
347:846
§ 370-91.1. Application procedures and time constraints.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from its regular members and select a Secretary who may or may
not be a member of the Planning Board or a City employee.
(2) The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may deem
necessary to govern its procedure and consistent with the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey and local ordinances.
(3) Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and
at such other times as the Board may determine and shall be open
to the public.
(4) The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote
of each member upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions.
(5) Each decision of the Board shall be recorded in accordance with
standard forms adopted by the Board and shall fully set forth the
circumstances of the case and the findings on which the decision is
based.
(6) All records and minutes shall be immediately filed in the office of
the Board by case number together with all documents pertaining
thereto and shall be a public record.
D. Powers of the Planning Board shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-25 et seq. Typically these powers may include but are not
limited to its power in regard to:
(1) The Master Plan preparation and maintenance.
(2) Major and minor subdivision and site plan review.
(3) The Official Map.
(4) The Zoning Ordinance, including conditional uses.
(5) The capital improvement program.
(6) Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with
subdivision, site plan and conditional use approval.
A. Submission. An applicant shall file with the Board Secretary at least 21
days prior to the meeting of the approving authority a completed
application form and 16 copies of all drawings and supporting
documents. The Board Secretary shall distribute one copy of the
documents to the Board Engineer, the Board Planner, and the
Construction Official.
B. Fees. All application and escrow fees shall be paid pursuant to Chapter
149, Article I, at the time of application submission.
§ 370-91 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-91.1
347:847
§ 370-92. Provisions applicable to both Planning Board and Board
of Adjustment.
C. Review and disposition by the approving authority. The general terms
and conditions of an application shall be in accordance with the MLUL
as follows:
(1) Preliminary site plan approval: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46 and Article X.
(2) Minor site plan approval: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.1 and Article X.
(3) Final site plan approval: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50 , 40:55D-52 and Article
X.
(4) General development plan: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1 et seq.
(5) Minor and major subdivision: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, 40:55D-48,
40:55D-50 and Chapter 311.
(6) Informal discussion pursuant to MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.1.
D. Environmental Commission. An Environmental Commission may be
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1.
E. Rules and regulations. The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of
this chapter. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and
taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
A. A resolution of each decision on any application shall be memorialized
in accordance with MLUL, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
(1) Whenever a resolution is adopted, the date of such adoption shall
constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the mailings,
filings and publication.
(2) A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the
official newspaper of the municipality. At a minimum, the notice
shall clearly identify the nature of the board action requested; the
public meeting or meetings at which the matter was heard and
decided; and whether or not the application was granted. Such
publication shall be arranged by the secretary of the approving
authority. Said notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for
publication to meet the requirements specified by MLUL, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10i.
(3) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the board within 10 days
of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his
attorney, without separate charge pursuant to MLUL, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10h.
§ 370-91.1 BRIDGETON CODE § 370-92
347:848
(a) A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to all persons who
have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed by the
board for such service.
(b) A copy of the decision shall be filed in the office of the
Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed decision
available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies
of other public documents in the municipality.
B. Payment of taxes. Every application for development submitted to the
approving authority shall include proof that no taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent on said property.
C. Absent members. A member of an approving authority who was absent
for one or more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be
eligible to vote on any matter provided that such board member has
available to him the transcript or recording of all of the hearing from
which he was absent, and certifies in writing to the board that he has
read such transcript or listened to such recording.
D. Experts and staff. When necessary, the board shall provide
recommendations to the City Council and Business Administrator for
any professional, expert, and staff services it deems necessary to
perform its duties pursuant to the MLUL.
E. Expenses and costs. City Council shall ensure the municipal budget
provides funding for the necessary expenses of the board.
F. Performance. Annually, the board shall provide an evaluation report to
the City Council and Business Administrator regarding the performance
of its professionals, experts, and staff services.
G. Attendance. Board members shall be deemed to have vacated their
appointment when they fail to attend and participate at meetings
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-12.1 based on six consecutive weeks or for
three consecutive regular meetings without being excused.
§ 370-92 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-92
347:849

ARTICLE XII
Condominium and Cooperative Structures and Uses
§ 370-93. Applicability of regulations.
A. This chapter and all development regulations pursuant thereto shall be
construed and applied with reference to the nature and use of the
condominium and cooperative apartment without regard to the form of
ownership.
B. No development regulation or requirement shall establish any
requirement concerning the use, location, placement or construction of
buildings or other improvements for condominium or cooperative
structures or uses unless such requirement shall be equally applicable
to all buildings and improvements of the same kind not then or
thereafter under the condominium or cooperative corporate form of
ownership.
C. No approval pursuant to this chapter shall be required as a condition
precedent to the recording of a condominium master deed or the sale of
any unit therein unless such approval shall also be required for the use
or development of the lands described in the master deed in the same
manner had such lands not been under the condominium form of
ownership.
§ 370-93 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 370-93
347:851
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
02-9 2-24-2003 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
03-1 8-4-2003 Placement of equipment
and apparatus in public
rights-of-way
Ch. 307, Art. IV
03-2 9-2-2003 Interlocal agreement NCM
03-3 9-15-2003 Tax abatement NCM
03-4 10-6-2003 Designating City Council as
Redevelopment Agency for
port district
NCM
03-5 10-6-2003 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
03-6 11-12-2003 Tax abatement agreement NCM
03-7 12-15-2003 Tax exemption and
payment in lieu of taxation
NCM
03-8 12-15-2003 Peddlers, hawkers and
vendors amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-02
03-9 12-15-2003 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
03-10 12-22-2003 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
03-11 Tabled
03-12 2-2-2004 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
03-13 2-2-2004 Police Department hiring
preferences
Ch. 40, Art. III
03-14 2-17-2004 Bond NCM
03-15 3-1-2004 Street vacation NCM
03-16 3-15-2004 Abandoned properties
rehabilitation
Ch. 64, Art. III
03-17 3-15-2004 Health services agreement NCM
03-18 3-15-2004 Street vacation NCM
03-19 4-5-2004 Salaries amendment NCM
§ 370-93 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:852
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
03-20 4-5-2004 Vehicles and traffic fines
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
03-21 4-5-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
03-22 4-5-2004 Rental property
amendment
Ch. 277
03-23 6-7-2004 Salaries NCM
03-24 6-7-2004 Residency requirements
amendment
Ch. 40, Art. I
03-25 6-21-2004 Fees: schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
03-26 6-21-2004 Animals: licensing and
control amendment; pet
waste; wildlife feeding;
litter control; containerized
yard waste; yard waste
collection program; storm
sewer systems: improper
disposal of waste; illicit
connections
Chs. 83, Arts. I, II
and III; Ch. 203,
Art. IV; Ch. 300,
Arts. V and VI
(repealed by Ord.
No. 07-40); Ch.
305, Arts. I and II
04-01 8-16-2004 Salaries NCM
04-02 Street vacation NCM
04-03 10-4-2004 Establishing cap bank NCM
04-04 10-18-2004 Salaries NCM
04-05 10-18-2004 Tax abatement NCM
04-06 11-22-2004 Cable television franchise
agreement
NCM
04-07 12-20-2004 Street vacation NCM
04-08 2-7-2005 Bond NCM
04-09 6-6-2005 Salaries NCM
04-10 6-6-2005 Salaries NCM
04-11 6-11-2005 Fees amendment Ch. 149
04-12 6-20-2005 Water rates and user
classifications
NCM
04-13 6-20-2005 Sewer use rates NCM
05-1 10-17-2005 Parking of tractor-trailers,
trucks and tractors
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
05-2 11-7-2005 Mercantile licenses Ch. 200
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:853
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
05-3 11-7-2005 Mercantile license and
business registration fees
Repealed by Ord.
No. 07-41
05-4 11-7-2005 Sex offender residency Repealed by Ord.
No. 09-01
05-5 11-7-2005 Animals: licensing and
control amendment
Ch. 83, Art. I
05-6 11-28-2005 Sewer rates NCM
05-7 12-5-2005 Animals: licensing and
control amendment
Ch. 83, Art. I
05-8 12-12-2005 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 265, Art. II
05-9 1-3-2006 Tax exemption for specific
property
NCM
05-10 1-17-2006 Emergency appropriation NCM
05-11 1-17-2006 Establishing cap bank NCM
05-12A 2-6-2006 Salaries NCM
05-12B 3-27-2006 Bond NCM
05-13 3-27-2006 Bond NCM
05-14 3-27-2006 Bond NCM
05-15 4-17-2006 Port District
Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
05-16 6-5-2006 Bond NCM
05-17 6-19-2006 Sale of property NCM
06-1 7-18-2006 Collection of garbage and
recyclables amendment;
trash collection fees
amendment
Ch. 300, Arts. I
and II
06-2 8-1-2006 Salaries NCM
06-3 9-5-2006 Bond NCM
06-4 9-5-2006 Rental property: units of
dwelling space amendment
Ch. 277, Art. I
06-5 9-5-2006 Solid Waste Utility
amendment
Ch. 300, Art. IV
06-6 9-19-2006 Property Maintenance
Code amendment
Ch. 265, Art. II
06-7 9-19-2006 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:854
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-8 10-3-2006 Officers and employees:
Table of Organization for
Police Department
Ch. 40, Art. IV
06-9 10-17-2006 Street vacation NCM
06-10 10-17-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
06-11 11-21-2006 Five-year real estate tax
exemption amendment
Ch. 317, Art. I
06-12 11-21-2006 Administration of
government amendment;
water and sewer
amendment (Department of
Water and Sewer)
Chs. 3; 360
06-13 11-21-2006 General penalty
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III
06-14 11-21-2006 Collection of garbage and
recyclables amendment;
Solid Waste Utility
amendment
Ch. 300, Arts. I
and IV
06-15 12-5-2006 Authorization of sale of
certain property
NCM
06-16 12-5-2006 Exceed budget
appropriation limits and
establish cap bank
NCM
06-17 12-5-2006 Schedule of fees
amendment; certificates of
occupancy amendment
Chs. 149, Art. II;
277, Art. II
06-18 12-5-2006 Garage/yard sales Ch. 176
06-19 2-6-2007 Authorization of easement
agreement
NCM
06-20 2-20-2007 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 77
06-21 3-6-2007 Animals: licensing and
control amendment;
schedule of fees
amendment
Chs. 83, Art. I;
149, Art. II
06-22 3-6-2007 Uniform Fire Code
amendment
Ch. 162, Art. I
06-23 3-20-2007 Salaries NCM
06-24 3-20-2007 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:855
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
06-25 3-20-2007 Urban Enterprise Zone
residential tax abatement
Ch. 317, Art. II
06-26 3-20-2007 Solid Waste Utility
amendment
Ch. 300, Art. IV
06-27 4-17-2007 Stormwater management Ch. 304
06-28 4-17-2007 Bond NCM
06-29 5-1-2007 Littering: handbills and
circulars amendment
Ch. 203, Art. III
06-30 5-1-2007 Escrow fees amendment;
schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Arts. I
and II
06-31 5-15-2007 Claims: supplemental tort
claim interrogatories
Ch. 10, Art. I
06-32 5-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
06-33 5-15-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
06-34 6-5-2007 Animals: licensing and
control amendment
Ch. 83, Art. I
06-35 6-5-2007 Peddlers, hawkers and
vendors amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-02
06-36 6-5-2007 Sale of property NCM
06-37 6-19-2007 Rental property: units of
dwelling space amendment
Ch. 277, Art. I
06-38 6-19-2007 Sale of property NCM
06-39 6-19-2007 Schedule of fees
amendment; water and
sewer amendment
Chs. 149, Art. II;
360
07-1 7-3-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 07-19
07-2 7-3-2007 Subdivision of land
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 311; 370
07-3 7-17-2007 General littering
regulations amendment
Ch. 203, Art. II
07-4 8-7-2007 Bond NCM
07-5 8-7-2007 Salaries NCM
07-6 8-7-2007 Sale of property;
designation of redeveloper
NCM
§ DL-1 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:856
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-7 8-7-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-8 8-7-2007 General littering
regulations amendment
Ch. 203, Art. II
07-9 8-7-2007 Salaries NCM
07-10 8-21-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
07-11 8-21-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-12 9-4-2007 Street vacation Repealed by Ord.
No. 07-27
07-13 10-2-2007 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
07-14 10-2-2007 Sale of property NCM
07-15 11-7-2007 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
07-16 11-7-2007 Water and sewer
amendment
Ch. 360
07-17 11-20-2007 Bond NCM
07-18 12-4-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
07-19 12-4-2007 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3 (Editor's
Note only)
07-20 12-4-2007 Salaries NCM
07-21 12-18-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
07-22 1-15-2008 Towing amendment Ch. 334
07-23 1-15-2008 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
07-24 1-15-2008 Bond NCM
07-25 1-15-2008 Abandoned vehicles
amendment
Ch. 347
07-26 2-6-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
07-27 2-6-2008 Street vacation repealer NCM
07-28 2-6-2008 False alarms Ch. 76, Art. I
07-29 2-19-2008 Phoenix Redevelopment
Plan
NCM
07-30 2-19-2008 Parking permits for
residential streets
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
07-31 2-19-2008 General littering
regulations amendment
Ch. 203, Art. II
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:857
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
07-32 2-19-2008 Water and sewer
amendment
Ch. 360
07-33 2-19-2008 Officers and employees:
Table of Organization for
Fire Division
Ch. 40, Art. V
07-34 4-1-2008 Property Maintenance
Code amendment
Ch. 265, Art. II
07-35 4-1-2008 Rental property: units of
dwelling space amendment
Ch. 277, Art. I
07-36 4-1-2008 General provisions: general
penalty amendment
Ch. 1, Art. III
07-37 4-1-2008 Authorization of easement
agreement
NCM
07-38 5-6-2008 Authorization of lease
agreement
NCM
07-39 5-6-2008 Street name change NCM
07-40 5-20-2008 Collection of garbage and
recyclables amendment;
trash collection fees
amendment; collection of
leaves and brush
amendment; containerized
yard waste repealer; yard
waste collection program
repealer
Ch. 300, Arts. I,
II, III, V (footnote
only) and VI
(footnote only)
07-41 6-4-2008 Mercantile license and
business registration fees
repealer; mercantile
licenses amendment
Chs. 149, Art. IV
(footnote only);
200 (footnote
only)
07-42 6-17-2008 Affordable housing: RCA
Administrator
Ch. 2, Art. I
07-43 6-17-2008 Salaries NCM
08-1 7-1-2008 Bond NCM
08-2 7-15-2008 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
08-3 8-5-2008 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
08-4 8-19-2008 Noise amendment Ch. 226
08-5 8-19-2008 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:858
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
08-6 9-2-2008 General littering
regulations amendment
Ch. 203, Art. II
08-7 9-16-2008 Bond amendment NCM
08-8 9-16-2008 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 251
08-9 9-16-2008 Lease authorization NCM
08-10 11-5-2008 Notice and related rights Vetoed
08-11 11-5-2008 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
08-12 11-5-2008 Exceed budget; establish
cap bank
NCM
08-13 12-2-2008 Street vacation NCM
08-14 12-16-2008 Sale of property NCM
08-15 12-16-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
08-16 12-16-2008 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
08-17 1-6-2009 Peddlers, hawkers and
vendors amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-02
08-18 1-6-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
08-19 1-6-2009 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
08-20 2-17-2009 Peddlers, hawkers and
vendors amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 14-02
08-21 3-17-2009 Bond NCM
08-22 4-7-2009 Sale of property NCM
08-23 4-21-2009 Acquisition of property
amendment
NCM
08-24 4-21-2009 Sale of property NCM
08-25 6-3-2009 Salaries NCM
08-26 6-3-2009 Salaries NCM
09-01 7-21-2009 Sex offender residency
repealer
Ch. 283
(reference only)
09-02 8-4-2009 Bond NCM
09-03 9-1-2009 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:859
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
09-04 12-1-2009 Administration of
government amendment;
water and sewer
amendment (abolition of
Department of Water and
Sewer)
Chs. 3; 360
09-05 1-5-2010 Tax abatement agreement NCM
09-06 1-5-2010 Acquisition of property NCM
09-07 1-5-2010 Rental property: units of
dwelling space and
dwelling units amendment
Ch. 277, Arts. I
and IV
09-08 1-5-2010 Solid waste: collection of
garbage and recyclables
and trash collection fees
amendment
Ch. 300, Arts. I
and II
09-09 2-2-2010 Sale of property NCM
09-10 2-2-2010 Sewer rates NCM
09-11 2-2-2010 Exceed budget; establish
cap bank
NCM
09-12 4-6-2010 Bond NCM
09-13 5-4-2010 Bond NCM
09-14 6-1-2010 Secondhand dealers: resale
of precious metal, coins
and jewelry
Ch. 281, Art. I
09-15 6-15-2010 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 77
10-01 7-1-2010 Personnel policies and
procedures manual
amendment
NCM
10-02 8-17-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
10-03 9-7-2010 Sale of property NCM
10-04 9-7-2010 Maintenance of dumpsters Ch. 304, Art. II
10-05 9-7-2010 Private storm drain inlet
retrofitting
Ch. 304, Art. III
10-06 10-5-2010 Salaries NCM
10-07 10-5-2010 Salaries NCM
10-08 10-5-2010 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
§ DL-1 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:860
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-09 10-5-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
10-10 10-19-2010 Acquisition of property
amendment
NCM
10-11 10-19-2010 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
10-12 11-3-2010 Granting of tax abatement NCM
10-13 12-7-2010 Acquisition of property NCM
10-14 12-7-2010 Street name change NCM
10-15 12-21-2010 Salaries NCM
10-16 1-4-2011 Officers and employees:
table of organization for
Police Department
amendment
Ch. 40, Art. IV
10-17 1-4-2011 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
10-18 1-4-2011 Tax abatement agreement NCM
10-19 1-18-2011 Officers and employees:
defined contribution
retirement program
Ch. 40, Art. VI
10-20 2-1-2011 Solid Waste Utility
amendment
Ch. 300, Art. IV
10-21 2-1-2011 Traffic control signal
monitoring system
Ch. 336
10-22 2-15-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
10-23 3-1-2011 Solid Waste Utility
amendment
Ch. 300, Art. IV
10-24 3-15-2011 Lease agreement NCM
10-25 3-15-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
10-26 3-15-2011 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
10-27 3-15-2011 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
10-28 4-5-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
10-29 4-5-2011 Towing amendment Ch. 334
10-30 4-5-2011 Escrow fees amendment Ch. 149, Art. I
10-31 4-5-2011 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
10-32 4-5-2011 Bond NCM
10-33 4-19-2011 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:861
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
10-34 5-3-2011 Bond NCM
10-35 5-3-2011 Sale of property NCM
10-36 5-17-2011 Bond amendment NCM
10-37 5-17-2010 Acceptance of property NCM
10-38 6-8-2011 Solid waste amendment Ch. 300
10-39 6-8-2011 Elections Ch. 19
10-40 6-8-2011 Awarding of public
contracts
Ch. 12, Art. I
10-41 6-21-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
10-42 6-21-2011 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
10-43 6-21-2011 Graffiti Ch. 180
11-01 7-19-2011 Recycling Superseded by
Ord. No. 14-07
11-02 7-19-2011 False alarms amendment Ch. 76, Art. I
11-03 8-2-2011 Schedule of fees
amendment; rental
property: units of dwelling
space amendment;
dwelling units amendment
Chs. 149, Art. II;
277, Arts. I and
IV
11-04 8-16-2011 Sale of property NCM
11-05 8-16-2011;
readopted
3-6-2012
Bond NCM
11-06 9-20-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
11-07 9-20-2011 Towing amendment Ch. 334
11-08 9-20-2011 Sale of property NCM
11-09 10-4-2011 Sale of property NCM
11-10 10-4-2011 Bond NCM
11-11 10-18-2011 Salaries NCM
11-12 10-18-2011 Salaries NCM
11-13 10-18-2011 Officers and employees:
hiring preferences and
residency requirements;
Police Department hiring
preferences repealer
Ch. 40, Arts. I
and III
11-14 11-14-2011 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
§ DL-1 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:862
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-15 11-14-2011 Solid waste amendment Ch. 300
11-16 2-17-2012 Bond NCM
11-17 2-17-2012 Bond NCM
11-18 3-6-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
11-19 3-6-2012 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 77
11-19 3-20-2012 Officers and employees:
Table of Organization for
Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 40, Art. V
11-20 3-20-2012 Bond NCM
11-21 3-20-2012 Bond amendment NCM
11-22 4-3-2012 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
11-23 4-17-2012 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
11-24 4-17-2012 Bond NCM
11-25 5-15-2012 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
11-26 6-19-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
11-27 6-19-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
11-28 6-19-2012 Satellite dish antennas Ch. 279
12-01 7-17-2012 Parks and recreation areas:
park rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 247, Art. II
12-02 7-17-2012 Salaries NCM
12-03 7-17-2012 Salaries NCM
12-04 8-7-2012 Acquisition of property NCM
12-05 8-21-2012 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 77
12-06 8-21-2012 Street vacation NCM
12-07 10-2-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
12-08 12-4-2012 Property maintenance:
vacant properties
Ch. 265, Art. IV
12-09 12-4-2012 Bond NCM
12-10 12-4-2012 Bond NCM
12-11 12-4-2012 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:863
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-12 12-18-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
12-13 12-18-2012 Bond NCM
12-14 1-8-2013 Officers and employees:
Table of Organization for
Police Department
amendment
Ch. 40, Art. IV
12-15 1-8-2013 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
12-16 1-8-2013 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
12-17 1-8-2013 Bond NCM
12-18 1-8-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
12-19 1-8-2013 Tax abatement agreement NCM
12-20 1-8-2013 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
12-21 1-8-2013 Salaries NCM
12-22 2-19-2013 Sewer rates NCM
12-23 3-5-2013 Sidewalk and curb
maintenance
Ch. 307, Art. V
12-24 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-25 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-26 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-27 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-28 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-29 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-30 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-31 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-32 3-19-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-33 3-19-2013 Salaries amendment NCM
12-34 3-19-2013 Schedule of fees
amendment; discovery fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Arts. II
and III
12-35 4-9-2013 Bond NCM
12-36 4-9-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
12-37 4-9-2013 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:864
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-38 4-9-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
12-39 4-23-2013 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
12-40 4-23-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
12-41 4-23-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
12-42 5-7-2013 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
12-43 5-21-2013 Purchase and transfer of
certain property
NCM
13-01 7-16-2013 Salaries NCM
13-02 7-16-2013 Salaries NCM
13-03 7-16-2013 Acquisition of certain
property
NCM
13-04 8-20-2013 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 247
13-05 9-3-2013 Tax abatement agreement NCM
13-06 9-17-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
13-07 10-1-2013 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
13-08 10-1-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
13-09 12-3-2013 Bond NCM
13-10 12-3-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Repealed by Ord.
No. 15-06
13-11 1-7-2014 Nuisance houses
amendment
Ch. 230, Art. II
13-12 2-4-2014 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
13-13 2-18-2014 Appropriation NCM
13-14 2-18-2014 Salaries NCM
13-15 2-18-2014 Salaries amendment NCM
13-16 2-18-2014 Administrative Code
amendment
Ch. 3
13-17 2-18-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 149
13-18 3-4-2014 Bond NCM
13-19 4-1-2014 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:865
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-20 5-6-2014 Fire insurance claims
amendment
Ch. 158
13-21 5-6-2014 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
13-22 5-6-2014 Bond NCM
13-23 6-4-2014 Salaries NCM
13-24 6-4-2014 Salaries NCM
14-01 7-15-2014 Street acceptance NCM
14-02 7-15-2014 Peddling and soliciting Ch. 254
14-03 8-5-2014 Consent to South Jersey
Gas Company for gas
service
NCM
14-04 9-2-2014 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
14-05 10-7-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
14-06 10-21-2014 Bond NCM
14-07 10-21-2014 Recycling Ch. 270
14-08 10-21-2014 Solid waste amendment Ch. 300
14-09 10-21-2014 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
14-10 12-2-2014 Table of organization for
Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 40, Art. V
14-11 12-16-2014 Sewer rates NCM
15-01 2-3-2015 Sale of certain city-owned
property
NCM
15-02 2-17-2015 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 321
15-03 2-17-2015 Bond NCM
15-04 3-17-2015 Bond NCM
15-05 4-7-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
15-06 4-21-2015 Parking repealer; vehicles
and traffic
Ch. 242,
reference only;
Ch. 350
15-07 4-21-2015 Speed humps installed on
Mayor Aitken Drive
NCM
15-08 4-21-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 350
§ DL-1 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:866
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-09 4-21-2015 Street vacation NCM
15-10 6-3-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 350
15-11 6-3-2015 Reversion to calendar fiscal
year
NCM
15-12 6-23-2015 Salaries NCM
15-13 6-23-2015 Salaries NCM
15-14 6-23-2015 Salaries NCM
15-15 6-23-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
15-16 6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 350
15-17 6-23-2015 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
15-18 6-23-2015 Acquisition of property NCM
15-19 7-7-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
15-20 7-7-2015 Bond NCM
15-21 7-7-2015 Sale of property NCM
15-22 8-4-2015 Salaries NCM
15-23 8-4-2015 Officers and employees:
table of organization for
Fire Department
Ch. 40, Art. V
15-24 10-6-2015 Tax exemption agreement NCM
15-25 11-4-2015 Sale of City-owned
property
NCM
15-26 12-1-2015 Salaries NCM
15-27 12-1-2015 Bond NCM
15-28 12-1-2015 Sewer rates NCM
15-29 12–1-2015 Salaries amendment NCM
16-01 2-2-2016 Bond NCM
16-02 3-15-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
16-03 3-15-2016 Schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
16-04 3-15-2016 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 3
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:867
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
16-05 3-15-2016 Property maintenance: sale
of residential property
Ch. 265, Art. V
16-06 3-15-2016 Rental property:
certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 277, Art. II
16-07 3-15-2016 Fire prevention: uniform
fire code amendment
Ch. 162, Art. I
16-08 5-3-2016 Bond NCM
16-09 6-8-2016 Flood damage prevention Ch. 167
16-10 6-21-2016 Salaries amendment NCM
16-11 6-21-2016 Authorization of auction of
taxi licenses
NCM
16-12 7-5-2016 Authorization of sale of
certain property
NCM
16-13 8-2-2016 Fees: schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
16-14 8-16-2016 Street name change NCM
16-15 8-16-2016 Fees: schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
16-16 9-20-2016 Tax exemption agreement NCM
16-17 10-4-2016 Fees: schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
16-18 10-18-2016 Water utility revitalization
funding plan
NCM
16-19 12-6-2016 Tax exemption agreement NCM
16-20 12-6-2016 Tax exemption agreement NCM
17-01 3-7-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
17-02 3-21-2017 Solid waste amendment Ch. 300
17-03 3-21-2017 Authorization of sale of
certain property
NCM
17-04 4-18-2017 Fees: schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
17-05 5-2-2017 Peace and good order
amendment
Ch. 251
17-06 6-7-2017 Fees: schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
17-07 6-7-2017 Salaries amendment NCM
17-08 6-7-2017 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:868
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-09 6-20-2017 Lot renaming NCM
17-10 6-20-2017 Street name change NCM
17-11 6-20-2017 Officers and employees:
table of organization for
Police Department
amendment
Ch. 40, Art. IV
17-12 6-20-2017 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 247
17-13 6-20-2017 Fees: schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
17-14 7-5-2017 Salaries NCM
17-15 7-5-2017 Sale of property NCM
17-16 Not adopted
17-17 8-15-2017 Bond amendment NCM
17-18 9-5-2017 Parks and recreation areas
amendment
Ch. 247
17-19 9-19-2017 Resident identification
program
Ch. 284
17-20 9-19-2017 Job title change: City Clerk
to Municipal Clerk and
Assistant City Clerk to
Assistant Municipal Clerk
Ch. 1, Art. I; Ch.
3; Ch. 98; Ch.
112; Ch. 158; Ch.
203, Art. III; Ch.
254; Ch. 260; Ch.
265, Art. II; Ch.
270; Ch. 277, Art.
I; Ch. 307, Art.
III; Ch. 311; Ch.
321; Ch. 334; Ch.
360; Ch. 370
17-21 9-19-2017 Fees: schedule of fees
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
17-22 Not adopted
17-23 10-3-2017 Uniform construction
codes: modular home
moving permits
amendment
Ch. 126, Art. III
17-24 10-3-2017 Street renaming
clarification
NCM
17-25 10-3-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 370
17-26 10-17-2017 Sale of property NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:869
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-27 11-6-2017 Redevelopment plan along
N. Pearl Street and N.
Laurel Street
NCM
17-28 11-6-2017 Redevelopment plan for
Florida Avenue Industrial
Park
NCM
17-29 12-5-2017 Appropriation NCM
17-30 12-19-2017 Bond NCM
17-31 12-19-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 350
17-32 12-19-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 350
18-1 2-20-2018 Bond NCM
18-2 2-20-2018 Salaries NCM
18-3 2-20-2018 Property Maintenance:
Vacant Properties
Amendment
Ch. 265, Art. IV
18-4 3-6-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
18-5 3-6-2018 Street Vacations NCM
18-6 3-6-2018 Taxicabs Amendment Ch. 321
18-7 4-17-2018 Zoning Map Amendment NCM
18-8 4-17-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
18-9 5-1-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 149
18-10 5-15-2018 Bond NCM
18-11 6-19-2018 Salaries NCM
18-12 6-19-2018 Taxation: One-Hundred-
Percent Disabled Veteran
Tax Refund
Ch. 317, Art. III
18-13 6-19-2018 Salaries NCM
18-14 7-17-2018 Fees: Schedule of Fees
Amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
18-15 7-17-2018 Emergency Lanes
Amendment
Ch. 141
18-16 7-17-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-17 7-17-2018 Bond NCM
18-18 7-17-2018 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 BRIDGETON CODE § DL-1
347:870
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-19 9-18-2018 Officers and Employees:
Table of Organization for
Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 40, Art. V
18-20 9-18-2018 Property Maintenance:
Property Maintenance
Code Amendment
Ch. 265, Art. II
18-21 10-2-2018 Bond NCM
18-22 10-16-2018 Sale of Property NCM
18-23 10-16-2018 Street Vacation NCM
18-24 12-18-2018 Street Vacation NCM
18-25 12-18-2018 Administration of
Government Amendment
Ch. 3
18-26 12-18-2018 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 307
18-27 12-18-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
18-28 12-18-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
18-29 12-18-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
19-1 3-5-2019 Easement NCM
19-2 3-5-2019 Appropriation NCM
19-3 3-19-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
19-4 4-2-2019 Salaries NCM
19-5 4-16-2019 Agreement NCM
19-6 5-21-2019 Sale of Property NCM
19-7 6-18-2019 Lease NCM
19-8 6-18-2019 Fees: Schedule of Fees
Amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
19-9 6-18-2019 Fees: Schedule of Fees
Amendment
Ch. 149, Art. II
19-10 7-16-2019 Bond NCM
19-11 7-16-2019 Sewer Rates NCM
§ DL-1 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § DL-1
347:871