Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Brigantine of a
general and permanent nature adopted by the City Council of the City of
Brigantine, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through
290, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as the "Code of the City of Brigantine," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such
ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in
force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Brigantine
by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City, to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Brigantine" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Brigantine, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of
this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the City Council,
which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City
of Brigantine to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section
or part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one of the
following: a fine of not more than $1,000, to imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter saved from repeal.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to August 5, 1992.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the City's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-15. General penalty for violations. [Amended 11-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 23-2007]
Whenever there is an offense of any section of this Code or ordinance of the
City of Brigantine and a specific penalty provision is not set forth therein,
the penalties to be imposed, in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge,
shall be as follows.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
A. A fine in the amount of up to $2,000, imprisonment in the county jail for
up to 90 days and community service for up to 90 days, or any
combination thereof in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
B. Notwithstanding the above, any fine in an amount greater than $1,250
assessed upon an owner for violations of a housing or zoning code shall
not be imposed unless said owner is first given a thirty-day period in
which he is afforded the opportunity to cure or abate the condition and
only after said owner is also afforded an opportunity for a hearing
before a court of competent jurisdiction for an independent
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-14B, the following sections and Articles were added or
amended: §§ 3-5, 3-19F, 3-23B, 3-28A(6), (7), (8) and B, 3-32I, 3-44A, 3-72, 3-74, 3-75 and
3-84; 77-2A; 87-3A and B and 87-10; Art. I of Ch. 91 and §§ 91-5, 91-7 and 91-13; 95-4 and
95-7; 101-8D(1), 101-9A and 101-10; 105-3A, 105-7A, 105-13, 105-15A, 105-21C, 105-24,
105-26B and C and 105-33; 111-4, 111-14, 111-28A, 111-31A and 111-32; 115-4; 123-8,
and 123-10; 131-3; 143-10A; 147-5; 153-1A and B, 153-7 and 153-10G; 165-3, 165-7A,
165-10A, 165-22 and 165-23; 175-8A; 181-8; 187-14; 198-15E, 198-17A, B(1) and C(3),
198-34, 198-51, 198-72A, 198-100H(1), 198-116F(3) and 198-120C(5); 204-21, 204-22 and
204-28; 210-17B, 210-18, 210-19, 210-23A and 210-29; 216-3A, 216-11, 216-19B and
216-22A and B; 220-2, 220-3, 220-5B, 220-7 and 220-19; 224-4; 230-5 and 230-7A; 234-3,
234-5, 234-8 and 234-13; 242-9A and B; 246-1 and 246-5; 252-2, 252-3A, 252-4, 252-8,
252-9, 252-38B(2), 252-49A and 252-54B and C; 260-7 and 260-8; 264-11 and 264-12B;
270-12 and 270-13A; 274-1 and 274-3; 290-7; 290-17D(1), 290-19A and B(1), 290-20C,
290-25A(1) and (2), B(1) and (2), C(1), D(2), (3) and (5) and 290-26. The following
original sections were deleted: Sections 1 through 5 and 7 through 12 of Ord. No.
13-1956; Section 903.14 of Ord. No. 20-1988. A complete description of each change may
be found in Ord. No. 28-1992, on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 1-13 BRIGANTINE CODE § 1-15
1:6
determination concerning the violation. In such cases, subsequent to
the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine in excess of $1,250 may be
imposed if a court has not determined otherwise or, upon reinspection
of the property, it is determined that the abatement has not been
substantially completed.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7

ARTICLE II
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were approved by the City Council for inclusion in the
Code of the City of Brigantine. Such new ordinances are noted in
the histories of individual chapters as "Adopted ---- during
codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II." During the
course of normal supplementation, specific dates of adoption will be
inserted where appropriate in the various chapters. The
enumeration below lists each chapter affected by such legislation
adopted during codification.]
Chapter Adoption Date Ord. No.
210, Mercantile Businesses,
Art. II, Fees Schedule
12-28-1992 29-1992
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims approval and payment — See Ch. 7.
Ethics — See Ch. 25.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
Ward Commission — See Ch. 77.
§ 1-15 BRIGANTINE CODE § 1-15
1:10
ARTICLE I
Form of Government; Membership in City Council
§ 3-1. Council-Manager Plan established.
Pursuant to the vote of the electorate of the City of Brigantine at the general
election of November 7, 1989, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-19,
providing for direct petition of the registered voters, the form of
government in the City of Brigantine, from and after January 1, 1991,
12:00 noon, is hereby established as the Council-Manager Plan, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 to 40:69A-210 et seq., the Optional Municipal Charters
Law. The specific provisions concerning the Council-Manager Plan form
chosen for the City of Brigantine are found at N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq.
§ 3-2. City Council membership.
The City Council of the City of Brigantine shall consist of a Mayor, elected
at large by the voters, two at-large Council members and four ward Council
members.
§ 3-3. Terms in office.
§ 3-4. Elections.
All elections shall be held at the general election provided for under New
Jersey law.
A. The Mayor shall be elected to a four-year term, beginning with the first
election of the members of Council.
B. The at-large Council members shall be elected to four-year terms,
beginning with the first election of the members of Council.
C. The ward Council members shall be elected to four-year terms, except
that the term of the ward Council members shall be two years following
the first election of the members of the Council, and four years
thereafter.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-4
1:11

ARTICLE II
Definitions2
§ 3-5. Terms defined.
For the purposes of this chapter and in the interpretation and application
of all other ordinances and resolutions heretofore or hereafter adopted by
the City of Brigantine, except as the context may otherwise require, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHARTER or CITY CHARTER — The Council-Manager Plan of Chapter 210
of the New Jersey Laws of 1950, also known as "N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.,"
as amended and supplemented, and any and all general laws as therein
defined which are or may be applicable to the City.
CITY or MUNICIPALITY — The City of Brigantine, in the County of Atlantic
and State of New Jersey, as governed by the provisions of the Charter
and being formerly known as "Brigantine," the "Borough of Brigantine,"
"Brigantine City," "Brigantine Beach," "East Atlantic City" and "North
Atlantic City."
CLERK or CITY CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed pursuant to
the Charter and General law, or the Deputy Municipal Clerk, when acting in
such capacity.
CODE or ADMINISTRATIVE CODE — This chapter, as may be hereafter
amended and supplemented. References to the "Code of the City of
Brigantine" or "Ordinances of the City of Brigantine" shall mean this and
those other ordinances duly adopted by the governing body of the City
of Brigantine, present or prior, and which are now adopted or remain in
effect. At the time of adoption of this Charter and Administrative Code, all
of the existing general legislation of the City of Brigantine was preliminarily
organized and codified for pending adoption in that certain compilation
of ordinances on file in the office of the City Clerk, by General Code
Publishers Corporation of Rochester, New York, entitled "Code of the City
of Brigantine." Pending adoption of the codification, of this and general
legislation, all prior ordinances remain in effect in the form in which they
were originally adopted, except for those superseded by the adoption of
the Optional Municipal Charters Law,3 and reference thereto shall be made
by the year and ordinance number of adoption.[Amended 12-28-1992 by
Ord. No. 28-1992]
COMMISSION FORM OF GOVERNMENT — The immediate prior form of
government of the City of Brigantine, found at N.J.S.A. 40:71-1 et seq.,
superseded as of January 1, 1991, 12:00 noon.
COUNCIL-MANAGER FORM — The Council-Manager form of government
as contained within the Optional Municipal Charters Law, 40:69A-1 et seq.,
specifically at 40:69A-81 et seq., effective in the City of Brigantine January
1, 1991, 12:00 noon.
2. Editor's Note: See also § 3-14, Word usage.
3. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:13
DEPARTMENT — An organization unit or group of organization units of
the City government, established or designated as a "department" by this
chapter.
DIRECTOR — The administrative head or officer in charge of a department,
regardless of his or her title (includes the titles "Superintendent," "Officer,"
or the like).
EMPLOYEE — An individual who is employed by the City of Brigantine on
a full- or part-time basis at the department level or below, being generally
those individuals employed pursuant to Article V et seq., inclusive, herein,
and whose compensation is fixed by the General Salary Ordinance of the
City,4 who may be any elected official, board member or anyone appointed
by the Manager or the City Council, including but not limited to the Mayor,
the members of Council, the Manager or any Planning Board or Zoning
Board member, according to law. For purposes of this chapter, the City
Manager, Deputy Manager, if any, Chief Financial Officer, City Clerk and
Deputy Clerk and the professional staff appointees shall be considered
as "employees." At the time of hiring or designating an individual for
employment in any capacity, the Manager and/or Council shall designate
whether or not an individual is to be considered an "employee,"
"independent contractor" or "service provider," for purposes of the manner
of payment of compensation.
GENERAL LAW — Any law or provision of law not inconsistent with the
Charter, heretofore or hereafter enacted, which is, by its terms, applicable
or available to the City, and the following additional laws, whether or
not such additional laws are so applicable or available to any city or
municipality, including legislation relating to taxation, local courts,
education, health, public employees, public lands and buildings, public
contracts, public authorities and the police power and laws which relate
to more than one city and cities in unsound financial condition. The term
"general law" includes any such law, even if not enumerated in or mentioned
by the Optional Municipal Charters Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq., this
Charter or Administrative Code. 5
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council created and constituted pursuant
to the Charter, including the Mayor when such Mayor is not performing
those duties which are peculiar to the Mayor's position and when sitting as
a member of the Council.
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR — A firm, company or professional person
that performs services for the City of Brigantine not as an employee.
MANAGER — The City Manager, Deputy Manager or Acting Manager
appointed and serving pursuant to the Charter or this chapter, with the
powers and duties of the Manager under the Optional Municipal Charters
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Salaries and Compensation.
5. Editor's Note: See also § 3-9, "General law" defined.
§ 3-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-5
1:14
MAYOR — The Mayor (or Deputy Mayor, as the case may be) duly elected
or appointed pursuant to the Charter.
MONTH — A calendar month, unless otherwise specifically provided.
OFFICIAL or OFFICER — Members of the City Council, all members of
the advisory boards, committees and commissions appointed pursuant to
Article V herein, and professional consultants appointed to hold the
positions described herein, irrespective of whether they perform such
functions as employees or independent contractors. For purposes of this
chapter, the City Manager, Deputy Manager, if any, Chief Financial Officer,
City Clerk and Deputy Clerk, Solicitor, Assistant Solicitor/Prosecutor,
Assistant Solicitor/Public Defender, City Engineer, City Planner, City
Auditor, Solicitors and professional advisors of the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be considered "officials" or "officers" of
the City.
OPTIONAL MUNICIPAL CHARTERS LAW or FAULKNER ACT — The
Optional Municipal Charters Law, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq., which
authorizes and requires the Council-Manager form of optional municipal
charter, found at N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq.
PERSON — Any corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization or
other entity, as well as an individual.
TENURE OF OFFICE LAW — Those laws of the State of New Jersey which
specifically establish a right of tenure in particular officeholders and which
limit the conditions under which an individual may be discharged from such
position, which have not been superseded by the adoption of the Optional
Municipal Charters Law.
YEAR — The calendar year, unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:15

ARTICLE III
Limitations; Transitional Provisions; Applicability
§ 3-6. Supersession of certain provisions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-206, 40:69A-207 and 40:69A-208, any prior
Charter and its amendments and supplements theretofore applicable to the
City of Brigantine shall be superseded. All ordinances and resolutions of
the City of Brigantine, to the extent that they are not inconsistent with
the provisions of the adoption by the voters of the Charter or adoption by
the City Council of this chapter, shall remain in full force and effect until
modified or repealed as provided by law.
§ 3-7. Continuation of pending actions and officers and employees.
All actions and proceedings of a legislative, executive or judicial character
which are pending on the effective date of this Charter, shall continue, and
the appropriate officer or employee under this Charter and chapter shall
be substituted for the officer or employee exercising or discharging the
function, power or duty involved in the action or proceeding.
§ 3-8. Prior references to "Board of Commissioners."
Wherever reference is made to the "governing body" or the "Board of
Commissioners" in prior ordinances or resolutions or other official acts of
the City of Brigantine, such ordinances, resolutions or official acts of the
City of Brigantine shall be deemed to be amended to refer to the "City
Council of the City of Brigantine," as the governing body or equivalent
of the City of Brigantine, to the extent required and permitted by the
Council-Manager form of government, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq. The City
of Brigantine shall remain a body corporate and politic with perpetual
succession and with such corporate name as it has heretofore adopted or
may hereafter adopt.
§ 3-9. "General law" defined.6
For the purposes of the Optional Municipal Charters Law (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1
to 40:69A-210), a "general law" shall be deemed to be any law or provisions
of law not inconsistent with the Charter adopted under the Optional
Municipal Charters Law heretofore or hereafter enacted, which is, by its
terms, applicable or available to all municipalities, and the following
additional laws, whether or not such additional laws are so applicable or
available to all municipalities: legislation relating to taxation, local courts,
education, health, public authorities serving more than one city and any city
in unsound financial condition.
6. Editor's Note: See also the definition of "general law" in § 3-5.
§ 3-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-10
1:17
§ 3-10. Powers under Optional Municipal Charters Law.7
The City of Brigantine, as with each municipality governed by an optional
form of government under the Optional Municipal Charters Law, shall be
subject to the provisions of the Optional Municipal Charters Law and other
general laws and have full power to do all those acts set forth as the general
powers of municipalities governed by an optional form of government.
§ 3-11. Next vote on form of government.
The voters of the City of Brigantine, who adopted the foregoing plan under
the Optional Municipal Charters Law, may not vote on the question of
adopting another form of government or reversion to the prior plan (the
Commission form or Walsh Act) until the general election to be held at the
expiration of the fifth year following November 7, 1989.
§ 3-12. Failure to include mandatory or optional statutory
provisions herein; statutory references.
§ 3-13. Amendments to Optional Municipal Charters Law.
Should any provision of law governing the Optional Municipal Charters Law
(the OMCL)9 of this charter be amended by the Legislature of the State of
New Jersey, then the applicable provisions of said law shall apply, except in
the case where the legislature of the State of New Jersey saves or continues
in effect the prior provisions of said law for municipalities having previously
adopted a form of government under this law, in which case there shall be
deemed no amendment hereto.
A. The noninclusion of specific mandatory provisions of the Optional
Municipal Charters Law8 or of any general law in the Charter or in this
Administrative Code, or the failure to include any specific reference
thereto, shall not be construed to mean the elimination or
nonapplicability of said law within the City of Brigantine, except where
options available to the municipality under the Optional Municipal
Charters Law have not been specifically chosen by the City of
Brigantine.
B. References to sections of the New Jersey Statutes (N.J.S.A.) found in
brackets within the text of this chapter are to be included within the
text of this chapter as reference to the inclusion of the text verbatim or
modified only to make necessary changes of reference or identity due to
peculiar matters found within the City of Brigantine.
7. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
9. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-14
1:18
§ 3-14. Word usage.10
Whenever there is used within this chapter, or within any ordinance,
resolution or other act of the City of Brigantine, terminology which may be
deemed to be masculine, feminine, neuter, plural, singular or the like, it
shall be deemed to include the other corresponding terminology as though
fully set forth in such document or act.
10.Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Definitions.
§ 3-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-14
1:19

ARTICLE IV
Mayor and City Council
§ 3-15. Membership.11
The City Council of the City of Brigantine shall consist of the Mayor and
those members identified in the Charter of the City of Brigantine and shall
be the governing body of the City of Brigantine.
§ 3-16. Powers vested in Council.
All powers of the City of Brigantine and the determinations of all matters of
policy shall be vested in the City Council of the City of Brigantine, except as
otherwise provided by the Optional Municipal Charters Law12 or by general
law.
§ 3-17. Mayor; Deputy Mayor.
A. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the City Council and shall
have a voice and vote in its proceedings. He or she shall fill vacancies
occurring in the Trustees of the public library, if applicable, and in the
Board of Education where the City is operating under Title 18A of the
New Jersey Annotated Statutes for such terms of office as are provided
by law. All bonds, notes, contracts and written obligations of the City
shall be executed on its behalf by the Mayor or, in the event of his
inability to act, by the Deputy Mayor, who is such Councilman as the
City Council shall designate to act as Mayor during his absence or
disability. The powers and duties of the Mayor shall be only such as are
expressly conferred upon him by this article. [P.L. 1950, c. 210, p. 486,
§ 9-7, effective June 8, 195013]
B. The Mayor shall perform such other duties as the Council may
prescribe and are prescribed in this Administrative Code. The
assignment of particular duties to the Mayor, or the Deputy Mayor, shall
not be construed in any manner as limiting or delegating to the Mayor,
or Deputy Mayor, any power of the Council as the governing body nor
limiting or delegating any power of the Manager as provided for in the
Optional Municipal Charters Law.
C. The Mayor shall perform such ceremonial functions as are allocated to
persons holding the title of "Mayor," as such is known generally in New
Jersey law.
D. At its organizational meeting, the City Council shall choose, by
nomination and confirming vote, one of the Council persons to act
during the year as the Deputy Mayor. The Deputy Mayor shall perform
all duties of the Mayor in the absence of the Mayor and shall in such
11.Editor's Note: See also § 3-2, City Council membership.
12.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-87.
§ 3-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-17
1:21
§ 3-18. Council's power over departments and officers.
§ 3-19. Meetings; rules of procedure; bylaws.
absence preside over the meetings of Council and perform such
ceremonial duties as are allowed by law. [Amended 6-6-2001 by Ord.
No. 7-2001]
A. The City Council shall continue or create and determine and define the
powers and duties of such executive and administrative departments,
boards and offices, in addition to those provided for herein, as it may
deem necessary for the proper and efficient conduct of the affairs of the
City, including the office of Deputy Manager, which shall not be
included in the classified service under Title 11 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated (only if separately adopted by the City of
Brigantine). Any department, board or office so continued or created
may at any time be abolished by the City Council.
B. It is the intention of this chapter that the City Council shall act in all
matters as a body, and it is contrary to the spirit of this article for any of
its members to seek individually to influence to the official acts of the
City Manager, or any other officer, or for the Council or any of its
members to direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his
removal from, office or to interfere in any way with the performance by
such officers of their duties. The Council and its members shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the Manager and shall
not give orders to any subordinates of the Manager, either publicly or
privately. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Municipal Council
from appointing committees or commissions of its own members or of
citizens to conduct investigations into the conduct of any officer or
department or any matter relating to the welfare of the City and
delegating to such committees or commissions such powers of inquiry
as the City Council may deem necessary. Any member of the Council
violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof in
a court of competent jurisdiction, be disqualified as a member of the
Council.
A. The Council shall, by ordinance or resolution, designate the time of
holding regular meetings, which shall be at least monthly. The Mayor
may, and upon written request of a majority of the members of the
Council other than the Mayor shall, call a special meeting of the
Council. In the call, the Mayor shall designate the purpose of the
special meeting, and no other business shall be considered. All
meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. The Municipal Clerk
shall keep a journal of its proceedings and record the minutes of every
meeting.
B. The Council shall determine its own rules of procedure, not inconsistent
with ordinance or statute. A majority of the whole number of members
of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but no ordinance shall be
§ 3-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-19
1:22
adopted by the Council without the affirmative vote of a majority of all
the members of the Council.
C. Each ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in written or
typewritten form and shall be read and considered as provided by
general law. The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall
be taken by roll call, and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the
minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the officer
presiding at such meeting and by the Municipal Clerk.
D. In the absence of the Mayor, the Deputy Mayor shall be the temporary
presiding officer.
E. The City Council shall act in all matters as a body. Notwithstanding the
prohibition of direct contact with the administrative service found at
N.J.S.A. 40:69A-91, the Council deems it appropriate and necessary to
institute standing and temporary committees of its members and
citizens for the purpose of conducting investigations into the conduct of
any officer or department or any matter relating to the welfare of the
City.
(1) Standing committees shall be formed by amendment to this
chapter. At the time of adoption of this chapter, the following
standing committees are formed:
(a) None.
(2) Temporary committees shall be formed by resolution of the City
Council. In such case, no temporary committee shall remain in
existence following the reorganization meeting of the Council held
or to be held on the first day of January 1993 and each two-year
period thereafter.
(3) As required or permitted by law or by this Code, a member or
members of the City Council may be appointed or designated by the
City Council to act as the Council member of or liaison to any
board, commission or committee.
F. All formal meetings of the Council shall be conducted according to the
Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq., and generally
according to Robert's Rules of Order, with the following changes:
[Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(1) The published agenda for the Council shall be followed, except as
directed by the presiding officer, and any additions or deletions
shall be accompanied by a statement as to the reason for the
change.
(2) A quorum for the conduct of official business shall be four of the
seven members, or a majority of members in the event of vacancies,
except that no ordinance shall be adopted without the majority of
the sitting members voting in the affirmative.
§ 3-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-19
1:23
(3) The Council may delegate, by ordinance or resolution, to the Clerk
or Deputy Clerk the right to preside over meetings held solely for
the receipt and opening of public bids, at which there shall be no
public discussion held.
(4) The order for consideration of public business at formal meetings
of the Council shall be as determined by the presiding officer and
shall include but not be limited to the following:
(a) Open Public Meetings Act announcement.14
(b) Flag salute.
(c) Roll call.
(d) Correspondence.
(e) Approval of minutes of prior meetings and receipt of minutes of
meetings over which the Clerk presided.
(f) Approval of payroll and operating expense.
(g) Public hearings on ordinances.
(h) Introduction of ordinances for first reading.
(i) Consideration of resolutions.
(j) Consideration of Council appointments.
(k) Consideration of Mayor's proclamations.
(l) Reports and comments of the Council.
(m) Reports and comments of the Manager.
(5) The receipt of general public comment at formal and workshop
meetings of Council shall be at a time and in a place on the agenda
where determined by the presiding officer. The public shall be
heard at the consideration of each ordinance, except that the
presiding officer may direct that comments be limited by subject
matter on time in the interest of order. The presiding officer may
direct that public speakers shall deliver their comments to the
Council from a place designated within the Council Chamber and
direct comments or questions only to the Chair or to the members
of Council or to the Manager at the pleasure of the presiding
officer.
(6) The presiding officer may direct the end of public comment or
comments by Council when it appears that consideration of the
matter should be put to a vote by stating, "The Chair is ready to
receive a motion," or in the case of general public comment, by
14.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 3-19 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-19
1:24
stating, "the time for receipt of public comments is now over."
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the presiding officer shall not
unreasonably terminate public or Council comment upon the
consideration of any ordinance or other public business which
requires a hearing, and any Council member may place upon the
floor a priority motion to overrule the presiding officer's
determination that the time for receipt of public or Council
comments should be terminated, which motion shall be determined
by majority vote.
(7) A previously printed ordinance or resolution placed within the
agenda shall be at all times considered the main motion, as is
contemplated by Robert's Rules of Order. Motions to amend any
ordinance or resolution shall be considered according to said rules.
In the consideration of any ordinance, the presiding officer may
direct the republication of any portion of the ordinance, as advised
by the Solicitor.
(8) All meetings shall be recorded by electronic recording devices, and
the tapes thereof kept in accordance with the laws relative to
public records.
(9) The Manager shall have a voice and shall be heard along with any
Council member at the time of any Council business. The Manager
shall have no vote. The Manager shall review all resolutions,
ordinances or other official acts for administrative conformity.
(10) Professional advisors to the City Council and to the Manager shall
attend all Council meetings as required by the Council or the
Manager and shall sit at the place directed by the presiding officer.
The form and content of all resolutions and ordinances shall be
approved by the City Solicitor.
(11) The City Clerk shall direct the order of call of the members of
Council and the Mayor. Following the first election of the Council,
the call shall be the following order: Wards 1, 2, 3 and 4; at-large
Council member; Deputy Mayor; and Mayor.
(12) All persons appearing before the Council shall conduct themselves
in a businesslike and courteous manner. No person shall engage in
conduct which is or may be deemed offensive to order or to any
person present within the public meeting. The presiding officer
may direct the removal of persons who act in a manner contrary
with this section.
(13) The City Clerk, with the advise of the Solicitor, shall formulate
standard forms of documents, including ordinances, resolutions
and other official acts of the Council, according to law.
§ 3-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-19
1:25

ARTICLE V
City Manager
§ 3-20. Qualifications; residency; appointment; vacancy.
§ 3-21. Removal from office.
The City Manager shall hold office for an indefinite term and may be
removed by a majority vote of the Council. At least 30 days before such
removal shall become effective, the Council shall, by a majority vote of
its members, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his or
her removal. The Manager may reply, in writing, and may request a public
hearing, which shall be held not earlier than 20 days nor later than 30
days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing and after full
consideration, the Council, by majority vote of its members, may adopt a
final resolution of removal. By the preliminary resolution, the Council may
suspend the Manager from duty, but in any case cause to be paid to him
or her forthwith any unpaid balance of his or her salary for the next three
calendar months following adoption of the preliminary resolution, unless
he or she is removed for good cause. For the purposes of this section,
"good cause" shall mean conviction of a crime or offense involving moral
turpitude, the violation of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:69A-163 through
40:69A-167 or the violation of any Code of Ethics in effect within the City.15
§ 3-22. Absence or disability.
The Manager may designate a qualified administrative officer of the City to
perform his or her duties during his or her temporary absence or disability.
In the event of his or her failure to make such designation, the Council
A. The City Manager shall be chosen by the Council solely on the basis of
his or her executive and administrative qualifications, with special
reference to his or her actual experience in or his or her knowledge of
accepted practice in respect to the duties of his or her office as
hereinafter set forth.
B. At the time of his or her appointment, he or she need not be a resident
of the City of Brigantine or the State of New Jersey, but during his or
her tenure of office, he or she may reside outside the City only with the
approval of Council.
C. The City Council shall determine the procedure for selection of the
Manager. Nominations for permanent Manager shall not be received on
the floor until the procedure established by Council for the search for
the Manager has been followed.
D. Vacancy. The City Council may appoint an Acting City Manager, by
resolution, for a specific term. [Amended 3-7-2018 by Ord. No.
5-2018]
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 25, Ethics.
§ 3-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-22
1:27
may by resolution appoint an officer of the City to perform the duties of the
manager during such absence or disability until he or she shall return or his
or her disability shall cease.
§ 3-23. Duties and responsibilities.
A. The City Manager shall:
(1) Be the chief executive and administrative official of the City.
(2) Execute all laws and ordinances of the City, along with members of
the governing body, as attested by the Clerk.
(3) Appoint and remove a Deputy Manager, if one is authorized by the
Council, all department heads and all other officers, subordinates
and assistants, except those appointments reserved to the Council
by the Optional Municipal Charters Law,16 and except a City Tax
Assessor, for whose selection or removal no other method is
provided in this article, except that he or she may authorize the
head of a department to appoint and remove subordinates in such
department; supervise and control his or her appointees; and
report all appointments or removals at the next meeting thereafter
of the City Council.
(4) Negotiate contracts for the City, subject to the approval of the City
Council; make recommendations concerning the nature and
location of City improvements; and execute City improvements as
determined by the City Council.
(5) See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City or its
inhabitants in any statute, public utility franchise or other contract
are faithfully kept and performed; and, upon knowledge of any
violation, call the same to the attention of the City Council.
(6) Attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to take part in
the discussions but without the right to vote.
(7) Recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures as he
or she may deem necessary or expedient; keep the Council advised
of the financial condition of the City; make reports to the Council as
requested by it; and at least once a year make an annual report of
his or her work for the benefit of the Council and the public.
(8) Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department of
the City.
(9) Perform such other duties as may be required of the City Manager
by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.
16.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 3-22 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-23
1:28
§ 3-24. Budget.
(10) Be responsible to the Council for carrying out all policies
established by it and for the proper administration of all affairs of
the City within the jurisdiction of the Council.
(11) Supervise and administer the Departments of Police, Fire and
Emergency Medical Services, the Beach Patrol, the Ordinance
Enforcement Department and the Uniform Construction Code
Enforcement Office. [Added 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 14-2015]
B. In carrying out the policies established by the Council as provided in
the previous section, the Manager shall diligently and timely render
reports to the Council or to individual members of the Council, as
required, on the progress of investigation into or implementation of
those matters referred by the Council or individual members for the
Manager's attention. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
A. The City budget shall be prepared by the City Manager. During the
month of November in each year, the City Manager shall require all
department heads to submit requests for appropriations for the ensuing
budget year and to appear before him or her at public hearings, which
shall be held during that month, on the various requests.
B. On or before the 15th day of January, the City Manager shall submit to
the Council his or her recommended budget, together with such
explanatory comment or statement as he or she may deem desirable.
The budget shall be in such form as is required by law for city budgets
and shall, in addition, have appended thereto detailed analyses of the
various items of expenditure and revenue.
C. The Council shall, where practicable, provide by ordinance for the
operation of a system of work programs and quarterly allotments for
operation of the budget and for development and reporting of
appropriate unit costs of budgeted expenditures. The Manager shall
append the proposed annual Salary Ordinance17 to the submission of
the annual budget in accordance with this section. The proposed annual
Salary Ordinance shall state the identity of each position proposed to be
funded by the budget, along with the annual salary and increments
thereof, and any amendments proposed to the then-existing Benefit
Ordinance or Code provisions, as the case may be.
D. Notwithstanding the provisions of this code (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-97), in any
local budget year for which budget dates are extended pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:4-5.1, the Municipal Manager of the City which takes
advantage of such extension shall submit to the Council his
recommended budget not less than 16 days prior to the extended date
for the introduction and approval of municipal budgets. Any provision of
general law conferring the appointing power or other power upon the
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-24
1:29
§ 3-25. New positions of employment.
No position of employment within the City, other than those set forth within
the annual Salary and Position Ordinance, as such may be amended from
time to time by the City Council, shall be offered or let by the City Manager,
and then only under such conditions of employment as are set by that
ordinance and this chapter.
§ 3-26. Deputy City Manager. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No.
23-2003]
The Deputy City Manager shall have such duties and responsibilities as are
authorized to the Manager and which are assigned by the Manager, and
the Deputy City Manager shall temporarily serve as the City Manager in
the absence of the City Manager, except that there shall be no automatic
succession of the Deputy City Manager to the position of City Manager
without selection as the City Manager by the City Council.
Mayor or other executive head of the City shall be construed as
meaning the City Manager in a city governed under this chapter, and
the appointments or the power exercised by the City Manager in
accordance with such provision shall be classified and given the same
force and effect as if executed by the official named therein, except
that members of the Board of Education and the Trustees of the public
library, whenever required to be appointed by any such provision by any
board or official of the City, shall be appointed under this chapter by the
Mayor, and except that the Mayor shall serve as the fifth member of the
Board of School Estimate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:22-1.
§ 3-24 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-26
1:30
ARTICLE VI
Chief Financial Officer
§ 3-27. Creation of position.
There is hereby created the office of the Chief Financial Officer, who shall
be the coordinator and monitor of all financial activities of the City of
Brigantine. The Council may determine that the office of the Chief Financial
Officer be held by the City Manager. Nothing herein shall be construed to
affect the tenure of any person subject to any tenure of office law.
§ 3-28. Duties and responsibilities.
A. The Chief Financial Officer, under the supervision and direction of the
City Manager, shall have the following duties and powers:
(1) Have responsibility for the work of all financial officers, financial
activities and the expenditures and budgetary functions of all
departments.
(2) Be responsible for the accounting, preauditing, control, receipt,
custody and disbursement of all City revenues and expenditures
and for all fiscal matters and financial policies of the City.
(3) Monitor and verify the financial activities of the Collector of Taxes,
Assessor, Comptroller, Personnel Officer and Director of
Purchasing and Inventory and all financial receipts and
expenditures of any department.
(4) Direct the proper investment of all funds received or held by the
City of Brigantine and establish regular procedures for such
activities.
(5) Certify the availability of any funds necessary for public
expenditures and act as certifying and approval authority to the
extent required and permitted by law.
(6) Monitor and verify all claims for payment against the City pursuant
to the claims procedures provided by the City. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(7) Under the direction of the City Manager, establish and approve
procedures for the payment of routine claims. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(8) Comply with and monitor and verify compliance by the City of all
guidelines and directives of the Department of Community Affairs
of the State of New Jersey, as such are published by or promulgated
by said agency as and for the operation of financial affairs of the
City of Brigantine. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
B. Nothing in this Administrative Code shall be construed as limiting or
otherwise affecting the responsibilities of the Chief Financial Officer.
§ 3-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-28
1:31
§ 3-29. Proper certifications and licenses required.
The Chief Financial Officer shall have such certifications and licenses as are
required by N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 and 40A:9-140.2 et seq. and as required by
law or regulation.
§ 3-30. Vacancy.
Vacancies in the office of Chief Financial Officer shall be filled by the
Manager, except where the Council directs that the office of Chief Financial
Officer be held by the Manager, in which case any vacancies shall be filled
in the manner prescribed by Council.
The Chief Financial Officer shall at all times comply with the policies
of the City of Brigantine as are promulgated by the City Council or by
the Manager, to the extent required and permitted by law. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
§ 3-28 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-30
1:32
ARTICLE VII
Clerk
§ 3-31. Creation of position.
There shall be an office of the Clerk, the head of which shall be the City
or Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk shall serve an initial term for a
period of three years, the term to run from January 1 of the year in which
he or she was appointed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et seq.
A Municipal Clerk who holds office continuously for five years shall have
tenure and shall not be removed except for good cause shown after a fair
and impartial hearing. The Municipal Clerk shall receive such compensation
as is set out by ordinance.18 The Municipal Clerk shall be subject to and
appointed according to any tenure of office law and have such licenses and
certifications as are required by law. Vacancies in the office of Clerk shall
be filled by the Council.
§ 3-32. Duties and responsibilities.
A. The Clerk shall serve as clerk of the City Council and as secretary of any
special legislative committees of the Council. He or she shall attend
such meetings of the Council as directed by the Council and shall attend
such meetings of the special legislative committees and advisory boards
of the Council as directed by the Council and shall keep the minutes of
the proceedings of the Council and of such committees and boards. The
minutes of each meeting of the Council shall be signed by the officer
presiding at the meeting and by the Clerk.
B. The Clerk shall attest all ordinances and all resolutions of a permanent
character in books to be provided for that purpose. After each
ordinance he or she shall also attest and certify the proof of publication
thereof as required by law. Each ordinance and resolution so attested
shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk, who shall attest that it was
duly adopted upon the date stated, and when so signed, the attested
copy shall be deemed to be a public record of the ordinance and
resolution. Any omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to attest, sign or
certify as herein required shall not impair or affect the validity of any
ordinance which has been duly adopted. At the close of the year, the
Clerk, with the advice and assistance of the City Solicitor, shall bind,
compile or codify all the ordinances and resolutions, or true copies
thereof, which then remain in force and effect. He or she shall also
properly index the record books, compilation or codification of
ordinances and resolutions.
C. The Clerk shall have custody of and shall safely keep all records, books
and documents of the City, except those committed by Charter or
ordinance to any other office or transferred thereto by the Manager.
The Clerk shall, upon request and upon payment of the fees prescribed
therefor by resolution of the Council for the use of the City, furnish a
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-32
1:33
certified copy of any such paper in his or her custody, under the
Corporate Seal of the City.
D. The Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the City to be affixed to
instruments and writings when authorized by ordinance or resolution of
the Council or when necessary to exemplify any document on record in
the Clerk's office or to certify any act or paper which, from the records
in his or her office, shall appear to have been a public act of the City or a
public document. The Clerk shall not affix said Seal or cause or permit it
to be affixed to any other instrument or writing of other paper, unless
required by law or ordinance.
E. The Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Manager, shall:
(1) Be the depository for and custodian of all:
(a) Official surety bonds furnished by or on account of any officer
or employee, except his/her own bond (which shall be placed in
the custody of the Treasurer).
(b) Insurance policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the
benefit of the City or to protect it against any claim, demand or
liability whatsoever.
(c) Formal contracts for work, labor services, supplies, equipment
and materials to which the City may be a party.
(2) Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the City as obligee or any other form of security given by
any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on account
of work done or to be done in or for the City.
(3) Have custody of all leases of property owned by the City.
(4) Report to the Manager, at such time as the Manager may require,
on the coverage, expiration date and premium of such surety bond
and contract of insurance, the nature and terms of outstanding
leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective expiration
dates.
F. No rule or general regulation made by any department, officer, agency
or authority of the City, except such as relates to the organization or
internal management of the City government or a part thereof, shall
take effect until it is filed with the Municipal Clerk. The Clerk shall
maintain a current compilation of all such rules and regulations, which
shall be available for public inspection in his or her office during
regular business hours.
G. In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be
prescribed by the Charter and ordinances, the Clerk shall:
(1) Perform all of the functions required of Municipal Clerks by the
Election Law (Title 19 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated) and
§ 3-32 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-32
1:34
§ 3-33. Deputy Clerk.
the Alcoholic Beverage Law (Title 33 of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated) and any other general law or ordinance.
(2) Serve or perform all duties necessary as the registrar of vital
statistics.
(3) Issue certificates as to approval of land subdivisions by the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to the
State Municipal Planning Act.19
(4) Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and
duties as may be prescribed by general law or ordinance.
(5) Perform such duties relative to the licensure of occupations and
activities as are directed by the Manager.
(6) Perform such other administrative duties as are assigned by the
Manager.
H. The Manager may allocate any of the aforementioned duties between
the Clerk and the Deputy Clerk, except for such statutory duties as are
assigned by general law to the Clerk.
I. The City Clerk shall serve as the municipal lien assessment officer to
act as the certifying officer for searches for municipal assessments or
liens, as may be required from time to time. [Amended 12-28-1992 by
Ord. No. 28-1992]
A. There is hereby established the office of Deputy Municipal Clerk, to be
appointed by the City Council. The Deputy Clerk shall assist the
Municipal Clerk in the performance of his or her duties. During the
absence or disability of the Municipal Clerk, the Deputy Municipal
Clerk shall have all the powers of the Municipal Clerk and shall perform
the functions and duties of such office.
B. The Deputy Clerk shall be a Clerk of the City, and vacancies in said
office shall be filled by the Council. The Deputy Clerk shall have such
licenses and certifications as are provided by law (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et
seq.) or, at or immediately following appointment, be enrolled in an
approved program to acquire such certificates as may be required by
the Council or the Manager, according to law.
C. The Deputy Clerk shall perform such duties of the office of the Clerk or
other administrative duties as are assigned by the Manager.
19.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 3-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-33
1:35

ARTICLE VIII
Professional Staff
§ 3-34. Solicitor.
A. The City Solicitor shall be appointed by the City Council and shall be
appointed for a term of one year, beginning on the first day of January of
the year of appointment, and shall serve until his or her successor has
been appointed and qualified. The Solicitor shall be an attorney at law
of the State of New Jersey, but need not be a resident nor maintain an
office in the City of Brigantine.
B. The City Solicitor shall receive such salary and other compensation as
is authorized by the Annual Salary Ordinance of the City of
Brigantine.20 In addition thereto, the Council or the Manager may from
time to time assign such additional work to the Solicitor according to a
professional services contract to be approved by the Council.
C. The City Solicitor shall have such powers and perform such duties as
are provided for the office of City Solicitor by general law or ordinances
of the City of Brigantine. The Solicitor shall give all legal counsel and
advise where required by the Manager, the Mayor, the Council, or any
member thereof, or the Clerk and shall in general serve as the legal
advisor to the Council and Manager on all matters of City business. In
furtherance of such general duties, the City Solicitor shall:
(1) Represent the City in all judicial and administrative proceedings in
which the City of any or its officers or agencies may be a part or
have an interest.
(2) Draft or approve as to form and sufficiency all legal documents,
contracts, deeds, ordinances and resolutions made, executed or
adopted by or on behalf of the City.
(3) Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the City as may be determined to be necessary or
desirable, as directed by the Mayor, the Manager or the Council.
(4) Have the power to enter into any agreement, compromise or
settlement of any litigation, subject to the approval of Council.
(5) Render opinions, in writing, upon any question of law submitted for
such purpose by the Manager or Council or any member thereof.
(6) Perform such duties as may be necessary to provide legal counsel
to the Manager or the Council in the administration of City affairs.
(7) Supervise and direct the work of such additional attorneys and
legal-technical and legal-professional assistants as the Council may
authorize for special or regular employment.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-34
1:37
§ 3-35. Prosecutor.
§ 3-36. Public Defender.
(8) Deliver to the Manger such products of work, reports, memoranda
and City property as are generated for and use on behalf of the City,
except, however, that the files and materials generated by the
Attorney for his or her own use in the preparation of work for the
City shall remain the property of the Attorney.
(9) Act as and for the City Prosecutor in the temporary absence of the
Assistant Solicitor assigned for such purpose.
D. The Solicitor may not designate a substitute to perform duties of the
Solicitor, except for brief absences, notice of which shall be reasonably
given to the Manager and the Council in advance of such absence.
A. The City Prosecutor shall be an Assistant Solicitor of the City and shall
be appointed by the City Council and shall be appointed for a one-year
term, beginning on the first day of January of the year of appointment,
and shall serve until his or her successor has been appointed and
qualified. The City Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law of the State of
New Jersey and need not be a resident of the municipality nor maintain
an office in the City of Brigantine.
B. The City Prosecutor shall receive such compensation in the form of
salary, or according to a professional services contract, as the Council
shall direct.
C. The City Prosecutor shall prosecute on behalf of the State of New Jersey
and the City of Brigantine.
D. The City Prosecutor shall perform such other duties as are assigned by
the Council, the Manager and the City Solicitor and in accordance with
the portions of this chapter applicable to the City Solicitor and shall
further:
(1) Prosecute any cases which are to be tried in the Municipal Court of
the City of Brigantine or in such courts as are directed by a Judge
sitting in and for the Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine or
courts having supervision and appellate jurisdiction over the
Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine.
(2) Perform all duties as are assigned from time to time by the Charter,
this chapter, the general police power, the laws of the State of New
Jersey and the ordinances of the City of Brigantine or as
promulgated by the City Council of Brigantine.
E. The City Prosecutor shall not designate any substitute to appear on
behalf of the City of Brigantine without the prior permission of the City
Solicitor, the Manager or the Council.
§ 3-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-36
1:38
§ 3-37. Engineer.
§ 3-38. Planner.
A. The City Public Defender shall be an Assistant City Solicitor for
purposes of appointment and shall be appointed by the City Council and
shall be appointed for a one-year term, beginning on the first day of
January of the year of appointment, and shall serve until his or her
successor has been appointed and qualified. The Public Defender shall
be an attorney at law of the State of New Jersey.
B. The City Public Defender shall receive such salary or compensation
according to a professional services contract, as the Council shall
direct.
C. The City Public Defender shall provide a defense to such persons
accused in the Municipal Court of Brigantine as the Judge of the
Municipal Court, or Judges supervising that Court, shall direct.
D. The City Public Defender shall not designate any substitute to appear
on behalf of defendants without the prior permission of the Manager or
Council.
A. There shall be a City Engineer appointed by the Manager for a term not
to exceed three years. The Engineer shall be a licensed professional
engineer, as certified by the applicable licensing authorities of the State
of New Jersey.
B. The Engineer shall receive such salary and compensation and may also
receive additional compensation according to a professional services
contract or contracts, as the Council shall direct.
C. The Engineer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by general
law and ordinance or as directed by Council resolution. In addition
thereto, the Engineer shall perform any and all functions as required by
the job description for said position as developed by the City Manager.
[Amended 3-7-2012 by Ord. No. 8-2012]
A. There shall be a City Planner, who shall be appointed by the Manager
for a term of up to one year and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Manager and shall be compensated pursuant to the terms of a contract
authorized annually by the Council.
B. The City Planner shall be a professional planner duly licensed by the
State of New Jersey.
C. The Planner shall perform such duties as may be directed by the
Manager. The Planner shall also attend such meetings of the Planning
Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment as required. All papers, reports
or work product reports and other materials created by or relative to
the performance of the Planner's duties shall be and remain the
§ 3-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-38
1:39
§ 3-39. Auditor.
property of the City, except for such files created solely for the Planner's
own use.
A. There is hereby created the position of City Auditor, who shall serve as
the professional advisor responsible for creating and promulgating the
official audit of the financial activities of the municipality, as such is
required and directed by the laws of the State of New Jersey, and report
the same to the City Council.
B. The City Auditor shall have the qualifications of a registered municipal
accountant, as such is certified by the State of New Jersey, and shall
serve a term of one year.
C. The City Auditor shall render such professional accounting advice as is
requested and required by the Manager and the Chief Financial Officer
according to a contract for professional services to be negotiated by the
Manager and approved by the City Council.
D. Vacancies in the office of the City Auditor shall be appointed by the City
Council.
§ 3-38 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-39
1:40
ARTICLE IX
Financial Offices and Departments
§ 3-40. Tax Collector; Tax Search Officer.
§ 3-41. Tax Assessor.
§ 3-42. Financial administration; officers.
A. The City Tax Collector shall serve a term of four years, from the first of
January in the first year of appointment, and until a successor is
appointed and qualified.
B. The City Tax Collector shall have, perform and discharge all the
functions, powers and duties prescribed for Tax Collectors by general
law and municipal ordinance. He or she shall receive, collect and
account for all moneys assessed or raised by taxes or assessment for
any purpose or by other City ordinance, according to the procedures
established for certification thereof by the Chief Financial Officer, and
serve under the direction and supervision, to the extent permitted by
law, of the City Manager.
C. Vacancies in the office of Tax Collector shall be filled by the City
Manager. Persons appointed as Tax Collector shall have such
certificates and licenses as are required by law. The position of Tax
Collector shall be subject to such tenure of office provisions as are
provided by law. [N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145]
D. The City Manager shall designate a Tax Search Officer, who may be the
Tax Collector, to act as the certifying officer for searches for municipal
taxes, as may be required from time to time.
A. The City Tax Assessor shall serve a term of four years, from the first of
July in the first year of appointment, and until a successor is appointed
and qualified.
B. Vacancies in office shall be filled by the City Manager.
C. The City Tax Assessor shall have, perform and discharge all the
functions, powers and duties prescribed for Tax Assessors or Boards of
Assessors by general law and City ordinances.
A. Comptroller.
(1) The Comptroller shall serve in office for an indefinite term.
(2) Vacancies in the office shall be filled by the Manager.
(3) The Comptroller shall have, perform and exercise all of the
functions, powers and duties prescribed by general law and City
ordinance. The Comptroller, under the direction of the Manager,
according to the procedures and directives established by the Chief
Financial Officer, shall:
§ 3-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-42
1:41
(a) Keep and maintain books and records of all financial
transactions of the City in accordance with the standards and
requirements of the Division of Local Government in the
Department of Treasury of the State of New Jersey; have
custody of all of the public moneys of the City; make such
reports to the Chief Financial Officer as are required by law;
and, from time to time, make payments pursuant to
expenditures approved according to law.
(b) Keep and maintain all accounts of invested funds of the City or
in possession of the City as escrow or fiduciary.
B. Personnel Officer.
(1) The Personnel Officer shall serve in office for an indefinite term.
(2) Vacancies in the office shall be filled by the Manager.
(3) The Personnel Officer, under the direction of the Manager, shall:
(a) Keep and maintain the personnel files and records of all
employees, including but not limited to application materials,
time records, wage and benefit records and retirement credit
information.
(b) Keep and maintain employee health and welfare benefit
records and records of payment.
(c) Keep and maintain an index of job descriptions approved by the
Manager, with the advice and consent of the Council.
C. Purchasing and Inventory Control Officer.
(1) The Purchasing and Inventory Control Officer shall serve in office
for an indefinite term.
(2) Vacancies in the office shall be filled by the Manager.
(3) The Purchasing and Inventory Control Officer, under the direction
of the Manager and according to the directives and procedures
specified by the Chief Financial Officer, shall:
(a) Make all purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and
contractual services, except for professional or extraordinary
and unspecifiable services, either by direct purchase or by
preparing specifications for conformance with the public
contract laws of the State of New Jersey, which shall require
the letting of any contract by open public bidding.
(b) Serve as the coordinator of the Purchasing Board in the receipt
of bids, the evaluation of the same and the preparation of
recommendations through the Manager to the Council,
regarding the letting of such contracts.
§ 3-42 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-42
1:42
(c) Coordinate and conform all City purchasing activities to the
Local Public Contracts Law21 and the purchasing regulations of
the City of Brigantine.
(d) Expend such funds as are allocated by budget for the purchase
of supplies, materials and contract services.
D. Requisition list. [Added 8-2-2000 by Ord. No. 11-200022]
(1) Prior to any bill or other expenditure being made in the City of
Brigantine, the same shall be contained on a requisition list which
will be submitted for consideration and approval by the City
Council of the City of Brigantine.
(2) Any such requisition list to be approved by Council shall contain
any and all bills or other expenditures to be made on behalf of the
City of Brigantine except for the following bills and/or expenditures
which may be processed without being placed on such requisition
list for approval:
(a) Any expenditure made pursuant to any contract when said
contract has been approved by the City Council of the City of
Brigantine.
(b) Any payment made for a statutorily defined emergency
purchase.
(c) Any payment of payroll or any related cost thereto.
(d) Any payment of any utility bill or cost such as gas, electric,
telephone or other such bills and related costs.
(e) Any statutory expenditure or any payment of debt service when
the same arose from a bond ordinance or other ordinance
which was approved by the City Council of the City of
Brigantine.
(f) Any payment pursuant to a professional services contract when
said contract has been awarded by a vote of the Council of the
City of Brigantine.
(g) Any payment for items which are below the monetary amount
of the statutory bid threshold when the same were contained in
a bond ordinance which has been approved by the City Council
of the City of Brigantine.
(h) Payment for any items under the amount of $12,000.
(3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the
decision to exercise an option in any contract or to not exercise an
21.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection D as Subsection E.
§ 3-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-42
1:43
option contained in any contract shall be placed before the City
Council of the City of Brigantine, and said City Council shall vote
upon the same.
E. Economic Development and Business Relations Officer.
(1) The Economic Development and Business Relations Officer shall
serve in office for an indefinite term.
(2) Vacancies in the office shall be filled by the Manager.
(3) The Business Relations and Economic Development Officer, under
the direction of the Manager, shall:
(a) Report to the Manager and Council concerning the status of
economic and business activities within the City.
(b) Keep and maintain statistics on the development of businesses
and the conditions thereof.
(c) Advise the Manager and the Council concerning the Land Use
Ordinance and the Mercantile Ordinance23 as such ordinances
affect business development.
(d) Represent the City to the Chamber of Commerce and to the
Tourist Commission. The Economic Development and Business
Relations Officer shall not be a voting member of the Tourist
Commission.
F. Beach fee office director. [Added 11-6-2019 by Ord. No. 19-2019]
(1) Under the direction of the City Manager, the Beach Fee Office
Director is responsible for coordinating and supervising all aspects
of the Beach Fee Office, including but not limited to, the ordering of
all supplies for the Beach Fee Office, including beach tags,
uniforms and office supplies; oversees the sales of beach tags, fourwheel
drive permits, parking permits, jet ski and catamaran
permits; accounts for all monies received from the above-named
sales, and supervises the daily bank deposits received from the
sales; maintains records of all sales, reporting said sales and bank
deposits to the City Comptroller/Chief Financial Officer on a
regular basis; meets with office supervisors and employees on a
regular basis to insure efficient and orderly operation of the Beach
Fee Office; disciplining employees when the need arises; performs
related work as required.
(2) The Beach Fee Office Director, under the direction of the City
Manager, shall supervise the activities of the Beach Fee Office
Employee Supervisor, the Beach Fee Office Assistant Bookkeeper
and Beach Tag Inspectors.
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Land Use, and Ch. 210, Mercantile Businesses, respectively.
§ 3-42 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-42
1:44
(a) Beach Fee Office Employee Supervisor is responsible for
scheduling and supervision of subordinate employees and
overseeing the duties of the Office Director in his/her absence.
(b) Beach Fee Office Assistant Bookkeeper is responsible for office
sales of beach tags and permits while maintaining accurate
records of sales. Also responsible for other related office duties
as assigned by the Director.
(c) Beach Tag Inspectors patrols the City of Brigantine beaches in
order to enforce rules, regulations and ordinances pertaining
to beach tag requirements.
§ 3-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-42
1:45

ARTICLE X
Public Safety and Enforcement Departments
§ 3-43. Director of Public Safety.
§ 3-44. Department of Police.
A. The Departments of Police, Fire and Emergency Medical Services, the
Beach Patrol, the Ordinance Enforcement Department and the Uniform
Construction Code Enforcement Office shall be supervised and
administered by the Director of Public Safety, under the direction of the
Manager.
B. Vacancies in the office of Director of Public Safety shall be filled by the
Manager. The Public Safety Director shall supervise the departments
indicated. Supervision of the Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire
Department and the Uniform Construction Code Enforcement Office
shall be in the manner permitted by law, and the Director of Public
Safety shall not be considered to be the holder of the statutory position
of such Chief of Police or Fire Department or Uniform Construction
Code Official.
A. The Department of Police shall be supervised by the Chief of Police,
which office and Department shall be organized and operated pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and all other laws relative to the operation of law
enforcement activities. The City Manager shall supervise the operations
and administration of the Department, and said City Manager shall be
deemed the appropriate authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
[Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992; 9-16-1998 by Ord.
No. 16-1998; 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 14-2015]
B. The Department of Police shall consist of the Chief and of subordinate
and intermediate officers as are authorized by the City Council,
including the ranks of: [Amended 9-6-1995 by Ord. No. 21-1995]
(1) (Reserved) 24
(2) Captains.
(3) Lieutenants.
(4) Sergeants.
(5) Patrol officers.
(6) Class 1 and Class 2 special officers.
(7) Telecommunicators (dispatchers).
(8) Crossing guards.
24.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), Deputy Chief, was repealed 6-16-2004 by Ord. No.
18-2004.
§ 3-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-44
1:47
§ 3-45. Department of Fire and Emergency Medical Services.
C. The subordinate officers, in order of rank and designation and
according to the priority among offices of equal rank so established by
the Chief of Police, the Director of Public Safety and the Manager, shall
assume the command of the Department of Police in the absence of the
Chief of Police. All officers shall be sworn in the manner required of the
State of New Jersey and shall further carry out the orders of superior
officers and agencies appointed to serve or having jurisdiction over
them. All officers shall observe the rules and regulations of the
Department of Police promulgated for the proper conduct of the affairs
of the Department and the administration of justice.
D. Vacancies in all ranks of the Police Department shall be filled by the
Manager.
A. The Department of Fire and Emergency Medical Services shall be
supervised by the Chief of the Department. The Director of Public
Safety, under the direction of the City Manager, shall supervise the
operations and administration of the Department and the Chief.
B. The Department shall consist of the Chief and such subordinate and
intermediate supervisory officers as are authorized by the City Council,
which are: [Amended 5-18-1994 by Ord. No. 12-1994]
(1) (Reserved) 25
(2) Captain/EMT.
(3) Lieutenant/EMT.
(4) Firefighter/EMT.
(5) Fire Official/firefighter [Added 9-21-2005 by Ord. No. 22-2005]
C. The Fire Department shall be governed by the rules and regulations of
said Department as appropriately adopted. [Added 3-16-2005 by Ord.
No. 7-200526]
D. The subordinate officers, in order of rank and designation and
according to the priority among officers of equal rank so established by
the Chief of the Fire Department, the Director of Public Safety and the
Manager, shall assume the command of the Department in the absence
of the Chief. All officers shall be sworn in the manner required by law
and the ordinances of the City of Brigantine.
E. Vacancies in all ranks of the Fire and Emergency Medical Services
Department shall be filled by the City Manager.
25.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(1), Deputy Chief/EMT, was repealed 6-16-2004 by Ord.
No. 18-2004.
26.Editor's Note: A copy of the initial rules and regulations of the Fire Department was
"attached hereto and specifically included in this ordinance by this reference and adopted
hereby."
§ 3-44 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-46
1:48
§ 3-46. Beach Patrol. [Amended 12-1-2010 by Ord. No. 25-2010]
§ 3-47. Ordinance administration and enforcement.
A. The Department of Beach Patrol shall be supervised by the Chief of the
Beach Patrol. The Director of Public Safety, under the direction of the
City Manager, shall supervise the operations and administration of the
Department and the Chief.
B. The Department shall consist of a Chief and such subordinate and
intermediate supervisors and officers as are authorized and placed by
the City Council. Said subordinate positions, if filled, shall include the
following:
(1) Assistant Chief.
(2) Captain.
(3) Senior Lieutenant.
(4) Lieutenant/Medic.
(5) Lieutenant.
(6) Lifeguard assigned and designated to perform additional duties,
including maintenance of beach patrol equipment, instructions and
patrol officers/ E.M.T.
C. The subordinate officers, in order of rank and designation and
according to the priority among officers of equal rank so established by
the Chief, the Director of Public Safety and the Manager, shall assume
the command of the Department in the absence of the Chief. All officers
shall be sworn in as required by law and the ordinances of the City of
Brigantine.
D. Vacancies in all ranks of the Department shall be filled by the City
Manager.
A. Zoning Enforcement Officer.
(1) The Director of Public Safety, under the direction of the Manager,
shall supervise the activities of the Zoning Enforcement Officer,
who shall perform all duties required by the Municipal Land Use
Law27 and the peculiar ordinances of the City of Brigantine relative
to the development and use of land.
(2) The Zoning Officer may be assigned duties as the State Housing
Inspector for multiple dwellings as is required by law.
(3) Vacancies in the office of Zoning Officer shall be filled by the
Manager.
27.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 3-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-47
1:49
B. Mercantile Licensing Officer.
(1) The Director of Public Safety, under the direction of the Manager,
shall supervise the activities of the Mercantile Licensing Officer,
who shall perform all duties required by the Mercantile Licensing
Ordinance of the City of Brigantine.28
(2) Vacancies in the office of Mercantile Licensing Officer shall be filled
by the Manager.
C. Health Code Officer.
(1) The Director of Public Safety, under the direction of the Manager,
shall supervise the activities of the Health Code Officer, who shall
perform all duties required by the health and safety laws of the
State of New Jersey, to the extent permitted by law, and those
required by the health and safety ordinances of the City of
Brigantine.
(2) The Health Code Officer shall also serve as the Secretary of the
Board of Health representative to the Board of Health having
jurisdiction over the City of Brigantine.
(3) Vacancies in the office of Health Code Officer shall be filled by the
Manager.
D. Animal Control Officer.
(1) The Director of Public Safety, under the direction of the Manager,
shall supervise the activities of the Animal Control Officer, who
shall perform all duties required by the animal control laws of the
State of New Jersey and those required by the Animal Control
Ordinances of the City of Brigantine.29
(2) Vacancies in the office of Animal Control Officer shall be filled by
the Manager.
E. Noise Control Officer.
(1) The Director of Public Safety, under the direction of the Manager,
shall supervise the activities of the Noise Control Officer, who shall
perform all duties required by the noise control laws of the State of
New Jersey and those required by the Noise Control Ordinances of
the City of Brigantine.30
(2) Vacancies in the office of Noise Control Officer shall be filled by the
Manager.
F. Recycling Coordinator and Control Officer.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Mercantile Businesses.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Dogs and Other Animals.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Noise.
§ 3-47 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-47
1:50
§ 3-48. Uniform Construction Code Office.32
§ 3-49. Emergency Management Services Office.
(1) The Director of Public Safety, under the direction of the Manager,
shall supervise the activities of the Recycling Coordinator and
Control Officer, who shall perform all duties required by the
recycling laws of the State of New Jersey and those required by the
Recycling Ordinances of the City of Brigantine.31
(2) Vacancies in the office of Recycling Coordinator and Control Officer
shall be filled by the Manager.
A. The Uniform Construction Code Officer shall be supervised by the
Construction Official, who shall possess such licenses as are required to
act as a Construction Official under the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code Act33 and applicable subcodes thereof. The Director
of Public Safety, under the Direction of the Manager, shall supervise the
administration and operations of the Construction Office.
B. The Construction Official, under the direction and supervision of the
Public Safety Director and the Manager, shall supervise and coordinate
the activities of all third-party inspectors and firms contracted for the
purpose of providing required inspection and plan review services.
C. The Construction Official shall account for and maintain such funds as
are collected in and for all such activities of the Department.
D. Vacancies in the office of the Construction Official shall be filled by the
Manager.
A. The Emergency Management Services Office shall be supervised by the
Coordinator, Emergency Management Services. The Director of Public
Safety, under the direction of the Manager, shall supervise the
administration and operations of the Emergency Management Services
Officer.
B. Vacancies in the office of the Emergency Management Services Officer
shall be filled by the Manager.
C. The Emergency Management Office is hereby reestablished in the City
of Brigantine.
(1) Findings. The City of Brigantine is threatened by potential
disasters of unprecedented size and destructiveness, resulting
from fire, flood, hurricane, tropical storm, plane crash, hazardous
or toxic materials and other natural and man-made causes. In order
to ensure that preparations of this City will be adequate to deal
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 242, Recycling.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Construction Codes, Uniform.
33.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 3-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-49
1:51
with such disasters and generally to provide for the common
defense and to protect the public peace, health and safety and to
preserve the lives and property of the residents of this City, it is
hereby found and declared to be necessary to:
(a) Create an emergency management organization.
(b) Provide for the rendering of mutual aid to other municipalities
within the State of New Jersey and adjoining states and to
cooperate with the county and state governments with respect
to carrying out emergency functions.
(c) Create an Emergency Operations Plan for all divisions of City
government in the event of an emergency.
(2) Purpose and policy. It is further declared to be the purpose of this
section and the policy of this City that all emergency functions of
the state government, including its various departments and
agencies, of the county government and of the other municipalities
and private agencies of every type be included in the Emergency
Operations Plan so that a comprehensive plan can be developed to
make use of all available resources in the event that a disaster does
occur.
(3) Creation of organization. It is the purpose of this section and the
policy of this City to create an emergency management
organization in conformity with the Civil Defense and Disaster
Control Acts, as directed in N.J.S.A. App. A:9-30 through A:9-63,
Chapter 438 of the Laws of 1953, as amended.
(4) Name of organization. The name of this organization shall be the
"City of Brigantine Office of Emergency Management."
(5) Appointment of Coordinator; staff. The City Manager of the City of
Brigantine shall be responsible for the appointment of a qualified
Coordinator of this office, pursuant to state and federal guidelines
as of the date of his/her appointment The City Manager shall
appoint a Deputy Coordinator and other staff as may be needed to
effectively operate this office, and the position of Deputy
Coordinator and other staff shall be created within the emergency
management organization. It is the responsibility of the staff, under
the direction of the Coordinator, to create and test the Emergency
Operations Plan and to be prepared to activate it whenever
necessary.
(6) Duties of organization. The Officer of Emergency Management
(OEM) shall carry out and enforce such orders, rules and
regulations as issued by the City Manager or the chain of
command, as outlined by the Emergency Operations Plan, under
the authority of this section.
§ 3-49 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-49
1:52
(7) Duties and responsibilities of Coordinator. The position of
Emergency Management Coordinator is created by this section.
The responsibilities, duties and authority of the Emergency
Management Coordinator shall be:
(a) Planning, activating, coordinating and conducting disaster
control operations within the City of Brigantine.
(b) Establishing, equipping, staffing and supervising the
Emergency Operating Center.
(c) Coordinating the utilization of local resources and allied
services and agencies in an emergency.
(d) Implementing mutual aid agreements, as appropriate.
(e) Alerting and activating, as required, the municipal
organization upon receipt of warning or notification of an
emergency situation.
(f) Requesting assistance from County Emergency Management
when resources are insufficient to cope with an emergency.
(g) Other responsibilities, duties and authority as outlined in the
Emergency Operations Plan.
§ 3-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-49
1:53

ARTICLE XI
Public Works Department
§ 3-50. Subdepartments; Superintendent; Administrator.
§ 3-51. Streets and Municipal Infrastructure.
§ 3-52. Water and Sewer Utility Operations.
§ 3-53. Public Buildings, Grounds and Facilities.
§ 3-54. Mechanical and Automotive Repair.
A. The Public Works Department, including the Streets and Municipal
Infrastructure, Public Buildings, Grounds and Facilities, Mechanical
and Automotive Repair Subdepartments, shall be supervised by the
Superintendent of Public Works. The City Manager shall supervise the
Superintendent of Public Works. [Amended 3-7-2012 by Ord. No.
9-2012]
B. The Superintendent shall supervise the Administrator, Public Works
Department, who shall perform such administrative duties as are
assigned by the Superintendent of Public Works.
C. Vacancies in the offices of Superintendent and Administrator, Public
Works Department, shall be filled by the Manager.
A. The Subdepartment of Streets and Municipal Infrastructure of the
Department of Public Works, shall be supervised by the Supervisor of
the Department. The Superintendent shall supervise the operations and
administration of the Subdepartment of Streets and Municipal
Infrastructure.
B. Vacancies in the office of Supervisor shall be filled by the Manager.
A. The Water and Sewer Utility Operations in the City of Brigantine shall
be supervised by the Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Utility/
Engineer. The Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Utility/Engineer
shall report to and be supervised by the City Manager. The
Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Utility/Engineer shall be
responsible for performing all of the functions as set forth in the job
descriptions for said positions. [Amended 3-7-2012 by Ord. No.
9-2012]
B. Vacancies in the office of Supervisor shall be filled by the Manager.
A. The Subdepartment of Public Buildings, Grounds and Facilities shall be
supervised by the Supervisor of the Department. The Superintendent of
Public Works shall supervise the operations and administration of the
Subdepartment.
B. Vacancies in the office of Supervisor shall be filled by the Manager.
§ 3-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-54
1:55
A. The Subdepartment of Mechanical and Automotive Repair shall be
supervised by the Supervisor of the Department. The Superintendent of
Public Works shall supervise the operations and administration of the
Subdepartment.
B. Vacancies in the office of Supervisor shall be filled by the Manager.
§ 3-54 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-54
1:56
ARTICLE XII
Boards and Commissions
§ 3-55. Board of Education.
§ 3-56. Board of School Estimate.
§ 3-57. Planning Board.34
§ 3-58. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. There shall continue, within the City of Brigantine, an appointed Board
of Education, or a Type I Board of Education, as is defined in Title 18A
of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated. The membership of the Board of
Education shall continue in their respective offices until the expiration
of their tenure or until their successor is appointed and qualified.
B. All vacancies in the Board of Education shall be filled by the Mayor.
A. There shall continue within the City of Brigantine a Board of School
Estimate, as such is defined in N.J.S.A. 18A:22-1, consisting of two
members of the Board of Education, appointed by it, two members of
the governing body of the municipality, appointed by it, and the Mayor.
B. All Council appointments to the Board of School Estimate shall be
appointed by the City Council.
C. The Mayor shall be the fifth member of the Board of School Estimate.
A. The Planning Board is hereby reestablished as a nine-member Planning
Board, with four alternate members. [Amended 2-5-2003 by Ord. No.
2-2003]
B. The membership of the Planning Board shall be as is set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23 and 40:55D-23.1.
C. The Mayor or the Manager, in accordance with New Jersey statutes,
shall be the Class I member.
D. The Council position, Class III, shall be appointed by the City Council.
E. Vacancies in the office of Planning Board member or alternate shall be
filled in the manner of original appointment and only for the unexpired
term.
F. The Secretary of the Planning Board shall serve as the administrative
officer in charge of the receipt and processing of applications and shall
perform such duties as are assigned by the Chairperson of the Planning
Board. Vacancies in the office of Planning Board Secretary shall be
filled by the Manager.
34.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 198, Art. II, Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 3-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-58
1:57
§ 3-59. (Reserved)35
§ 3-60. (Reserved)36
§ 3-61. Recreation Advisory Commission; Director of Recreation.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby reestablished as a sevenmember
Zoning Board of Adjustment, with two alternate members.
B. Vacancies in the Zoning Board shall be appointed by the City Council.
C. Vacancies in the office of a Zoning Board of Adjustment member shall
be filled in the manner of original appointment and only for the
unexpired term.
D. The Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be the
administrative officer in charge of the receipt and processing of Zoning
Board of Adjustment applications and shall perform such duties as are
assigned by the Chairperson of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Vacancies in the office of the Secretary of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be filled by the Manager.
A. Recreation Advisory Commission.
(1) There is hereby reestablished the Recreation Advisory Commission
of 12 members, who shall be residents of the City of Brigantine.
Terms of office shall be for one year. [Amended 2-16-1994 by
Ord. No. 1-1994; 4-18-2006 by Ord. No. 2-2006]
(2) All members shall serve without compensation, and vacancies shall
be appointed by the City Council.
(3) The Recreation Advisory Commission shall:
(a) Advise the City Council and Manager as to recreation policies,
proposed or existing ordinances, capital development and
maintenance of facilities.
(b) Serve as the representative body for sports clubs and
organizations, facilities use and sharing and programs of the
City.
(c) Make recommendations to the Manager concerning the
allocation of City funds to users to the City recreation facilities.
(d) Make recommendations to the Manager and the Council
concerning the fees to be charged users of the facilities.
35.Editor’s Note: Former § 3-59, Environmental Commission, as amended, was repealed
3-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1-2013, as abolished.
36.Editor’s Note: Former § 3-60, Local Assistance Board, as amended, was repealed 3-6-2013
by Ord. No. 1-2013, as abolished.
§ 3-58 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-61
1:58
§ 3-62. (Reserved)37
§ 3-63. (Reserved)38
§ 3-64. Clean Communities Act Committee.39
(e) Make recommendations to the Manager and the Council
concerning the training and certification of youth sports
coaches who use City facilities.
(f) Make recommendations to the City Manager and the
Superintendent of Public Works concerning the day-to-day
maintenance and operation of the recreation facilities.
B. Director of Recreation.
(1) The Director of Recreation shall serve under the direction of the
Manager and shall perform duties, including those which are as set
forth herein, in support of programs and activities of the
Recreation Department. The Director of Recreation shall
coordinate and plan programs, supervise the persons hired for the
implementation of such programs, supervise the collection of fees
and supervise the preparation of facilities, sports fields and
buildings for such activities. The Director shall further develop,
plan and organize the implementation of a comprehensive program
for recreation within the City as directed by the City Council. The
Director shall further make recommendations to the Manager, the
Recreation Commission and the City Council in the development of
recreation programs. The Director shall further coordinate the
requests for funds from various sports and recreation organizations
and prepare recommendations to the Manager concerning the
budget for such purposes.
(2) Vacancies in the office of the Director of Recreation shall be filled
by the Manager.
A. There is hereby established the City of Brigantine Clean Communities
Act Committee to make recommendations concerning the
administration of the Clean Communities and Recycling Act, N.J.S.A.
13:1E-92 et seq., and to assist the City of Brigantine in developing and
implementing regulations concerning the control of litter and other
waste-generating activities and to collect such information concerning
the program of waste and recycling activities as is required for any
annual report relative to the application for and receipt of State of New
37.Editor’s Note: Former § 3-62, Tourist and Business Development Commission, was
repealed 3-6-2013 by Ord. No. 1-2013, as abolished.
38.Editor’s Note: Former § 3-63, Shade Tree Commission, was repealed 3-6-2013 by Ord. No.
1-2013, as abolished.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Art. III, Clean Communities.
§ 3-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-64
1:59
§ 3-65. Lifeguard Pension Commission.
§ 3-66. Committee/Alliance to Prevent Alcohol and Drug Abuse.
Jersey aid for such programs available pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.2
and other provisions of law.
B. The City of Brigantine Clean Communities Act Committee shall consist
of five members, who shall serve terms of one year. Vacancies in the
membership of the Clean Communities Act Committee shall be
appointed by the City Council.
C. The Recycling Coordinator and Control Officer, in the Department of
Public Safety, shall serve as the advisor to the Clean Communities Act
Committee.
A. There is hereby reestablished the Lifeguard Pension Commission, to
administer the pension fund for lifeguards established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 43:13-23 et seq. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:13-28, the Lifeguard
Pension Commission shall consist of four members, the initial members
of which and vacancies on which shall be appointed by the City Council.
One member shall be a superior officer of the life guard force, one shall
be a lifeguard, and two members shall be citizens of the City of
Brigantine and not members of the lifeguard force. Members of the
Commission shall serve terms of four years and until their successors
are appointed or have qualified. Members shall receive no
compensation.
B. The pension fund shall be funded and administered in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 43:13-23 to 43:13-29, inclusive.
A. There is hereby established within the City of Brigantine, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-15 and Chapter 51, Section 8, of the Laws of 198940 the
Committee/Alliance to Prevent Alcohol and Drug Abuse, which shall
consist of 15 members, who shall serve terms of one year.
B. Vacancies in the membership of the Committee shall be appointed by
the City Council.
C. The purpose of the Committee shall be to promote moderation and
responsibility in the use of alcoholic beverages and to make
recommendations to the City Council concerning the City Council's
policy, legislation and the City's administration of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act.41 The purpose of the Committee shall also be to
promote the elimination of drug abuse and to make recommendations
to the City Council concerning the City's policy and legislation and the
City's administration of the laws concerning enforcement and
elimination of the use of controlled dangerous substances. The
40.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-8.
41.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 3-64 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-66
1:60
Committee shall be further empowered to apply for grants from the
Drug Enforcement and Demands Reduction Fund, pursuant to law.
§ 3-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-66
1:61

ARTICLE XIII
Municipal Court
§ 3-67. Court reestablished.
There is reestablished a Municipal Court in and for the City of Brigantine,
pursuant to the Laws of the State of New Jersey, 1948, Chapter 264, as
amended and supplemented.42
§ 3-68. Municipal Court Judge.
§ 3-69. Name of Court.
The name of the Court shall be the "Municipal Court of Brigantine, Atlantic
County." The Court shall have such functions, powers, duties and
jurisdiction as are set forth in the enabling legislation, all as amended and
supplemented.
§ 3-70. Sessions.
All sessions of the Court shall be held in the City Hall, Court and Council
Chambers, City of Brigantine, at the time designated by the Court.
§ 3-71. Clerk of Municipal Court; Deputy Clerks.
A. The Municipal Judge shall be an attorney at law of the State of New
Jersey, eligible to serve as a Judge of the Municipal Court.
B. The Municipal Judge shall serve a term of three years commencing on
January 1 of the year of first appointment, and continue to serve until a
successor is appointed and qualified.
C. Vacancies in the office of the Municipal Court Judge shall be appointed
by the City Council.
A. There shall be established the position of Clerk of the Municipal Court,
who shall perform such functions and duties as shall be prescribed by
law, by the rules applicable to Municipal Courts and by the Municipal
Judge. Such duties shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Carrying out all rules, regulations, policies, procedures, accounting
functions and report functions as are prescribed for the operation
of a municipal court.
(2) Receiving and docketing all complaints made by law enforcement
officers, citizens and others and scheduling the same for hearing;
and interviewing all persons seeking to make complaints or
referring the complainant to the appropriate law or ordinance
enforcement officer.
42.Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 3-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-71
1:63
(3) Attending Court; taking minutes or other required records of the
proceedings; keeping and maintaining exhibits and evidence; and
preparing and issuing summonses, warrants and commitments.
(4) Taking and preparing bail bonds; making inquiry as to sufficiency
thereof; and receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
B. There shall be such Deputy Clerks of the Court as are necessary to
carry out the duties of the Clerk.
C. Vacancies in the office of Clerk of the Court and Deputy Clerk shall be
filled by the Manager.
§ 3-71 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-71
1:64
ARTICLE XIV
Employee Rights and Benefits
§ 3-72. Compensation. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
Each employee of the City of Brigantine shall receive such compensation as
is approved by the Council, as set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance of
the City of Brigantine.43
§ 3-73. Approval for part-time employment.
Part-time employment shall be approved by the Manager or by supervisors
appointed under the Manager.
§ 3-74. Benefits and conditions of employment. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
Each employee shall be entitled to earn such vacation, personal days off and
sick-leave credits as are granted to employees of any collective bargaining
unit over which or in which such employee serves. Should such employee
not be a member of any such bargaining unit, the general rules and
regulations promulgated by the Manager, reported to the City Council for its
advice and consent, where applicable, and kept on file with the City Clerk,
shall control the benefits received by such individuals; or the conditions of
employment for any other individual shall be approved by contracts for such
purpose as are negotiated by the Manager and presented to the Council for
approval.
A. All full-time managerial employees, including but not limited to the City
Manager, Deputy City Manager, Chief Financial Officer, City Clerk,
Deputy City Clerk, Administrator of the Court, Deputy Administrator of
the Court, Comptroller, Personnel Officer, Purchasing Agent, Director of
Public Safety, Chiefs of Police, Fire and Beach Patrol, Superintendent
and Supervisors of Public Works and the Construction Official, shall
receive such compensation, credits, and benefits as are set forth in the
rules and regulations relative to such classes of employees as are
promulgated by the Manager, reported to the City Council for its advice
and consent, where applicable, and kept on file with the City Clerk. Of
those specifically mentioned in the previous sentence, the City
Manager, Deputy City Manager, City Clerk, Director of Public Safety,
Chiefs of Police, Fire and Beach Patrol, Superintendent of Public Works
and Construction Official shall be subject to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-1.3 and be
bona fide residents of this City. [Amended 12-17-2003 by Ord. No.
23-2003; 4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 12-2004]
B. All full-time and part-time employees of the City of Brigantine shall
perform their duties under the supervision of the City Manager or the
Council, as provided by law, and all departments and employees thereof
shall have such further duties, functions and services as shall be
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 61, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 3-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-74
1:65
§ 3-75. Administrative rules and regulations for employees and
departments. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
As soon as is practicable after the adoption of this chapter, the City Manager
shall, with the advice and consent of the Council, where applicable, prepare
general administrative rules and regulations concerning the departments
and employees of the City, which said rules and regulations shall include but
not be limited to provisions governing the following:
required under the supervision, order and direction of the Manager or
of the Council, as the case may be.
C. All part-time employees or advisors of the City of Brigantine shall
perform their duties under the supervision of the City Manager, except
for those specific employees who report only to the Council, as is set
forth in this Administrative Code, and shall have such duties, functions
and services as shall be required under the supervision, order and
direction of the Manager or the Council, as the case may be.
A. The classification of all City employees at the department level or
below, based on the duties, authority and responsibility of each
position, with adequate provision for job classification and
reclassification of any position whenever warranted by changed
circumstances.
B. The policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and removal
for cause.
C. The policies and procedures regulating promotion and the right to
transfer among available positions within the City.
D. The hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for vacation
and sick leave, including accumulations thereof and the rights of
surrender upon termination of employment or from time to time.
E. The policies and procedures governing persons holding temporary,
provisional and probationary appointments.
F. The policies and procedures regarding in-service training, attainment
of necessary licensure or required education.
G. Grievance procedures, including hearings for the resolution of such
grievances and appeals therefrom.
H. The manner of hiring vacancies to positions, including the manner of
advertising for receipt of applications for positions, the manner of
review and evaluation of applicants, the manner of testing for any
position for which a formal test shall be administered and the manner of
keeping lists of applicants and eligible persons on such lists.
I. The application of any residency requirement to a particular position,
as such may be allowed or required by law or by the job.
§ 3-74 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-75
1:66
§ 3-76. Continuation of vested rights.
§ 3-77. Indemnification of officers and employees.
§ 3-78. Ethics Board.44
There is hereby established an Ethics Board, which shall consist of five
members, to be appointed by the City Council. Each member shall be a
resident of the City of Brigantine, and none shall be an employee or officer
of the City. The Ethics Board shall choose from its members a Chairperson.
J. The manner of acceptance of applications for retirement and the
manner of payment or allowance of any terminal leave.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to alter the vested right of
any employee to accumulated and unpaid benefits upon termination by
nonselection for continuation in positions by reason of the adoption of
this chapter.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to alter the vested right of
any employee to accumulated and unpaid benefits upon selection for
continuation in the same or substantially similar position after the
adoption of this chapter.
A. Pursuant to statutory authority, the City does hereby authorize and
provide indemnification to its employees and officers and advisors and
appointees, in accordance with indemnification provisions applicable to
all public employees within this state.
B. The City does hereby authorize and provide indemnification to its
employees, appointees and officials in accordance with the
indemnification provisions of N.J.S.A. 59:10-4, as amended and
supplemented.
C. The intention of the City of Brigantine is to provide indemnification and
defense in as broad a manner as is authorized by state statute and
common law. This shall include indemnification for exemplary or
punitive damages resulting from the employee’s civil violation of state
or federal law if, in the opinion of the City Council, the act committed
upon which the damages are based did not constitute actual fraud,
actual malice, willful misconduct or an intentional wrong. Additionally,
full and complete defense and indemnification shall be provided to any
professional performing services on behalf of the City of Brigantine,
even if said professional is considered an independent contractor, if any
charge or charges arise against said professional in relationship to
services being performed on behalf of the City of Brigantine. [Added
2-15-2006 by Ord. No. 6-2006; amended 3-19-2008 by Ord. No.
7-2008]
44.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 25, Ethics.
§ 3-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-78
1:67

ARTICLE XV
Ward Commission45
§ 3-79. Commission reestablished.
There is hereby reestablished in the City of Brigantine the Brigantine Ward
Commission, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:44-9 to 40:44-18.
§ 3-80. Membership.
Membership in the Brigantine Ward Commission shall include the Municipal
Clerk and the appointed members of the Atlantic County Board of Elections,
during their respective terms of office.
§ 3-81. Compensation.
Compensation of each of the Ward Commissioners and additional
compensation to the City Clerk shall be as set forth in the ordinance of the
City of Brigantine calling the Ward Commission into session.46
§ 3-82. Expenses.
All regularly incurred expenses of the Ward Commission shall be
reimbursed upon certification to the City Clerk of the City of Brigantine
of such service of each Ward Commissioner and of the Ward Commission
as a whole. No individual expense of any Ward Commissioner shall be
reimbursed unless approved by the affirmative vote of the members of the
Commission. The Ward Commission is authorized to incur expense for the
services of the City Engineer and City Solicitor, as such are required.
§ 3-83. Applicability of state law.
The Ward Commission shall act in accordance with the Municipal Ward
Law.47
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Ward Commission.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 77, Ward Commission.
47.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:44-9 et seq.
§ 3-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-83
1:69

ARTICLE XVI
Repealer; Temporary Effective Period
§ 3-84. Specific repealer. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
All ordinances, resolutions and prior actions of the City of Brigantine
inconsistent with this Code and any chapter thereof, including those
portions of the Code of the City of Brigantine, as prepared by General
Code Publishers Corporation, proposed for adoption, found at Chapters
1-81, excepting the portion designated as Chapter 7, Claims Approval and
Payment, be and the same are hereby repealed and of no further force and
effect.
§ 3-85. Temporary effective period of chapter pending adoption.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-207, this chapter shall be temporarily effective
within the City of Brigantine from and after the date of its introduction, for
a period not to exceed 30 days, while it is pending as an ordinance.
§ 3-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-85
1:71

ARTICLE XVII
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Added 8-2-2006 by Ord. No. 20-2006]
§ 3-86. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the City of Brigantine's responsibility to assist
in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985.
§ 3-87. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the City of Brigantine to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the City of Brigantine.
§ 3-88. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison position and
compensation; powers and duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the City of
Brigantine.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the City of
Brigantine, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out:
(1) Serving as the City of Brigantine's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households.
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the City of
Brigantine's Fair Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
§ 3-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-88
1:73
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
(6) If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the City of Brigantine as described in
Subsection F below,
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the City of Brigantine may contract with
or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged
by the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the City of Brigantine.
If the City of Brigantine contracts with another entity to administer all
or any part of the affordable housing program, including the
affordability controls and affirmative marketing plan, the Municipal
Housing Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at
the at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison. (Select only those tasks that are not delegated specifically to an
approved administrative agent as part of a contract and will therefore
be the responsibility of the Municipal Housing Liaison.)
(1) Affirmative marketing:
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Brigantine and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as requirements and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification:
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination or eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
§ 3-88 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-88
1:74
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendixes J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Brigantine when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls:
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
record mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental:
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing request from unit owners:
(a) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to take out home
equity loans or refinance during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
§ 3-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-88
1:75
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement:
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved be the DCA;
(f) Establishing a rent-to-equity program;
(g) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(h) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 3-88 BRIGANTINE CODE § 3-88
1:76
Chapter 5
ARTS AND CULTURAL COMMISSION
§ 5-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established within the City of Brigantine an Arts and
Cultural Commission which will be known as the "Brigantine Arts and
Cultural Commission."
§ 5-2. Membership. [Amended 2-16-1994 by Ord. No. 2-1994;
2-15-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
The Brigantine Arts and Cultural Commission shall have 13 members, and
each said member shall be a resident of the City of Brigantine.
§ 5-3. Appointment of members. [Amended 2-16-1994 by Ord. No.
2-1994; 2-15-2006 by Ord. No. 5-2006]
The 13 members of the Brigantine Arts and Cultural Commission shall be
appointed by the Council of the City of Brigantine.
§ 5-4. Terms of office.
The term of members of the Brigantine Arts and Cultural Commission shall
be for a period of one year. Members may serve for successive years if they
receive reappointment to additional one-year terms.
§ 5-5. Filling of vacancies.
If any vacancy in the Brigantine Arts and Cultural Commission is created
due to death, disability, resignation or other reason, said vacancy shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the City Council of the City
of Brigantine.
§ 5-6. Compensation.
No member of the Brigantine Arts and Cultural Commission shall receive
any compensation for being a member thereof.
§ 5-7. Purpose.
The purpose of the Brigantine Arts and Cultural Commission is to establish,
sponsor, promote, display, circulate, maintain and otherwise advance
artistic and cultural endeavors within the City of Brigantine.
§ 5-8. Funding.
The City of Brigantine shall not be responsible for funding the Brigantine
Arts and Cultural Commission but may provide funding with the approval
of the City Manager and City Council of said City of Brigantine. If any
§ 3-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-8
1:77
said funding is provided by the City of Brigantine, strict requirements
concerning accounting, budgetary procedures, disbursements,
expenditures and other recordkeeping concerning funds received and spent
shall be maintained by the Brigantine Arts and Cultural Commission in a
manner satisfactory to the City Manager and Chief Financial Officer of the
City of Brigantine.
§ 5-9. Annual report.
The Brigantine Arts and Cultural Commission shall submit an annual report
to the City Council of the City of Brigantine detailing the activities which
have occurred in the City of Brigantine during the past three hundred sixtyfive-
day period which promote artistic and cultural endeavors in said City of
Brigantine. Said report shall be due at the annual reorganization meeting of
the City Council of the City of Brigantine.
Chapter 6
BRIGANTINE BEACH COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and dune protection — See Ch. 101. Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
§ 6-1. Establishment.
The Brigantine Beach Committee (hereinafter the "Beach Committee") be
and is hereby established as an advisory committee to the City Council.
§ 6-2. Purpose.
The general purpose for the Beach Committee shall include but not be
limited to:
A. Advising City Council in regard to maintenance and operation of the
beaches in the City of Brigantine.
B. Encouraging the City's staff to pursue practices to maintain the
environmental and recreational values and goals of the City beaches.
C. Work with the existing groups within the City whose actions affect
environmental and recreational issues impacting the City beaches so as
to eliminate duplication and assure that important tasks are covered.
D. Provide input for the City of Brigantine website.
E. Provide suggestions for the ongoing maintenance and improvement of
City beaches to the City Council.
§ 5-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 6-3
1:78
§ 6-3. Membership; terms of office.
§ 6-4. Meetings.
Meetings of the Beach Committee may be scheduled by the Chair at his/her
discretion.
Chapter 7
CLAIMS APPROVAL AND PAYMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Comptroller — See Ch. 3, § 3-42. Purchasing Board — See 3.
§ 7-1. Detailed bill required.
Any person claiming payment from the City of Brigantine shall first present
a detailed bill of items supplied or services performed, to the responsible
executive agency, specifying particularly how the bill or demand is made up,
with a certification of the party claiming payment that it is correct.
A. The Brigantine City Council shall appoint nine City residents to serve as
the Beach Committee with at least one member being a member of the
City Council. The Beach Committee shall appoint a Chair of the Beach
Committee. The Beach Committee shall elect from among its members
a Vice Chair and a Secretary/Treasurer. In addition to the members
referred to herein, the Beach Committee shall also include ex officio
members, including the City Manager, the Director of Public Works, the
Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department, the Chief of the Beach
Patrol, and such other City employees as the Manager may, from time to
time, designate. Each of the ex officio members may name a designee of
his or her respective Department to serve in the absence of the
designated ex officio member.
B. Beach Committee members shall serve a one-year term. The initial nine
members of the Beach Committee members from the date of
appointment until December 31, 2017. Thereafter, the Beach
Committee appointments shall be made at the time of the
Reorganization Meeting of City Government in the City of Brigantine.
C. The Beach Committee shall recruit City volunteers to work on Beach
Committee projects. The names of volunteers shall periodically be
submitted to the City Manager.
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-2
1:79
§ 7-2. Purchase order required. [Amended 11-25-1987 by Ord. No.
20-1987]
No bill, claim or demand shall be considered for payment unless it shall
be presented on a proper City purchase order. The purchase order must
include a certification of the department head or other municipal official
responsible for the particular function from which the billing is derived, that
said department head or municipal official has personal knowledge of the
fact that the goods have been received by, or the services rendered to, the
City of Brigantine, and that those services or goods are consistent with any
existing contract or purchase order. The City Comptroller shall have the
duty to audit, warrant and make recommendations on all claims and bills.
§ 7-3. Bills to be presented to governing body; examination of bills.
[Amended 11-25-1987 by Ord. No. 20-1987]
The bill or claim, duly certified, shall be presented to the City Comptroller
for inclusion on the agenda at the next formal meeting of the governing
body, and it shall be the duty of the City Comptroller to examine all bills or
claims submitted for payment in order to ascertain if proper administrative
procedures have been followed.
§ 7-4. Approval or disapproval of claims. [Amended 11-25-1987 by
Ord. No. 20-1987]
A claim shall be considered by the governing body which shall approve the
same, except that said governing body may reject any claim presented to
it after having stated the reason for such rejection. Any disapproved claim
shall be referred back to the City Comptroller with such instructions that
the governing body may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 7-5. Record of claims to be kept.
It shall be the duty of the Municipal Clerk to record all claims in the official
minutes indicating that the governing body has by formal action approved of
the same with appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or rejected.
§ 7-6. Preparation of checks; payment of claims. [Amended
11-25-1987 by Ord. No. 20-1987]
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved by the
governing body and recorded the same in the official minutes, he shall turn
said claims over to the City Comptroller, who shall forthwith prepare the
necessary check or checks for the payment thereof, which check or checks
shall be signed by any two of the three members of the governing body and
countersigned by any one of the Chief Financial Officer or City Comptroller
or whichever other municipal official may be designated by resolution of
the governing body. After preparing checks for the payment of the claim,
the City Comptroller shall record them in the proper books of account and
thereafter mail, or cause to be delivered, the checks to the claimants.
§ 7-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 7-6
1:80
Chapter 12
CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 3. Claims approval and payment — See Ch. 7.
§ 7-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:81

ARTICLE I
Emergency Contracts
[Adopted 4-16-2009 by Ord. No. 8-2009]
§ 12-1. Awarding of contracts without public bidding.
The City of Brigantine is authorized to award contracts without public
advertising for bids or public bidding whenever an emergency affecting the
public health, safety or welfare requires the immediate delivery of goods or
the performance of services.
§ 12-2. Adherence to procedure.
No such emergency contract shall be awarded unless the procedure set
forth in this article is followed.
§ 12-3. Procedure for authorization.
The City Manager, after consultation with the City Engineer, shall notify
the Purchasing Agent or, if the Purchasing Agent is unavailable, the Chief
Financial Officer of the need for the performance of an emergency contract,
the nature of the emergency, the time that it occurred and the need for
invoking this article. If the Purchasing Agent or, in the Purchasing Agent's
absence, the Chief Financial Officer is satisfied that an emergency exists,
then he is specifically authorized to award a contract or contracts for the
purpose necessary to respond to the emergency without the need for public
advertisement or public bidding. The City Manager shall file a written
notification with the Purchasing Agent, as soon as practicable after the
emergency, identifying the emergency, the time it occurred and the need
for emergency contracting. Any delay in providing said written notification
shall not serve to void the emergency contract awarded.
§ 12-4. Conditions for implementation of emergency purchasing
procedure.
This emergency purchasing procedure may not be used unless the need for
goods or services could not have been reasonably foreseen or the need for
such goods or services has arisen notwithstanding a good-faith effort on
the part of the City of Brigantine to plan for the purchase of any goods or
services required by the contracting unit.
§ 12-5. Duration of contract.
Any emergency contract awarded pursuant to this article shall be for a
limited duration necessary only to meet the immediate needs of the
emergency. For example, under no circumstances shall the emergency
purchasing procedure be used to enter into a multiyear contract.
§ 12-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:83
§ 12-6. Alternative authorization permitted.
To the extent that either the City Manager or City Engineer is unavailable
during emergency services, the available individual may invoke the
procedure set forth in this article after consultation and agreement with the
Chief Financial Officer.
§ 12-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 12-6
1:84
Chapter 13
(RESERVED)
Chapter 16
DEFENDER, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 3, Art. XIII.
§ 12-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:85

ARTICLE I
Fee for Representation
[Adopted 3-16-1994 by Ord. No. 6-1994; amended in its entirety
12-17-1997 by Ord. No. 16-1997]
§ 16-1. Statutory authority.
The Municipal Public Defender in the City of Brigantine shall be covered by
the Municipal Public Defender's Act.48
§ 16-2. Fee required; waiver; excess funds.
Any person applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender or
Court-approved counsel within the City of Brigantine shall be required to
pay an application fee of not more than $200, but said amount shall only
be as necessary to pay the costs of Municipal Public Defender services.
In accordance with the guidelines promulgated by the Supreme Court,
the Municipal Court may waive any required application fee, in whole or
in part, only if the Court determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and
convincing showing by the applicant, that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation. The Municipal
Court may permit a person to pay the application fee over a specific period
of time not to exceed four months. Funds collected pursuant to this section
shall be deposited in a dedicated fund and administered by the Chief
Financial Officer of the City of Brigantine. Such funds shall be used
exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of a
Municipal Public Defender including, when required, expert and lay
investigation and testimony. Beginning in 1999, if it is determined by the
Division of Local Government Services during its annual review of the
City of Brigantine's budget that the amount of money in a dedicated fund
established pursuant to this section exceeds by more than 25% the amount
which the City of Brigantine expended during the prior year providing the
services of a Municipal Public Defender, the amount in excess of the amount
expended shall be forwarded to the Criminal Disposition and Review
Collection Fund and administered by the Victims of Crime Compensation
Board.
§ 16-3. Time parameters.
The provisions of this article shall take effect pursuant to the time
parameters as established in the law as set forth herein.49
48.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.
49.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:24-1 et seq.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-3
1:87
Chapter 19
(RESERVED)
Chapter 21
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
§ 21-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established within the City of Brigantine Beach an
Economic Development Committee known as the "Brigantine Beach
Economic Development Committee."
§ 21-2. Membership.
§ 21-3. Terms.
The term of each member shall be for one year. The initial term shall
commence as of the adoption of this chapter and shall expire on December
31, 2001. Thereafter, each appointment or reappointment shall be from
January 1 to December 31 of any given year. All members shall, on an annual
basis, be appointed or reappointed by the City Council. There shall be no
limitations on the number of years which any member can be reappointed
to the Economic Development Committee.
§ 21-4. Chairperson.
The Chairperson shall be as selected by the Council of the City of
Brigantine.
A. There shall be 11 members on the Brigantine Beach Economic
Development Committee. Said members shall be appointed by City
Council. [Amended 2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2-2004]
B. The following individuals must always be a member of said Economic
Development Committee:
(1) Mayor.
(2) Two Council members as selected by Council.
(3) City Manager.
(4) Member of the Brigantine Beach Tourism Commission.
(5) Three members of the community that are involved with business
establishments within the community as selected by Council.
(6) Three other members to be selected by City Council. [Amended
2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 2-2004]
§ 16-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 21-5
1:88
§ 21-5. Goals and objectives.
The Economic Development Committee is created and formed for the
following purposes:
§ 21-6. Powers.
In furtherance of its goals and objectives as set forth above, the Economic
Development Committee shall have the following powers:
§ 21-7. Limitations.
The Committee shall specifically not have the power to:
A. To encourage the location, improvement and viability of commercial
establishments within the City.
B. To, in conjunction with the Brigantine Beach Tourism Commission,
promote and advertise the economic advantages and opportunities of
the City of Brigantine Beach in general and of commercial
establishments in particular.
C. To solicit any commercial or business enterprises for settlement in the
City as best calculated in the judgment of the Committee to advance the
interests of the City and of its citizens.
D. To undertake such other activities in an effort to attract and improve
commercial businesses and advance economic development within the
City.
A. To recommend to the City Council the hiring of any consultants
necessary, in the opinion of the Committee, to further the goals and
objectives of said Committee.
B. With prior approval from the City Council, to apply for any and all
municipal, county, state or federal grants or other aid which can be
used in the furtherance of the goals and objectives of the Committee.
C. Adopt suitable bylaws, with the approval of City Council, for the
management of the meetings and affairs of the Committee.
D. To send and receive any correspondence or other communications in
furtherance of the goals and objectives of the Committee.
E. To conduct surveys or otherwise inquire into the advantages or
disadvantages of taking any action to promote the goals and objectives
of the Committee.
F. To promote and advertise the economic advantages and opportunities
of the City of Brigantine Beach in conformity with the goals and
objectives of the Committee.
G. To take any other legal action to promote economic development within
the City.
§ 21-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 21-7
1:89
§ 21-8. Reports.
The Economic Development Committee shall submit reports to the City
Council concerning the financial status and activities of said Economic
Development Committee on an "as requested" basis.
§ 21-9. Joint efforts with tourism.
The Economic Development Committee and Tourism Commission will each
take adequate steps to ensure that said two bodies are working in
conjunction with one another and are not in any manner trying to achieve
contradictory goals or objectives.
§ 21-10. Professionals.
The Economic Development Committee may use the services of the City
Engineer, City Planner and City Solicitor on an "as needed" basis to aid and
assist them in any effort to further the goals and objectives of the Economic
Development Committee.
Chapter 22
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, TOURISM AND SPECIAL
EVENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 3. Economic Development Committee — See Ch.
21.
§ 22-1. Committee established.
The City Council of the City of Brigantine (hereinafter the "City"), Atlantic
County, New Jersey, hereby establishes the Brigantine Economic
Development, Tourism and Special Events Advisory Committee (hereinafter
the "Committee").
§ 22-2. Purpose and goals.
A. Take any property by condemnation or eminent domain.
B. Pledge the credit of the City of Brigantine Beach or otherwise incur
debt on behalf of the City of Brigantine Beach without the prior
approval of City Council.
A. The primary functions, purposes and goals of the Committee include
the following:
(1) To discuss, investigate, study and give written advice and
recommendations to City Council as determined by the Committee
§ 21-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 22-2
1:90
§ 22-3. Membership; terms; appointments; privileges; duties.
and/or as may be requested by City Council regarding economic
and business conditions and circumstances best suited for the City,
and the manner and methods by which development of business
conditions and circumstances best suited for the City may evolve
and be encouraged;
(2) To market and promote the City's economic and business strengths;
(3) To recommend, in writing, to City Council the means by which
stability and growth can best take place for existing business;
(4) To work together cooperatively with the County of Atlantic and
other local regional and state organizations, divisions, or
departments having similar goals, in order to be able to
recommend to the City Council the best and most desirable
planning implementation and courses of action by which the
primary functions, purposes and goals of the City's economic and
business interests can be most effectively and efficiently merged
and coordinated with those other organizations, divisions, or
departments having similar goals.
B. The Committee shall have such additional functions, purposes and
goals as the Committee may request that the City Council establish,
subject to the approval of City Council.
A. The Committee shall consist of nine regular members, all appointed by
City Council, and all members shall have a term of office of three
calendar years, or such lesser period of time as may be caused by the
date of appointment, with terms expiring at 11:59 p.m., December 31,
of each calendar year. Appointments shall be staggered such that three
appointments expire each year, and each year three members are
appointed to full three-year terms.
B. The members of the Committee shall be residents or taxpayers of the
City. The Mayor and one member of City Council shall be members of
the Committee. The City Manager shall be an ex officio member of the
Committee, and City department heads may from time to time attend
the meetings of the Committee as directed by the City Manager.
C. All regular members of the Committee shall have full voting privileges.
D. The appointments of regular and ex officio members of the Committee
shall be made by City Council by resolution as soon as practicable after
the establishment of the Committee by this chapter in this calendar
year of its establishment, and in succeeding years practicable after the
establishment of the Committee by this chapter in this calendar year of
its establishment, and in succeeding years at the annual City Council
reorganization meeting or any subsequent regular meeting of City
Council in January of each calendar year.
§ 22-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 22-3
1:91
§ 22-4. Initial meeting.
The Committee is authorized to meet within 30 days of the appointment of
the members by City Council.
§ 22-5. Organization and administration.
E. No appointment of any member of the Committee may be rescinded or
terminated by City Council except for good cause.
F. Any vacancy created by any registration of any member of the
Committee during any calendar year may be filled by appointment by
City Council by resolution for the remainder of that member's term of
office.
A. At the first meeting in each calendar year, the Committee shall:
(1) Elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary.
(2) Establish a schedule of meeting dates for the remainder of the
calendar year.
(3) Establish a list of primary and lesser goals and a mission statement
for the calendar year.
(4) Establish a schedule of performance due dates for reports of any
investigation or study to be undertaken by the Committee during
the calendar year.
B. The Secretary shall prepare accurate written minutes of each
Committee meeting, which minutes shall be approved by the
Committee and forwarded to City Council.
C. The Committee may organize and appoint subcommittees which shall
perform certain tasks for the Committee, make reports and
recommendations to the Committee. Subcommittee reports and actions
shall not be deemed reports or actions of the full Committee unless
adopted by a majority vote of the Committee.
D. The Committee shall be an advisory committee to City Council, and any
reports or actions recommended by the Committee shall not be
effective until approved by City Council. The Committee shall conduct
its activities and meetings in accordance with all applicable state laws
which shall include the Open Public Meetings Act50 and the Open Public
Records Act.51
50.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
51.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 22-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 22-5
1:92
Chapter 23
(RESERVED)
Chapter 25
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics Board — See Ch. 3, § 3-78.
§ 25-1. Titles.
The Board established by this chapter shall be known as the "City of
Brigantine Ethics Board," and any Code of Ethics established pursuant to
this chapter shall be known as the "Brigantine Ethics Code."
§ 25-2. Findings.
The findings in relation to this chapter are as follows:
§ 25-3. Purpose; statutory authority.
A. Public office and employment are a public trust;
B. The vitality and stability of representative democracy depends upon the
public's confidence in the integrity of its elected and appointed
representatives;
C. It is desirous never to imperil the confidence that the public may have
in any government officer or employee by allowing the perception of a
conflict between the private interests and the public duties of said
government officer or employee;
D. Governments have a duty both to provide their citizens with standards
by which they determine whether public duties are being faithfully
performed and to apprise their officers and employees of the behavior
which is expected of them while conducting their public duties;
E. The State of New Jersey has adopted P.L. 1991, Chapter 29, known as
the "Local Government Ethics Law";52 and
F. The City of Brigantine is desirous of establishing a Brigantine Board of
Ethics and a Brigantine Ethics Code which meet the new mandates of
the State of New Jersey's Local Government Ethics Law.
52.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 22-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-3
1:93
§ 25-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any agency, board, governing body, including the chief
executive officer, office, commission or other instrumentality within the
City of Brigantine, and any independent local authority which performs
functions other than of a purely advisory nature, but shall not include a
school board.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, partnership, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other
legal entity.
EMPLOYEE — Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time
or full-time, employed by or serving on any agency, board, governing body,
bureau, division, office, commission or other instrumentality within the City
of Brigantine which performs functions other than of a purely advisory
nature, who is not an officer, but shall not mean any employee of a school
district.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council or other body, by whatever
name it may be known, having charge of the finances of the City of
Brigantine.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits,
assets or stock of a business organization, but shall not include the control
of assets in a nonprofit entity or labor union.
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The spouse or dependent child of an
officer or employee of the City of Brigantine, residing in the same household
as said officer or employee of said City of Brigantine.
OFFICER — Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time or
full-time, who falls into one of the following categories:
A. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide a method of assuring that
standards of ethical conduct and financial disclosure requirements for
officers and employees of the City of Brigantine shall be clear,
consistent, uniform in their application and enforceable and to provide
those officers or employees with advice and information concerning
possible conflicts of interests which might arise in the conduct of their
public duties.
B. It is the further purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of
the Local Government Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29.53
C. This chapter is enacted under the authority of the Local Government
Ethics Law, P.L. 1991, c. 29, and under the further authority granted to
the City of Brigantine under the provisions of Titles 40 and 40A of the
New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
53.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 25-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 25-4
1:94
OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the City of
Brigantine.
§ 25-5. Ethical standards.
Officers and employees of the City of Brigantine shall meet the following
ethical standards and comply with the following provisions:
Any person who is elected to any office of any agency, board, governing
body, office, commission or other instrumentality within the City of
Brigantine, and any independent local authority created by or
appointed under the authority of the City of Brigantine which performs
functions other than of a purely advisory nature.
A.
Any person who is serving on any agency, board, governing body, office,
commission or other instrumentality within the City of Brigantine, and
any independent local authority created by or appointed under the
authority of the City of Brigantine which performs functions other
than of a purely advisory nature and which has the authority to enact
ordinances, approve development applications or grant zoning
variances.
B.
C. Any person who is a member of a municipal authority.
Any person who formulates management policies or practices and/or
is charged with the responsibility of directing the effectuation of such
management policies and practices.
D.
Any person whose functional responsibilities or knowledge in
connection with the issues involved in the collective negotiations
process would make his membership on any appropriate negotiating
unit incompatible with his official duties.
E.
Any employee of a school district or member of a school board is
specifically not considered an "officer" for the terms of this chapter.
F.
A. No officer or employee or member of his or her immediate family shall
have an interest in a business organization or engage in any business,
transaction or professional activity which is in substantial conflict with
the proper discharge of his or her duties in the public interest.
B. No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her official
position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself,
herself or others.
C. No officer or employee shall act in his or her official capacity in any
manner where he or she, a member of his or her immediate family or a
business organization in which he or she has an interest has a direct or
indirect financial or personal involvement that might reasonably be
expected to impair his or her objectivity or independence of judgment.
D. No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service,
whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to
§ 25-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-5
1:95
prejudice his or her independence of judgment in the exercise of his or
her official duties.
E. No officer or employee, member of his or her immediate family or
business organization in which he or she has an interest shall solicit or
accept any gift, favor, loan, political contribution, service, promise of
future employment or other thing of value based upon an
understanding that the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise
or other thing of value was given or offered for the purposes of
influencing him or her, directly or indirectly, in the discharge of his or
her official duties. This provision shall not apply to the solicitation or
acceptance of contributions to the campaign of an announced candidate
for elective public office if the officer has no knowledge or reason to
believe that the campaign contribution, if accepted, was given with the
intent to influence the officer in the discharge of his or her official
duties.
F. No officer or employee shall use or allow to be used his or her public
office or employment or any information not generally available to the
members of the public, which he or she receives or acquires in the
course of and by reason of his or her office or employment, for the
purpose of securing financial gain for himself or herself, any member of
his or her immediate family or any business organization with which he
or she is associated.
G. No officer or employee or any business organization in which he or she
has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the City
of Brigantine in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or
other matter pending before any agency in the City of Brigantine. This
provision shall not be deemed to prohibit an employee from
representing another employee where the agency is the City of
Brigantine and the representation is within the context of official labor
union or similar representational responsibilities.
H. No officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by reason
of his or her participation in the enactment of any ordinance, resolution
or other matter required to be voted upon or which is subject to
executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him
or her as a member of any business, profession, occupation or group to
any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to
accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation or
group.
I. No elected officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for
information on behalf of a constituent if no fee, reward or other thing of
value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or a member of
his or her immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in return
therefor.
§ 25-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 25-5
1:96
§ 25-6. Financial disclosure statements.
Officers of the City of Brigantine shall annually file a financial disclosure
statement. All financial disclosure statements shall include the following
information, which shall specify, where applicable, the name and address of
each source and the officer's job title, as well as:
J. Nothing shall prohibit any officer or employee or members of his or her
immediate family from representing himself, herself or themselves in
negotiations or proceedings concerning his, her or their own interests.
K. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the Public Defender
in the City of Brigantine from representing any person appearing in the
Brigantine Municipal Court regardless of whether said individual falls
within the parameters of the Brigantine Ethics Code.
L. Independent local authority.
(1) No independent local authority shall, if the same does indeed exist
within a municipality, for a period of one year next subsequent to
the termination of office of a member of said authority:
(a) Award any contract which is not publicly bid to a former
member of that authority;
(b) Allow a former member of that authority to represent, appear
for or negotiate on behalf of any other party before that
authority; or
(c) Employ for compensation, except pursuant to open competitive
examination in accordance with Title 11A of the New Jersey
Statutes and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, any former member of that authority.
(2) The restrictions contained in this subsection shall also apply to any
business organization in which the former authority member holds
an interest.
A. Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding $2,000 received
by the officer or a member of his or her immediate family during the
preceding calendar year. Individual client fees, customer receipts or
commission on transactions received through a business organization
need not be separately reported as sources of income. If a publicly
traded security is the source of income, the security need not be
reported unless the officer or member of his or her immediate family
has an interest in the business organization.
B. Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding $250 from any single source for personal appearances,
speeches or writings received by the officer or a member of his or her
immediate family during the proceeding calendar year.
§ 25-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-6
1:97
§ 25-7. Financial disclosure form.
§ 25-8. Ethics Board established.
C. Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having an
aggregate value exceeding $400 from any single source, excluding
relatives, received by the officer or member of his or her immediate
family during the preceding calendar year.
D. The name and address of all business organizations in which the officer
or a member of his or her immediate family had an interest during the
preceding calendar year.
E. The address and brief description of all real property in the state in
which the officer or a member of his or her immediate family held an
interest during the preceding calendar year.
A. The City of Brigantine Ethics Board shall prescribe a financial
disclosure statement form for filing purposes. If a financial disclosure
statement form has been promulgated by the New Jersey Local Finance
Board in accordance with the New Jersey Local Government Ethics
Law,54 then the Brigantine Ethics Board shall use that form. If no such
financial disclosure statement form has been promulgated by the New
Jersey Local Finance Board, then the Brigantine Ethics Board shall
prepare the forms to be used for compliance pursuant to the City of
Brigantine Ethics Code. The City of Brigantine Ethics Board shall make
the forms available to the local officers within its jurisdiction.
B. The original financial disclosure statement shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk of the City of Brigantine. A copy of the statement shall
be filed with the City of Brigantine Ethics Board and the Local Finance
Board in the Division of Local Government Services in the Department
of Community Affairs with the State of New Jersey.
C. The original financial disclosure statement to be filed in 1991 shall be
filed on or before August 19, 1991. All financial disclosure statements to
be filed in subsequent years shall be filed on or before April 30 of each
respective year.
D. All financial disclosure statements filed shall be public records.
A. There is hereby established the City of Brigantine Ethics Board, which
shall consist of six members who are residents of the City of Brigantine,
at least two of whom shall be members of the public. The members of
the Brigantine Ethics Board shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council of the City of Brigantine. The members shall be chosen by
virtue of their known and consistent reputation for integrity and their
knowledge of local government affairs. No more than three members of
the City of Brigantine Ethics Board shall be of the same political party.
54.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:A9-22.1 et seq.
§ 25-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 25-8
1:98
§ 25-9. Facilities and staff.
§ 25-10. Adoption of Code of Ethics.
B. The members of the Brigantine Ethics Board shall annually elect a
Chairman from among their membership.
C. The members of the Brigantine Ethics Board shall serve for terms of
five years, except that of the members initially appointed two of the
public members shall be appointed to serve for terms of five years, one
member shall be appointed to serve for a term of four years and the
remaining members shall be appointed to serve for terms of three
years. Each member shall serve until his or her successor has been
appointed and qualified. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of
the Brigantine Ethics Board shall be filled in the same manner as the
original appointment for the unexpired term.
D. Members of the Brigantine Ethics Board shall serve without
compensation but shall be reimbursed by the City of Brigantine for
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
A. The City of Brigantine shall provide the City of Brigantine Ethics Board
with offices for the conduct of said Ethics Board's business and the
preservation of said Board's records and shall supply equipment and
supplies as may be necessary.
B. All necessary expenses incurred by the City of Brigantine Ethics Board
and its members shall be paid, upon certification of the Chairman of
said Ethics Board, by the City of Brigantine within the limits of funds
appropriated by the City of Brigantine in the City of Brigantine's annual
budget or by emergency appropriations for those purposes.
C. The City of Brigantine Ethics Board may appoint employees, including
independent counsel and clerical staff, as are necessary to implement
the Brigantine Ethics Code within the limits of the funds appropriated
by the City of Brigantine for those purposes.
D. Nothing herein shall prevent the Brigantine Ethics Board from
receiving clerical assistance from the clerical staff of the City of
Brigantine.
A. Within 90 days after the establishment of the Brigantine Ethics Board,
said Ethics Board shall promulgate by resolution a Code of Ethics to be
adhered to by the appropriate officers and employees of the City of
Brigantine. Officers and employees serving an independent authority in
the City of Brigantine, if any, shall be deemed to be serving the City of
Brigantine for the purposes of this chapter.
B. The Code of Ethics promulgated by the City of Brigantine Ethics Board
shall be either identical to or more restrictive than those set forth in the
appropriate section of the Local Government Ethics Law.55
§ 25-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-10
1:99
§ 25-11. Powers of Ethics Board; advisory opinions; hearings.
C. Within 15 days following the promulgation of the City of Brigantine
Ethics Code, said City of Brigantine Ethics Code and a notice of the date
of the public hearing to be held thereon shall be published in either the
Beachcomber News or the Press and Sunday Press and shall be
distributed to the City Clerk and the City Manager for circulation
among the affected officers and employees within the City of
Brigantine.
D. The City of Brigantine Ethics Board shall hold a public hearing on the
Brigantine Ethics Code not less than 30 days following its
promulgation, at which time any person wishing to be heard shall be
permitted to testify. As a result of said hearing, the Brigantine Ethics
Board may amend or supplement the Brigantine Ethics Code as it
deems necessary.
E. If the Brigantine Ethics Code is not identical to the provisions set forth
in the appropriate sections of the Local Government Ethics Law, the
City of Brigantine Ethics Board shall thereafter submit said Brigantine
Ethics Code to the Local Finance Board in the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs of the
State of New Jersey for approval.
F. If the Local Finance Board and the Division of Local Government
Services in the Department of Community Affairs fails to act within 60
days of the submission of the Brigantine Ethics Code by the Brigantine
Ethics Board, said Brigantine Ethics Code shall be deemed approved. If
the City of Brigantine Ethics Board elects to submit the Brigantine
Ethics Code to the Local Finance Board in the Division of Local
Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs, said
Brigantine Ethics Code shall take effect 60 days after the approval by
said Local Finance Board.
G. If the Brigantine Ethics Code is identical to the provisions set forth in
the pertinent section of the Local Government Ethics Law, said Ethics
Code shall take effect 10 days after the public hearing thereon.
H. The Brigantine Ethics Board shall forward a copy of the Brigantine
Ethics Code to the City Clerk and shall make copies of the Brigantine
Ethics Code available to all individuals who fall within the parameters
of said code.
A. The Brigantine Ethics Board shall have the following powers:
(1) To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold hearings
with regard to possible violations of the Brigantine Ethics Code or
financial disclosure requirements contained therein by any
55.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:A9-22.1 et seq.
§ 25-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 25-11
1:100
individual falling within the parameters of the Brigantine Ethics
Code.
(2) To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the
attendance of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any
complaint or to the holding of a hearing.
(3) To forward to the County Prosecutor or the Attorney General or
other governmental body any information concerning violations of
the Brigantine Ethics Code or the financial disclosure requirements
contained therein by appropriate individuals who fall within the
parameters of the Brigantine Ethics Code which may become the
subject of criminal prosecution or which may warrant the
institution of other legal proceedings by the Attorney General.
(4) To render advisory opinions to individuals who fall within the
parameters of the Brigantine Ethics Code as to whether a given set
of facts and circumstances would constitute a violation of any
provisions of the Brigantine Ethics Code or the financial disclosure
requirements contained therein
(5) To enforce the provisions of the Brigantine Ethics Code and
financial disclosure requirements contained therein with regard to
individuals falling within the parameters of said Ethics Code and to
impose penalties for the violation thereof as are authorized by this
chapter.
(6) To adopt rules and regulations and to do other things as are
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
B. Advisory opinions.
(1) An individual who falls within the parameters of the Brigantine
Ethics Code may request and obtain from the Brigantine Ethics
Board an advisory opinion as to whether any proposed activity or
conduct would, in the Board's opinion, constitute a violation of the
Brigantine Ethics Code or the financial disclosure requirements
contained therein.
(2) Advisory opinions of the Brigantine Ethics Board shall not be made
public, except when the Ethics Board, by the vote of 2/3 of all of its
members, directs that any said opinion be made public.
(3) Public advisory opinions shall not disclose the name of the
individual requesting the same unless the Brigantine Ethics Board,
in directing that that opinion be made public, so determines.
C. Hearings.
(1) In the event that a hearing is to be held pursuant to the Brigantine
Ethics Code, any person charged with a violation of said Ethics
Code or the financial disclosure requirements contained therein
shall be given the following:
§ 25-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-11
1:101
§ 25-12. Complaints; review; decisions.
(a) The right to select and be represented by legal counsel of said
individuals choosing and at said individual's expense.
(b) Reasonable notice of any such hearing.
(c) The right of examination and cross-examination of witnesses.
(2) The Chairman of the Brigantine Ethics Board shall advise said
individual of Subsection C(1)(a) through (c) above prior to
commencement of any such hearing.
(3) All hearings required pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted in
conformity with the rules and procedures, insofar as they may be
applicable, provided for hearings by a state agency in contested
cases under the Administrative Procedure Act, N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et
seq.
A. The Brigantine Ethics Board, upon receipt of a signed written complaint
by any person alleging that the conduct of any officer or employee
serving the City of Brigantine is in conflict with the Brigantine Ethics
Code or the financial disclosure requirements contained therein, shall
acknowledge receipt of said complaint within 30 days of the receipt
thereof and initiate an investigation concerning the facts and
circumstances set forth in said complaint.
B. The Brigantine Ethics Board shall make a determination as to whether
the complaint is within its jurisdiction, frivolous or without any
reasonable factual basis.
C. If the Brigantine Ethics Board shall conclude that the complaint is
outside its jurisdiction, frivolous or without factual basis, it shall reduce
that conclusion to writing and shall transmit a copy thereof to the
complainant and to the individual against whom the complaint was
filed.
D. If the Brigantine Ethics Board shall conclude that the complaint is
within its jurisdiction and is not frivolous and has a factual basis, the
Brigantine Ethics Board shall notify the individual against whom the
complaint was filed of the nature of the complaint and the facts and
circumstances set forth therein.
E. Said individual shall have the opportunity to present the Brigantine
Ethics Board with any statement or information concerning the
complaint which he or she wishes.
F. Thereafter, if the Brigantine Ethics Board determines that a reasonable
doubt exists as to whether the individual is in conflict with the
Brigantine Ethics Code or the financial disclosure requirements
contained therein, the Brigantine Ethics Board shall conduct a hearing
in the manner prescribed by this chapter concerning the possible
§ 25-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 25-12
1:102
§ 25-13. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
violation and any other facts and circumstances which may have come
to the Brigantine Ethics Board's attention with respect to the conduct
of said individual.
G. The Brigantine Ethics Board shall render a decision as to whether the
conduct of said individual is in conflict with the Brigantine Ethics Code
or any financial disclosure requirements contained therein. This
decision shall be made by no less than 2/3 of all members of the
Brigantine Ethics Board.
H. If the Brigantine Ethics Board determines that the individual is in
conflict with the Brigantine Ethics Code or any financial disclosure
requirements contained therein, the Board may impose any penalties
which it believes appropriate within the limitations of this chapter.
I. A final decision of the Brigantine Ethics Board may be appealed to the
Local Finance Board within 30 days of the rendering of said decision.
J. All statements, complaints, requests or other written materials filed
pursuant to this chapter and any rulings, opinions, judgments,
transcripts or other official papers prepared pursuant to this chapter
shall be preserved for a period of at least five years from the date of
filing and preparation of the same.
A. An appointed officer or employee found guilty by the Brigantine Ethics
Board of a violation of any provisions of the Brigantine Ethics Code
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500, which penalty
may be collected in a summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty
Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.56 The Brigantine Ethics
Board shall report its findings to the office or agency having the power
of removal or discipline of the appointed officer or employee and may
recommend that further disciplinary action be taken.
B. An elected officer or employee of the City of Brigantine found guilty by
the Brigantine Ethics Board of the violation of any provisions of the
Brigantine Ethics Code shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than
$500, which penalty may be collected in a summary proceeding
pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.57
C. The finding of the Brigantine Ethics Board that an appointed officer or
employee is guilty of the violation of the provisions of the Brigantine
Ethics Code shall be sufficient cause for his or her removal, suspension,
demotion or other disciplinary action by the officer or agency having
the power of removal or discipline. When a person who is in the career
service is charged with violating the provisions of the Brigantine Ethics
56.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1999, c. 274, § 4. See now
2A:58-10 et seq.
57.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq. was repealed by P.L. 1999, c. 274, § 4. See now
2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 25-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 25-13
1:103
Chapter 29
(RESERVED)
Chapter 30
GOLF COURSE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Economic Development Committee — See Ch.
21.
Economic Development, Tourism and Special
Events Advisory Committee — See Ch. 22.
§ 30-1. Committee established.
The City Council of the City of Brigantine (hereinafter the "City"), Atlantic
County, New Jersey, hereby establishes the Brigantine Golf Course Advisory
Committee, (hereinafter the "Committee").
§ 30-2. Purpose and goals.
Code, the procedure leading to removal, suspension, demotion or other
disciplinary action shall be governed by any applicable procedures
of Title 11A of the New Jersey Statutes and the rules promulgated
pursuant thereto.
A. The primary functions, purposes and goals of the Committee include
the following:
(1) To discuss, investigate, study and give written advice and
recommendations to City Council as determined by the Committee
and/or as may be requested by City Council regarding the
operation of the Brigantine Golf Course and the economic and
business conditions and circumstances best suited for the
operation of the Brigantine Golf Course, and the manner and
methods by which the business and recreation conditions
associated with the Brigantine Golf Course are best developed;
(2) To recommend programs and methodologies to market and
promote the Brigantine Golf Course;
(3) To recommend, in writing, to City Council the means by which such
development and growth of the Brigantine Golf Course can best
take place.
B. The Committee shall have such additional functions, purposes and
goals as the Committee may request that the City Council establish
subject to the approval of City Council.
§ 25-13 BRIGANTINE CODE § 30-3
1:104
§ 30-3. Membership; terms; appointments; privileges; duties.
§ 30-4. Initial meeting.
The Committee is authorized to meet within 30 days of the appointment of
the members by City Council.
§ 30-5. Organization and administration.
A. The Committee shall consist of seven regular members, all appointed by
City Council, and all members shall have a term of office of three
calendar years, or such lesser period of time as may be caused by the
date of appointment, with terms expiring at 11:59 p.m., December 31,
of each calendar year. Appointments shall be staggered. To effectuate
such staggered appointments, initial appointments shall provide for
three appointments of three years, two appointments of two years, and
two appointments of one year. Thereafter, all appointments will be for a
full three-year term.
B. The members of the Committee shall be residents or taxpayers of the
City. Two members of City Council shall be members of the Committee.
The City Manager shall be an ex officio member of the Committee, and
City department heads may from time to time attend the meetings of
the Committee as directed by the City Manager.
C. All regular members of the Committee shall have full voting privileges.
D. The appointments of regular and ex officio members of the Committee
shall be made by City Council by resolution as soon as practicable after
the establishment of the Committee by this chapter in this calendar
year of its establishment, and in succeeding years at the annual City
Council reorganization meeting or any subsequent regular meeting of
City Council in January of each calendar year.
E. No appointment of any member of the Committee may be rescinded or
terminated by City Council except for good cause.
F. Any vacancy created by any resignation of any member of the
Committee during any calendar year may be filled by appointment by
City Council by resolution for the remainder of that member's term of
office.
A. At the first meeting in each calendar year the Committee shall:
(1) Elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary;
(2) Establish a schedule of meeting dates for the remainder of the
calendar year;
(3) Establish a list of primary and lesser goals and a mission statement
for the calendar year;
§ 30-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 30-5
1:105
Chapter 35
(RESERVED)
Chapter 39
GARDEN CLUB ADVISORY BOARD
§ 39-1. Creation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:69A-89, the Garden Club Advisory Board
(hereinafter the "Garden Club") is hereby created and established. This
Board is not a Shade Tree Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:64-1, et seq.,
and is not intended to have the powers of a Commission.
§ 39-2. Powers and duties.
The Garden Club shall act in an advisory capacity to the City Council, and
provide the following:
(4) Establish a schedule of performance due dates for reports of any
investigation or study to be undertaken by the Committee during
the calendar year.
B. The Secretary shall prepare accurate written minutes of each
Committee meeting which minutes shall be approved by the Committee
and forwarded to City Council.
C. The Committee may organize and appoint subcommittees which shall
perform certain tasks for the Committee, make reports and
recommendations to the Committee. Subcommittee reports and actions
shall not be deemed reports or actions of the full Committee unless
adopted by a majority vote of the Committee.
D. The Committee shall be an advisory committee to City Council, and any
reports or actions recommended by the Committee shall not be
effective until approved by City Council. The Committee shall conduct
its activities and meetings in accordance with all applicable state laws
which shall include the Open Public Meetings Act and the Open Public
Records Act.
A. Plan, organize the planting, and maintain the City-owned flowerbeds,
parks and other designated locations in the discretion of the City
Council, as directed by the Director of Public Works.
B. Make recommendations to the City Council with regard to planning and
planting of flowers and shrubs in the City flowerbeds and parks, as well
as, performing the task of planting.
§ 30-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 39-2
1:106
§ 39-3. Membership.
Members of the Garden Club shall be appointed by the City Council by
resolution. The Garden Club shall consist of nine members, with at least one
member being a member of City Council and one member being the City's
Director of Public Works. With the exception of the Director of Public Works,
each member shall be a resident of Brigantine.
§ 39-4. Term of appointment.
The term of members of the Garden Club shall be for a one-year period.
Members may serve for successive years if reappointed by Council.
§ 39-5. Unexpired term.
Any vacancy created other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term only.
§ 39-6. Compensation.
No member or volunteer of the Garden Club shall receive any compensation
for being a member.
§ 39-7. Funding.
The City Council may, if necessary, appropriate funds on an annual basis for
use by the Garden Club to meet its stated purposes, and expenses of the
Garden Club shall not exceed the funds appropriated by the City Council.
§ 39-8. Donations.
The City is permitted to accept donations on behalf of the Garden Club for
the purposes of assisting with the beautification of the City, and promoting
environmental responsibility, conservation and education. Any donation
shall be held in trust by the City designated to the Garden Club Trust
Fund in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:4-39 and be used in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40A:5-29.
§ 39-9. Organization and administration.
The Garden Club shall provide for its own internal organizational rules and
procedures, as it deems desirable and shall organize immediately, however
no rule or procedure shall be inconsistent with any federal, state or local
statute or regulation.
C. Submit an annual report to the City Council regarding its activities over
the prior 12 months, and if requested, appear before the City Council
for the discussion of same.
A. The Garden Club shall ensure accurate minutes of each meeting are
prepared and approved by the Board and forwarded to City Council.
§ 39-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-9
1:107
Chapter 45
PAYROLL PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
B. The Garden Club may recruit community volunteers to assist on
projects. The names of the volunteers shall be submitted to the City
Manager on an annual basis or when volunteers change. No volunteer
shall be considered or have any rights of an employee of the City of
Brigantine.
C. The Garden Club volunteers engaged in activity as authorized herein or
directed by Council and/or the Director of Public Works shall be
extended insurance coverage by the City of Brigantine through the
Atlantic County Municipal Joint Insurance Fund. The insurance
coverage provided herein, does not establish an obligation on the part
of the City to indemnify or hold harmless the Garden Club volunteers
nor provide any compensation in excess of the amounts provided by the
ACMJIF.
D. The Garden Club shall be an advisory committee to City Council, and
any reports or actions recommended by the Garden Club shall not be
effective until approved by the City Council and directed by the Director
of Public Works. The Garden Club shall conduct its activities and
meetings in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local
statutes and regulations, which shall include, but not be limited to, the
Local Government Ethics Law,58 the Open Public Meetings Act59 and the
Open Public Records Act.60
58.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 39-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 39-9
1:108
ARTICLE I
Direct Deposit
[Adopted 3-15-2017 by Ord. No. 6-2017]
§ 45-1. Mandatory deposit of net pay.
Mandatory direct deposit of net pay hereby is established for all City of
Brigantine employees in specific banking institutions based on information
provided by such employee, except for those temporary employees as stated
herein.
§ 45-2. Scope.
"Net pay" shall include biweekly pay and other forms of payment, including
but not limited to retroactivity of wages, clothing and uniform allowances,
health benefit buyouts, accrued time buyouts and final payments to
employees separating employment, etc.
§ 45-3. Exemptions.
The City may exempt certain temporary/seasonal employees from the
requirements of this article due to impracticality of direct deposit for such
temporary work.
§ 45-4. Severability.
Any ordinance or provision thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this
article is hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistencies.
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-4
1:109
Chapter 48
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 48-1. Policies adopted.
This chapter officially adopts the Manual of Personnel Policies of the City of
Brigantine by and on behalf of said City of Brigantine.61
Chapter 51
POLICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public safety and enforcement
departments — See Ch. 3, Art. X.
61.Editor's Note: Copies of the Manual of Personnel Policies are on file and available for
inspection in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 45-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 48-1
1:110
ARTICLE I
Mutual Aid
[Adopted 11-28-1990 by Ord. No. 18-1990]
§ 51-1. Agreement established; applicability.62
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1, there is hereby established a mutual
aid agreement with all other municipalities in Atlantic County, New Jersey,
which adopt a reciprocal ordinance to provide mutual police aid in case
of emergency. This agreement shall apply whenever the City of Brigantine
may have an emergency within its boundaries requiring additional police
assistance to protect life and property or to assist in suppressing a riot
or disorder and whenever another municipality in this county which has
enacted a reciprocal ordinance may experience a similar emergency
requiring additional police assistance.
§ 51-2. Authority to request assistance.
The Chief of the City of Brigantine Police Department is authorized to
request assistance from the Chief or other head of the Police Department of
another municipality within Atlantic County to provide aid during and after
said emergency.
§ 51-3. Assistance provided to other municipalities.
The Chief of the City of Brigantine Police Department shall provide
assistance to another municipality or municipalities in Atlantic County
making a valid request to supply such personnel and equipment, as
required, to the extent possible without endangering person or property
within the City of Brigantine. The members of the Police Department
supplying aid shall have the same powers, authority, rights and immunities
of the members of the police force of the municipality to which assistance is
rendered.
62.Editor's Note: Former Ch. 51, Police Department, adopted 7-17-1957 by Ord. No. 5-1957,
as amended, was repealed 1-30-1991 by Ord. No. 1-1991. See now § 3-44, Department of
Police.
§ 51-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-3
1:111
Chapter 55
(RESERVED)
Chapter 56
RECORDS, PUBLIC
§ 56-1. Custodian of Records.
§ 56-2. City Manager to be advised.
The Custodian of Records and all Deputy Custodians of Records shall not
physically give a government record to a member of the public without first
advising the City Manager of the same.
§ 56-3. Fees for copies.
The following shall be charged for the copying and reproduction of public
records. Copies of public records shall be made available upon payment of
the following fees, which shall be based upon the total number of pages,
or parts thereof, to be purchased, without regard to the number of records
being copied:
A. The individual filling the position of Municipal Clerk shall be the
Custodian of Public Records for the City of Brigantine.
B. The following individuals shall be designated Deputy Custodians of
Public Records in their respective departments:
(1) Police Chief and/or his designee.
(2) Fire Chief and/or his designee.
(3) Tax Assessor and/or her designee.
(4) Construction Official and/or his designee.
(5) Purchasing Agent and/or his designee.
(6) Chief Financial Officer and/or his designee.
(7) Superintendent of Public Works and/or his designee.
(8) Tax Collector and/or her designee.
A. First page to 10th page: $0.75 per page.
B. Eleventh page to 20th page: $0.50 per page.
C. All pages over 20: $0.25 per page.
§ 51-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 56-4
1:112
§ 56-4. Copying of nonstandard records.
Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation or volume of a
government record(s) embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined or copied pursuant to this section is such that the
record cannot be reproduced by ordinary document-copying equipment
in ordinary business size and requires outsourcing for reproduction or
copying, the actual cost charged for such outsourcing shall be the charge
paid for said outsourcing and shall be paid by the individual or entity
making the request for such public record. The first sentence of this section
shall be contained on the Open Public Records Act request form currently
used in the City of Brigantine and shall be preprinted on the same, and said
form as amended by this chapter is specifically adopted as the official Open
Public Records Act request form of the City of Brigantine.
§ 56-5. Right of public access; service charges.
A. Any person shall have the right, during regular business hours and
under the supervision of the Custodian of Records or a designee
thereof, to inspect or have copied any public record. Should the actual
time that the Custodian of Records or representative(s) thereof spend
supervising or copying any public documents pursuant to a single
request be in excess of seven hours of employee time, including
locating such document or documents, any hour or part thereof in
excess of said seven hours shall be considered an extraordinary
expenditure of time and effort and the individual requesting such public
document(s) shall be charged, in addition to the actual cost of
duplicating the document(s), a special service charge for each hour in
excess of said seven hours at the cost of $25 per hour or the actual
hourly rate of the employee and/or employees supervising and/or
copying said documents, whichever is less. A copy of the second
sentence of this subsection shall be included on the Open Public
Records Act request form used by the City of Brigantine so that any
requestor shall have the opportunity to review the same and object to
said charge prior to same being incurred.
B. If an individual requests a record from the City of Brigantine in a
medium not routinely used by the City of Brigantine or not routinely
developed or maintained by the City of Brigantine or requiring a
substantial amount of manipulation or programming of information
technology by the City of Brigantine, said requestor shall be charged in
addition to the actual costs of duplication a special charge in the
amount of $25 per hour or the actual hourly rate of the employee or the
employees performing said function, per hour, whichever is less. A copy
of the first sentence of this subsection shall be added to the Open Public
Records Act request form used in the City of Brigantine.
C. In addition to any and all charges as set forth above, if an individual
requests a reproduction of a video tape, audio tape, or compact disk,
said requestor shall be given the opportunity to supply a blank video
§ 56-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-5
1:113
§ 56-6. Time period for response to records request.
Any request for public records shall be responded to in seven business days
by either providing the public document(s) requested or by providing the
requestor with an interim report indicating the estimated time that will be
required to provide the records if the same cannot be produced within seven
business days from said request.
§ 56-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the term "public records" includes those
records determined to be public in accordance with the Open Public
Records Act and subject to all exclusions and deletions as set forth therein.
§ 56-8. Posting of notice of right of appeal.
The Custodian of Records shall prominently post in public view in a part
or parts of the Clerks Office that are open to or frequented by the public
a statement that sets forth in clear, concise and specific terms the right to
appeal denial of, or failure to provide, access to a government record by
any person for inspection, examination, or copying or for purchase of copies
thereof and the procedure by which an appeal may be filed.
tape, blank audio tape, or blank compact disk, respectively, which will
be used for such reproduction.
(1) If the individual making such a request indicates that they do not
wish to provide the video tape, audio tape or compact disk, as the
case may be, the following charges shall apply regarding the
purchase of the same for reproduction by the City of Brigantine and
shall be in addition to any and all amounts which may be charged
pursuant to this chapter:
(a) Video tape: $25 per tape.
(b) Audio tape: $5 per tape.
(c) Compact disk: $5 per disk.
(2) The above portion of this subsection shall be listed on the Open
Public Records Act request form used in the City of Brigantine. The
seven-business-day period pursuant to which an Open Public
Records Act request must be responded to shall begin in the case of
video tapes, audio tapes and compact disks from the date that the
Custodian of Records or a Deputy Custodian of Records is advised
that the requestor shall not supply such video tape, audio tape or
compact disk or from the date that the individual requestor
supplies such video tape, audio tape or compact disk, respectively.
§ 56-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 56-8
1:114
Chapter 58
RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 3. Personnel policies — See Ch. 48.
§ 56-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 56-8
1:115

ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 8-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-20]
§ 58-1. Participation required for eligible positions.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 58-2. Exempt positions.
A. Municipal Manager;
B. All newly hired department heads who report directly to the City
Manager;
C. Solicitor;
D. Municipal Engineer;
E. Municipal Prosecutor;
F. Municipal Court Judge;
A. Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
(1) Tax Collector;
(2) Chief Financial Officer;
(3) Construction Code Official;
(4) Qualified Purchasing Agent;
(5) Tax Assessor;
(6) Municipal Planner;
(7) Registered Municipal Clerk;
(8) Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector;
(9) Principal Public Works Manager.
B. If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in § 58-1 and
the individual is not serving in a position described in Subsection A
above, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality may determine
that the individual is not required to join the Defined Contribution
Retirement Program if that individual:
(1) Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement
System on July 1, 2007 and continuously since that time; or
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-2
1:117
§ 58-3. Legislative authority.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
(2) Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
(3) Is appointed on a temporary, interim or acting basis to a position
requiring state certification as set forth in Subsection A herein, and
is in pursuit of the required certification; or
(4) Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board of the Division of Pensions and benefits.
§ 58-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 58-3
1:118
Chapter 61
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 65
SUSTAINABLE BRIGANTINE GREEN TEAM
§ 65-1. Establishment.
The Sustainable Brigantine Green Team (hereinafter "Green Team") be and
is hereby established as an advisory committee to the Department of Public
Works, and the Director of Public Works shall supervise all projects and
programs of the Green Team and make appropriate reports to City Council.
§ 65-2. Purpose.
The general purpose for the Green Team shall include, but not be limited to:
§ 65-3. Membership; terms of office.
A. Managing Brigantine's participation in the Sustainable Jersey program;
B. Encouraging the City's staff to pursue sustainable practices where
possible and implement the City Council's environmental goals;
C. Work with the existing groups within the City whose actions affect
environmental issues so as to eliminate duplication and assure that
important tasks are covered;
D. Provide input for the City of Brigantine website;
E. Provide suggestions for further research and action to the City Council;
F. Provide advice and suggestions to the Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Adjustment and other environmental entities to assure that
environmental issues are considered in their deliberations and actions;
G. Manage and coordinate the Brigantine Farmers' Market;
H. Solicit and evaluate environmental ideas and suggestions from the
community; and
I. Promote the causes of sustainability with the City.
A. The Brigantine City Council shall appoint 15 City residents to serve as
the Green Team with at least one member being a member of the City
Council. Additionally, the City Council shall appoint five City residents
to serve as alternate members of the Green Team. The Green Team shall
appoint a Chair or may appoint two co-Chairs of the Green Team. The
Green Team shall elect from among its members a Vice Chair and a
Secretary/Treasurer.
§ 58-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 65-3
1:119
§ 65-4. Meetings.
The Green Team shall meet monthly. Additional meetings of the Green Team
may be scheduled by the Chair at his/her discretion.
Chapter 71
(RESERVED)
Chapter 77
WARD COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ward Commission - See Ch. 3, Art. XV.
§ 77-1. Commission established.
There is hereby established in the City of Brigantine, County of Atlantic,
State of New Jersey, the Brigantine City Ward Commission.
§ 77-2. Membership; term.
§ 77-3. Compensation.
Compensation of each of the Ward Commissioners shall be as follows: single
stipend of $500 for service as required.
B. Green Team members shall serve a one-year term. The initial 15
members of the Green Team shall serve from the date of appointment
until December 31, 2017. Thereafter, the Green Team appointments
shall be made at the time of the Reorganization Meeting of City
Government in the City of Brigantine.
C. The Green Team shall recruit City volunteers to work on Green Team
projects. The names of volunteers shall periodically be submitted to the
City Manager.
A. Membership of the Brigantine City Ward Commission shall be as
follows: the Municipal Clerk and the members of the Atlantic County
Board of Elections. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
B. The aforementioned members shall serve during their terms of office as
members of the Atlantic County Board of Elections.
§ 65-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 77-4
1:120
§ 77-4. Expenses.
All regularly incurred expense of the Ward Commission shall be reimbursed
upon certification by the Municipal Clerk for expense incurred by the
Ward Commission as a body and upon certification by the individual Ward
Commissioner where incurred by an individual member. No individual
expense nor any Commission expenditure shall be authorized unless
approved by resolution of the Ward Commission. The Ward Commission is
hereby authorized to retain the services of a licensed professional engineer
or licensed surveyor as authorized by law.
§ 77-5. Expenditure of funds.
The Ward Commission shall act in accordance with law. Any portion of this
chapter requiring the expenditure of funds shall not be effective until the
certification by the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Brigantine of the
availability of funds for such purpose is affixed hereto.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 85
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Development fees — See Ch. 150.
§ 77-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-5
1:121

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 85-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide for and regulate affordable housing
in the City.
§ 85-2. Definitions.
The following terms, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
given in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the City to
administer affordable units in accordance with this article, N.J.A.C. 5:93,
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which new restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the City's fair share obligation, and includes,
but is not limited to, inclusionary development market to affordable
program and apartments for veterans and families.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:123
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that:
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENTS — A structure in which
households live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing
facilities, central heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements
include, but are not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless;
Class A, B, C, D and E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities
as regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for
the developmentally disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated
by the New Jersey Department of Human Services; and congregate living
arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load-bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option
All the residents of the development wherein the unit is situated are 62
years of age or older; or
A.
At least 80% of the units are occupied by one person who is 55 years of
age or older; or
B.
The development has been designated by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development as "housing for
older persons" as defined in Section 807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act,
42 U.S.C. § 3607.
C.
§ 85-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-2
1:124
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market-rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to: new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include, but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load-bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region, as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A structure containing five or more dwelling units.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a Class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
§ 85-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:125
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAH or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 85-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that are
proposed to be created within the City of Brigantine pursuant to the City's
most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan.
§ 85-4. Alternative living arrangements.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following
exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15); provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
§ 85-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-4
1:126
§ 85-5. Zoning.
To implement the fair share plan in a manner consistent with the terms of
the settlement agreement, ensure the efficient use of land through compact
forms of development and to create realistic opportunities for the
construction of affordable housing, the zoning in Article II is consistent with
the provisions of the City of Brigantine's Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan and the terms of the settlement agreement.
§ 85-6. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments, the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 85-7. New construction.
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court.
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units.
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very-lowincome
units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
median income). The very-low-income units shall be counted as
part of the required number of low-income units within the
development.
(2) At least 25% of the obligation shall be met through rental units,
including at least half in rental units available to families.
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:127
(3) A maximum of 25% of the City's obligation may be met with agerestricted
units. At least half of all affordable units in the City's Plan
shall be available to families.
(4) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
(5) Affordable developments that are not age restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(6) Affordable developments that are age restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements.
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and the following:
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If not all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) can be satisfied, then an interior accessible route
of travel must be provided between stories within an individual
§ 85-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-7
1:128
unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a) through (d)
above have been satisfied, then an interior accessible route
of travel shall not be required between stories within an
individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a et seq.) and the Barrier Free Subcode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Brigantine has collected funds
from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a person with disabilities
who is purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the City of Brigantine's Affordable Housing
Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the City of Brigantine for the sole purpose
of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable unit
accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
City of Brigantine for the conversion of adaptable to
accessible entrances.
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the City's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of the
City Chief Financial Officer who shall ensure that the
funds are deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund and appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is "site
impracticable" to meet the requirements. Determinations
of site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-7
1:129
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices.
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the regional income limits established by COAH or
a successor entity.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, earning 30% or less of the regional
median household income.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four-and-one-halfperson
household; and
§ 85-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-7
1:130
§ 85-8. Utilities.
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one-and-one-halfperson
household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowners' association fees do not exceed 28%
of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant-paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rent of low- and moderate-income units may be increased
annually based on the permitted percentage increase in the
Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This increase
shall not exceed 9% in any one year. Rents for units constructed
pursuant to low-income housing tax credit regulations shall be
indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low-income housing
tax credits.
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8
1:131
§ 85-9. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 85-10. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for its Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until Brigantine takes
action to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action,
a restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first nonexempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this article, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture
lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
§ 85-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-10
1:132
§ 85-11. Price and fee restrictions for restricted ownership units.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
§ 85-12. Buyer income eligibility.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowners' association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the administrative agent may,
upon approval by the City Council, and subject to the Court's approval,
permit moderate-income purchasers to buy low-income units in housing
markets if the administrative agent determines that there is an
insufficient number of eligible low-income purchasers to permit prompt
occupancy of the units. All such low-income units to be sold to
moderate-income households shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for low-income units.
§ 85-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-12
1:133
§ 85-13. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership unit;
subordination.
§ 85-14. Capital improvements to ownership units.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowners' association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination, in writing, that the proposed indebtedness complies
with the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall
issue such determination prior to the owner incurring such
indebtedness.
B. With the exception of first purchase money mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95% of
the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that adds an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
§ 85-12 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-14
1:134
§ 85-15. Control periods for restricted rental units.
§ 85-16. Rent restrictions for rental units; leases.
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of
the unit resale, provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article for a period of at least 30 years, until Brigantine takes action to
release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Atlantic. The deed shall also identify each affordable unit by
apartment number and/or address and whether that unit is designated
as a very-low-, low- or moderate-income unit. Neither the unit nor its
affordability designation shall change throughout the term of the deed
restriction. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
§ 85-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-16
1:135
§ 85-17. Tenant income eligibility.
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of median
income.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of median
income.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of median income.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
§ 85-16 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-17
1:136
§ 85-18. Municipal Housing Liaison.
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsection B(1) through (5) above
with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
A. The City of Brigantine shall appoint a specific municipal employee to
serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison, responsible for administering the
affordable housing program, including affordability controls, the
affirmative marketing plan, monitoring and reporting, and, where
applicable, supervising any contracted administrative agent. Brigantine
shall adopt an ordinance creating the position of Municipal Housing
Liaison. Brigantine shall adopt a resolution appointing a Municipal
Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by
the governing body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be approved by the Court and shall
be duly qualified through a training program sponsored by Affordable
Housing Professionals of New Jersey before assuming the duties of
Municipal Housing Liaison.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Brigantine,
including the following responsibilities which may not be contracted
out to the administrative agent:
(1) Serving as Brigantine's primary point of contact for all inquiries
from the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents
and interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Brigantine's Fair
Share Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual monitoring reports as
may be required by the Court;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
C. Subject to the approval of the Court, the City of Brigantine shall
designate one or more administrative agent(s) to administer newly
constructed affordable units in accordance with UHAC. An operating
manual for each affordable housing program shall be provided by the
§ 85-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-18
1:137
§ 85-19. Administrative agent.
The administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. For new sale and rental
developments, all of the fees of the administrative agent shall be paid by the
owners of the affordable units for which the services of the administrative
agent are required. For resales, single-family homeowners and
condominium homeowners shall be required to pay 3% of the sales price
for services provided by the administrative agent related to the resale of
their homes. That fee shall be collected at closing and paid directly to the
administrative agent. The administrative agent shall perform the duties and
responsibilities of an administrative agent as set forth in UHAC, including
those set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which include:
administrative agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing
body and subject to approval of the Court. The operating manual(s)
shall be available for public inspection in the office of the City Clerk, in
the office of the Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the
administrative agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise
the contracting administrative agent(s).
A. Affirmative marketing.
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of
the City of Brigantine and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification.
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
§ 85-18 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-19
1:138
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located; and
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the City of Brigantine when referring
households for certification to affordable units.
C. Affordability controls.
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Atlantic County Register of Deeds or County Clerk's office after the
termination of the affordability controls for each restricted unit;
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and rerentals.
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to low- and moderate-income households regarding the
availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners.
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
article;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central airconditioning
systems;
§ 85-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-19
1:139
§ 85-20. Affirmative marketing requirements.
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) The posting annually in all rental properties, including two-family
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent, together with
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
agent, to be approved by the City Council and the Court, setting
forth procedures for administering the affordability controls.
G. Additional responsibilities.
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet any
monitoring requirements and deadlines imposed by the Court.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
§ 85-19 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-20
1:140
A. The City of Brigantine shall adopt, by resolution, an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region. In addition, as a result of the settlement agreement with FSHC,
the affirmative marketing plan shall require the notification of the New
Jersey State NAACP, the Mainland/Pleasantville Mizpah, Atlantic City
and Cape May County Branches of the NAACP, Supportive Housing
Association, FSHC and the Latino Action Network of affordable housing
opportunities. It is a continuing program that directs marketing
activities toward Housing Region 6 and is required to be followed
throughout the period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 6, comprised of
Atlantic, Cape May, Cumberland and Salem Counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the City
of Brigantine shall implement the affirmative marketing plan to assure
the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
§ 85-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-20
1:141
§ 85-21. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
office. Pre-applications shall be emailed or mailed to prospective
applicants upon request.
I. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited to
foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low- or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units, the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense. In the case of an
owner who has rented a low- or moderate-income unit in
violation of the regulations governing affordable housing units,
payment into the City of Brigantine Affordable Housing Trust
Fund of the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
(b) In the case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
§ 85-20 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-21
1:142
the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase
money mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to
satisfy the first purchase money mortgage lien and any prior
liens upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if
any, shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and
all costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriff's sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions
of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
§ 85-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-21
1:143
§ 85-22. Appeals.
Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent appointed pursuant to
this article shall be filed, in writing, with the Court.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the first purchase money mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the first purchase
money mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the first
purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price for which the low- and moderate-income
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriff's sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
§ 85-21 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-22
1:144
ARTICLE II
Mandatory Set Aside; Affordable Housing Overlay Zones
§ 85-23. Mandatory affordable housing set aside. [Amended
8-15-2018 by Ord. No. 17-2018]
Mandatory affordable housing set-aside in future rezonings or the grant of
variances authorizing multifamily housing as follows:
Pursuant to directives of the Superior Court in the third-round affordable
housing proceedings encaptioned In the Matter of the City of Brigantine,
Docket No. ATL-L-1504-15 (Mount Laurel), if the City or its land use
boards permit, either through future rezonings or the grant of variances,
multifamily or single-family attached development that is "approvable" and
"developable," as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., at a gross density of six
units to the acre or more, or permits an increase in the already permitted
density of a multifamily or single-family attached zone or development
resulting in six or more net new dwelling units on the property, the City
and/or its land use boards shall require that an appropriate percentage
of the residential units shall be set aside for low- and moderate-income
households in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq. This requirement
shall apply to any multifamily or single-family attached residential
development, including the residential portion of a mixed-use project which
consists of five or more net new residential units, whether permitted by a
zoning amendment, a variance granted by the City's land use boards, or
adoption of a redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan in areas
in need of redevelopment or rehabilitation. Nothing herein precludes the
City from imposing an affordable housing set-aside in a development not
required to have a set-aside pursuant to the provisions hereof consistent
with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311(h) and other applicable law. Consistent with
N.J.A.C. 5:93-1 et seq., for inclusionary projects in which low- and
moderate-income units are to be offered for "sale," the appropriate setaside
percentage is 20%; for inclusionary projects for which the low- and
moderate-income units are to be offered for "rent," the appropriate setaside
percentage is 15%. This requirement does not create any entitlement
for a property owner or applicant for a zoning amendment, variance, or
adoption of a redevelopment plan or amended redevelopment plan in areas
in need of redevelopment or rehabilitation, or for approval of any particular
proposed project. This requirement does not apply to any sites or specific
zones otherwise identified in judicially approved settlement agreements
under Docket No. ATL-L-1504-15 (Mount Laurel) or the City's judicially
approved third-round Housing Element and Fair Share Plan (collectively
"Compliance Plan"), for which density and set-aside standards shall be
governed by the specific standards set forth therein. A property shall not
be permitted to be subdivided so as to avoid meeting the above affordable
housing requirement.
§ 85-24. Affordable Housing Overlay: B3 Town Center (AHO-B3)
Zone.
§ 85-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-24
1:145
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Overlay B3 (AHO-B3)
overlay zone is to create an incentive to redevelop property for
inclusionary development. The density is predicated on a set-aside for
affordable housing (low- and moderate-income housing). The affordable
units will be for rent; the set-aside shall be 15%.
B. Designated overlay area. The AHO-B3 Zone will encompass a portion of
the B3 (Business) Zone. This district will be the focus of an overlay zone
with residential uses over existing commercial. This zone contains a
shopping area (Town Center) that is located between Harbor Beach
Boulevard, 38th Street, Bayshore Avenue and Amhurst Avenue (Block
3804, Lot 1). The overlay zone at this shopping center will provide for
three residential floors above commercial. There will be a fifteenpercent
set-aside for affordable family rental units with 13% of the
affordable units for very-low-income households. The underlying B-1
Zone, its permitted uses, area and bulk requirements shall remain
unchanged unless the overlay district option for affordable housing is
implemented by the property owner(s) or developer.
C. Permitted uses: mixed use, commercial first floor with residential
above.
D. Schedule of Area and Bulk Requirements.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be based on the underlying
B-1 lot size requirements.
(2) Lot frontage. The minimum frontage shall be based on the
underlying B-1 lot frontage requirements.
(3) Perimeter setbacks. The minimum perimeter setback shall be
based on the minimum setbacks as outlined in the underlying B-1
District.
(4) Public service. Every residential and commercial unit shall be
served by public water and sanitary sewer, which, if required, shall
be installed by and at the expense of the developer.
(a) The developer shall install, at his sole expense, the following
minimum site improvements: streets, accessways, off-street
parking areas, sidewalks, streetlighting, storm drainage
facilities, landscaping and open space areas. These
improvements shall be installed in accordance with this
chapter unless a specific waiver is granted as provided for
within the applicable standards or requirements. Whenever a
developer is required to place catch basins as part of an
approval, the Planning Board shall, in its discretion, require
the developer to pay for and place a sign at each such catch
basin setting forth the requirements and penalties of §§ 220-23
to 220-26 of the Code of the City of Brigantine.
§ 85-24 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-24
1:146
§ 85-25. Affordable Housing Overlay: B1A (AHO-B1A) Zone.
(b) All utilities shall be installed underground within the mixed-use
development. These utilities shall include but not be limited to
gas, television cable, telephone, and electric.
(5) Parking.
(a) On-site parking for the residential component of the
development in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(b) Parking for the commercial aspect of the development shall be
provided in accordance with the City of Brigantine on-site
parking requirements.
(6) Solid waste disposal areas.
(a) All trash compactors, bins and areas of refuse storage and
recyclable storage areas shall be located in a common area and
in such a manner to be screened from the general view of the
public and must comply with all other ordinances of the City of
Brigantine, including any ordinance in reference to dumpsters.
(b) Solid waste disposal areas shall be fully accessible to service
vehicles.
(c) Solid waste disposal areas shall be maintained in a clean and
orderly condition at all times.
(d) Solid waste disposal areas shall be designed of a durable
material consistent with the architectural theme of the
development.
(e) Disposal areas and all facilities shall be provided and
maintained by the owner of the development.
(7) Public safety considerations.
(a) All multifamily developments shall address the following public
safety issues within the application for development:
[1] Emergency access routes for police, fire and ambulance
vehicles.
[2] Architectural techniques utilized to enhance the security
of the development's occupants.
(b) All public safety facilities located in a project shall be kept
unobstructed by parking and/or any other type of storage. No
parking spaces shall be placed to obstruct access as approved
by the Fire Chief and/or Police Chief of the City of Brigantine.
§ 85-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-25
1:147
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Overlay B1A (AHOB1A)
overlay zone is to create an incentive to redevelop property for
inclusionary development. The tract may be developed at a density of
20 units per acre. The density is predicated on a set-aside for affordable
housing (low- and moderate-income housing). The affordable units will
be for rent; the set-aside shall be 15%.
B. Designated overlay area. The AHO-B1A Zone will encompass a portion
of the B1A (Business) Zone. This district will be the focus of an overlay
zone with residential uses over existing commercial. This zone contains
an existing commercial retail store (former CVS Store) that is located
along Brigantine Avenue and is listed on the Tax Map as Block 806, Lot
1. The overlay zone at this location will provide for up to three
residential floors. There will be a fifteen-percent set-aside for affordable
family rental units with 13% of the affordable units for very-low-income
households. The underlying B1A Zone, its permitted uses, area and bulk
requirements shall remain unchanged unless the overlay district option
for affordable housing is implemented by the property owner(s) or
developer.
C. Permitted uses: mixed use, commercial first floor with residential
above.
D. Schedule of Area and Bulk Requirements.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 24,000 square feet.
(2) Lot frontage. The minimum frontage shall be based on the
underlying B1A lot frontage requirements.
(3) Perimeter setbacks. The minimum perimeter setback shall be
based on the minimum setbacks as outlined in the underlying B1A
District.
(4) Density: 20 dwelling units per acre.
(5) Public service. Every residential and commercial unit shall be
served by public water and sanitary sewer, which, if required, shall
be installed by and at the expense of the developer.
(a) The developer shall install, at his sole expense, the following
minimum site improvements: streets, accessways, off-street
parking areas, sidewalks, streetlighting, storm drainage
facilities, landscaping and open space areas. These
improvements shall be installed in accordance with this
chapter unless a specific waiver is granted as provided for
within the applicable standards or requirements. Whenever a
developer is required to place catch basins as part of an
approval, the Planning Board shall, in its discretion, require
the developer to pay for and place a sign at each such catch
basin setting forth the requirements and penalties of §§ 220-23
to 220-26 of the Code of the City of Brigantine.
§ 85-25 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-25
1:148
§ 85-26. Affordable Housing Overlay: B1 (AHO-B1) Zone.
(b) All utilities shall be installed underground within the mixed use
development. These utilities shall include but not be limited to
gas, television cable, telephone, and electric.
(6) Parking.
(a) On-site parking for the residential component of the
development in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(b) Parking for the commercial aspect of the development shall be
provided in accordance with the City of Brigantine on-site
parking requirements.
(7) Solid waste disposal areas.
(a) All trash compactors, bins and areas of refuse storage and
recyclable storage areas shall be located in a common area and
in such a manner to be screened from the general view of the
public and must comply with all other ordinances of the City of
Brigantine, including any ordinance in reference to dumpsters.
(b) Solid waste disposal areas shall be fully accessible to service
vehicles.
(c) Solid waste disposal areas shall be maintained in a clean and
orderly condition at all times.
(d) Solid waste disposal areas shall be designed of a durable
material consistent with the architectural theme of the
development.
(e) Disposal areas and all facilities shall be provided and
maintained by the owner of the development.
(8) Public safety considerations.
(a) All multifamily developments shall address the following public
safety issues within the application for development:
[1] Emergency access routes for police, fire and ambulance
vehicles.
[2] Architectural techniques utilized to enhance the security
of the development's occupants.
(b) All public safety facilities located in a project shall be kept
unobstructed by parking and/or any other type of storage. No
parking spaces shall be placed to obstruct access as approved
by the Fire Chief and/or Police Chief of the City of Brigantine.
§ 85-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-26
1:149
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Overlay B1 (AHO-B1)
overlay zone is to create an incentive to redevelop property for
inclusionary development. The tract may be developed at a density of
20 units per acre. The density is predicated on a set-aside for affordable
housing (low- and moderate-income housing). The affordable units will
be for rent; the set-aside shall be 15%.
B. Designated overlay area. The AHO-B1 Zone will encompass a portion of
the B1 (Business) Zone. This district will be the focus of an overlay zone
with residential uses over existing commercial. This zone contains an
existing commercial retail and service uses that are located along
Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard and is listed on the Tax Map as Block
3701, Lots 1-9 and Block 3702, Lots 1-9. The overlay zone at this
location will provide for up to three residential floors above the existing
or new commercial uses. There will be a fifteen-percent set-aside for
affordable family rental units with 13% of the affordable units for verylow-
income households. The underlying B1 Zone, its permitted uses,
area and bulk requirements shall remain unchanged unless the overlay
district option for affordable housing is implemented by the property
owner(s) or developer.
C. Permitted uses: mixed use, commercial first floor with residential
above.
D. Schedule of Area and Bulk Requirements.
(1) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be based on the underlying
B-1 lot size requirements.
(2) Lot frontage. The minimum frontage shall be based on the
underlying B-1 lot frontage requirements.
(3) Perimeter setbacks. The minimum perimeter setback shall be
based on the minimum setbacks as outlined in the underlying B-1
District.
(4) Density: 20 dwelling units per acre.
(5) Public service. Every residential and commercial unit shall be
served by public water and sanitary sewer, which, if required, shall
be installed by and at the expense of the developer.
(a) The developer shall install, at his sole expense, the following
minimum site improvements: streets, accessways, off-street
parking areas, sidewalks, streetlighting, storm drainage
facilities, landscaping and open space areas. These
improvements shall be installed in accordance with this
chapter unless a specific waiver is granted as provided for
within the applicable standards or requirements. Whenever a
developer is required to place catch basins as part of an
approval, the Planning Board shall, in its discretion, require
the developer to pay for and place a sign at each such catch
§ 85-26 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-26
1:150
basin setting forth the requirements and penalties of §§ 220-23
to 220-26 of the Code of the City of Brigantine.
(b) All utilities shall be installed underground within the mixed use
development. These utilities shall include but not be limited to
gas, television cable, telephone, and electric.
(6) Parking.
(a) On-site parking for the residential component of the
development in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
(b) Parking for the commercial aspect of the development shall be
provided in accordance with the City of Brigantine on-site
parking requirements.
(7) Solid waste disposal areas.
(a) All trash compactors, bins and areas of refuse storage and
recyclable storage areas shall be located in a common area and
in such a manner to be screened from the general view of the
public and must comply with all other ordinances of the City of
Brigantine including any ordinance in reference to dumpsters.
(b) Solid waste disposal areas shall be fully accessible to service
vehicles.
(c) Solid waste disposal areas shall be maintained in a clean and
orderly condition at all times.
(d) Solid waste disposal areas shall be designed of a durable
material consistent with the architectural theme of the
development.
(e) Disposal areas and all facilities shall be provided and
maintained by the owner of the development.
(8) Public safety considerations.
(a) All multifamily developments shall address the following public
safety issues within the application for development:
[1] Emergency access routes for police, fire and ambulance
vehicles.
[2] Architectural techniques utilized to enhance the security
of the development's occupants.
(b) All public safety facilities located in a project shall be kept
unobstructed by parking and/or any other type of storage. No
parking spaces shall be placed to obstruct access as approved
by the Fire Chief and/or Police Chief of the City of Brigantine.
§ 85-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-26
1:151
Chapter 87
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175. Fees schedule — See Ch. 210, Art. II.
§ 85-26 BRIGANTINE CODE § 85-26
1:152
ARTICLE I
Supplier; Installation; Use
[Adopted 10-6-1982 by Ord. No. 28-1982]
§ 87-1. Contract specifications.
The appropriate officer of the City of Brigantine is hereby empowered to
negotiate a contract with a responsible supplier (hereinafter "supplier")
for installation at the supplier's own expense at police headquarters in
the City of Brigantine of a Varitech security burglar and fire receiving
system (hereinafter "system"), to be equipped to receive burglar and fire
alarm service for direct wire digital receivers from the supplier's private
subscribers to Brigantine police headquarters. Said contract shall set forth
the charges to be paid to the City of Brigantine by the supplier's individual
subscriber for installation into the system and maintenance of that
installation. In addition, the contract shall further provide for the schedule
of fees to be charged by the supplier to its individual subscribers.
Nevertheless, no fees or other charges shall be paid by the supplier to
the City of Brigantine for placement of the system in Brigantine police
headquarters. Said contract shall further require the supplier to indemnify
the City of Brigantine against any loss, including reasonable attorney's fees,
which the City of Brigantine may incur as a consequence of the failure of the
supplier to fulfill the terms of its contract with the City of Brigantine or any
contract which the supplier may have with its individual subscriber, and the
contract shall further require the supplier to post a bond or other security in
an amount sufficient to guarantee its performance under the terms of that
contract. Prior to execution, such contract shall be approved by resolution
of the Board of Commissioners of the City of Brigantine.
§ 87-2. Responsibilities of supplier.
The system to be installed will be and remain the property of supplier. All
alarms connected to said system will operate in a uniform manner and in
accordance with the manufacturer's specification so that the system can be
efficiently monitored by the Brigantine Police Dispatcher. The supplier shall
install and maintain the system at its own expense and shall be responsible
for the transfer of all existing connections to the system and shall be
further responsible to make such improvements to the system during the
term of the contract as may be requested by the Chief of Police. Access to
the system shall be available to all alarm companies having permission to
operate in the City of Brigantine.
§ 87-3. (Reserved)63
63.Editor's Note: Former § 87-3, Fees for installation and service, as amended, was repealed
12-17-2008 by Ord. No. 30-2008.
§ 87-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-4
1:153
§ 87-4. Supplier required to obtain permit.
Any alarm equipment supplier that installs, maintains or services alarm
systems or automatic protection devices in the City must be approved by
and secure a permit from the City of Brigantine Police Department.
§ 87-5. Timing mechanisms for audible alarms.
After passage of this article, all owners of premises within the City of
Brigantine equipped with audible alarms with a timing mechanism must
equip that mechanism in such a manner so that it will disengage the audible
alarm after a maximum period of 15 minutes. Any audible alarms without
such a timing mechanism shall be disconnected by the owner within 60 days
from the effective date of this article.
§ 87-6. Automatic direct-keying protection devices.
Automatic direct-keying protecting devices shall be governed as follows:
§ 87-7. Repair services.
Repair service for automatic protection devices and alarms systems shall be
governed as follows:
A. Automatic protection devices that use the services of intermediaries
(live voice central dispatch) are prohibited from using any primary or
secondary phone lines at the City of Brigantine Police Department. It is
the intent of this section to have all alarms, leased lines, digital
communicators and others connected to the system at the Police
Department.
B. After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful to transmit
alarms to the Brigantine Police Department through live-voice central
dispatch from private alarm companies and live voice through any other
intermediaries. All such alarms shall be transmitted by connection to
the system to be installed within the City of Brigantine Police
Department.
C. The time for transmitting each digital electric or electronic messages
shall not exceed five seconds.
D. Within 60 days from the effective date of this article, existing automatic
protection devices in the City shall be disconnected from primary and
secondary phone lines at the expense of the owner or lessee of the
premises in which such device is located.
A. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells or leases an automatic
protection device which is keyed to a designated phone line or who
sells, installs or leases an alarm system in the City of Brigantine shall
make service available on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis, seven days
a week, to repair such device or system or to correct any malfunction
that may occur.
§ 87-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 87-7
1:154
§ 87-8. Disconnection of faulty systems.
When messages or alarms evidencing failure to comply with the operational
requirements set forth are received by the Police or Fire Department and
the Chief of Police concludes that the automatic protection device or alarm
system sending such messages or alarms should be disconnected in order
to relieve the particular department of the burden of responding to false
alarms, he is authorized to demand that the supplier or the owner or lessee
of the premises in which the device is located disconnect the device until it
is made to comply with this operational requirement. If disconnection of the
detective device is not accomplished promptly, the Chief of Police may then
disconnect the device from the system upon notice to the owner or lessee of
the premises in which the device is located.
§ 87-9. False alarms.
For the purpose of defraying the cost to the City of Brigantine of responding
to a false alarm, the owner or lessee of the premises in which such device is
located shall, as a condition to installation and operation of such equipment,
execute a consent in such form as may be prescribed by the Chief of
Police, that such owner or lessee shall be permitted five false alarms in
each calendar year, after which such owner or lessee shall pay to the City
of Brigantine $25 for such subsequent false alarm originating from his
premises. This sum shall constitute a civil claim by the City apart from any
penalty provisions hereunder. Any such owner or lessee shall execute such
consent prior to connection to the system.
§ 87-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
B. At the time of installation, the alarm equipment supplier shall furnish to
its private subscriber written information as to how service may be
obtained at any time, including the telephone number of the alarm
equipment supplier or agent responsible for service. The supplier and
the owner or lessee of the premises in which the alarm equipment is
located shall be responsible for having such equipment repaired or
disconnected as quickly as possible after notice that the automatic
protection device is not functioning properly.
A. Failure of any person to comply with the requirements of written notice
of violation of any provision of this article within three days of receipt of
such notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day's failure to
comply with such provision shall constitute a separate violation.
B. Any person found guilty of misuse, false activation or continual
activation shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than
$1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 87-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-10
1:155

ARTICLE II
Key Boxes
[Adopted 5-19-1998 by Ord. No. 6-1998]
§ 87-11. Where required.
All properties within the City of Brigantine which have an automatic or
manual fire alarm system or an automatic or manual fire suppression
system shall hereinafter be equipped with a key box. Further, the Chief
of the Fire Department or his designee may require other properties to
install a key box if such key box will aid the fire-fighting capability of the
Brigantine Fire Department.
§ 87-12. Use of approved key boxes required.
Any and all key boxes erected pursuant to this article shall be of a type
approved by Underwriters Laboratory and shall further be approved by the
Fire Chief of the City of Brigantine or his designee.
§ 87-13. Location of key boxes.
Said key boxes shall be located at the properties where they are so required
in a manner which will allow easy access by the City of Brigantine Fire
Department, and said location must be approved by the Fire Chief of the
City of Brigantine or his designee prior to any installation of said key box.
§ 87-14. Key box contents.
All such key boxes shall contain, at a minimum, the following, as applicable:
§ 87-15. One- and two-family residential dwellings exempt.
One- and two-family residential dwellings shall be specifically exempted
from the requirements of this article.
A. Keys to any and all locked points of ingress or egress whether on the
interior or exterior of any property.
B. Keys to any locked mechanical equipment rooms within or on said
property.
C. Keys to any locked electrical rooms within or on said property.
D. Keys to all elevator controls and control units.
E. Keys to such other areas as directed by the Fire Chief of the City of
Brigantine or his designee and for which gaining access will be a
benefit in the efforts of the City of Brigantine Fire Department in
fighting fires or other hazards.
§ 87-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-16
1:157
§ 87-16. Time for compliance.
All existing properties which are required to erect a key box pursuant to this
article shall have the same approved and erected in not less than six months
from the effective date of this article. All newly constructed buildings which
would require a key box to be erected pursuant to this article shall comply
prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy (CO).
§ 87-17. Maintenance.
Said key boxes shall be maintained so that entry upon the same may be
easily gained by the City of Brigantine Fire Department and representatives
thereof. Further, said key boxes are to be maintained in a neat, clean and
well maintained condition.
§ 87-18. Missing keys.
The property owner shall be strictly responsible for any and all keys missing
from said key box, and the City of Brigantine, its agents, representatives
and employees, including members of the City of Brigantine Fire
Department, are specifically indemnified and held harmless regarding any
such missing keys.
§ 87-19. Violations and penalties.
Any owner/occupant of a property which is in violation of this article, after
receiving written notice from the City of Brigantine Fire Department, shall
be subject to a fine of $100 per day for each offense.
§ 87-16 BRIGANTINE CODE § 87-19
1:158
Chapter 91
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Drugs and drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 159.
Fees schedule — See Ch. 210, Art. II.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
§ 87-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 87-19
1:159

ARTICLE I
Licensing Fees
[Adopted 12-4-1946 by Ord. No. 6-1946; amended in its entirety
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
§ 91-1. Club license.
On and after July 1, 1983, the annual fee for a club license issued in
accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Law, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., as
modified by N.J.S.A. 52:17B-1 et seq., for premises within the corporate
limits of the City of Brigantine shall be as set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
§ 91-2. Plenary retail consumption license.
On and after July 1, 1983, the annual fee for a plenary retail consumption
license for premises within the corporate limits of the City of Brigantine
shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees
Schedule.
§ 91-3. Plenary retail distribution license.
On and after July 1, 1983, the annual fee for a plenary retail distribution
license for premises within the corporate limits of the City of Brigantine
shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees
Schedule.
§ 91-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-3
1:161

ARTICLE II
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 7-16-1975 by Ord. No. 11-1975]
§ 91-4. Consumption in public prohibited.
It is hereby prohibited to drink any intoxicating liquor on any sidewalk,
street, avenue, highway, public parking lot, park, recreation area or in
any vehicle not on private property within the City of Brigantine, Atlantic
County, New Jersey, at any time.
§ 91-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
Any person or persons violating this article shall, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or imprisonment in the county jail not more than 90 days, or both
fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge hearing said
violation.
§ 91-6. Regulations to be posted.
Copies of this article shall be posted on the beaches of Brigantine, in
the City Hall of said City and every place licensed for the sale of alcohol
beverages in said City.
§ 91-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-6
1:163

ARTICLE III
Purchase by Minors
[Adopted 5-4-1983 by Ord. No. 7-1983]
§ 91-7. Minimum age established. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992]
The right to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages in the City of
Brigantine shall be extended to persons 21 years of age.
§ 91-8. Purchase by minors prohibited.
Any purchase or attempted purchase of alcoholic beverages by person not
meeting the age criteria of § 91-7, whether the same is to be consumed
on the premises or not, is hereby prohibited, and any person violating this
section shall be deemed a disorderly person.
§ 91-9. Use of false documents to represent age.
Any person not meeting the age criteria in § 91-7 who shall attempt to
purchase any alcoholic beverages in the City of Brigantine by use of false
documents or representations shall be deemed a disorderly person.
§ 91-10. Possession of false documents to represent age.
Any person under the age criteria of § 91-7 who shall have in his or her
possession any altered or false document or documents for the purpose of
identification and/or establishing the age of said person shall be deemed a
disorderly person.
§ 91-11. Misrepresentation of age to officers.
Any person who misrepresents his or her age to any police officer or
special officer of the City of Brigantine in connection with the purchase and/
or consumption of any alcoholic beverages shall be deemed a disorderly
person.
§ 91-12. Persons allowing minors to use identification documents.
Any person who shall permit the use of his or her documents by any person
under the age criteria of § 91-7 for the purpose of securing the purchase of
alcoholic beverages in the City of Brigantine shall be deemed a disorderly
person.
§ 91-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
The Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine shall have jurisdiction over
this article. Unless otherwise provided for in N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, any person
who is convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be subject to
a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
§ 91-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-13
1:165
both. The above penalties will be in addition to any and all penalties which
may be imposed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or other applicable statutes.
§ 91-13 BRIGANTINE CODE § 91-13
1:166
ARTICLE IV
Possession or Consumption on Private Property by Minors
[Adopted 10-7-2009 by Ord. No. 24-2009]
§ 91-14. Underage possession or consumption.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
§ 91-15. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this Article IV shall, in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2, be punished by a
fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
B. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privileges of the
defendant. Upon conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a
report to the Motor Vehicle Commission stating the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.2. If a person, at the time of the imposition of
sentence, is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
C. If a person, at the time of the imposition of a sentence, has a valid
driver's license issued by the State of New Jersey, the Court shall
immediately collect the license and forward it to the Motor Vehicle
Commission along with the report. If for any reason the license cannot
be collected, the court shall include in the report the complete name,
address, date of birth, eye color and sex of the person, as well as the
first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by the
court.
D. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing, that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of
license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of written notice in writing. Failure to receive
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If a person convicted under this Article IV is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresidential
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit it to the Motor Vehicle Commission on the required report. The
court shall not collect the license of a non-resident convicted under this
§ 91-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-15
1:167
§ 91-16. Exceptions.
article. Upon receipt of a report from the court, the Motor Vehicle
Commission shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. Nothing contained in this Article IV is intended nor shall it be construed
as prohibiting an underage person from consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony
or rite, or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. As used in this Article IV, the following terms shall have the meanings
set forth:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to testimony or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
C. Nothing contained in this Article IV is intended nor shall it be construed
as prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages by any such person
while actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person
who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a school for the
culinary arts or a hotel management program at a county vocational
school or postsecondary educational institution; provided, however,
that this article shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under N.J.S.A. 33:1-81 or any other section of law against a
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 91-15 BRIGANTINE CODE § 91-16
1:168
Chapter 95
AMUSEMENT GAMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use — See Ch. 198. Mercantile businesses — See Ch. 210.
§ 95-1. Amusement or entertainment area. [Amended 3-18-1964 by
Ord. No. 7-1964]
§ 95-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to own or operate
within this municipality any amusement game or games as said terms are
defined by the Amusement Games Licensing Law (Chapter 109 of the Laws
of 1959),65 whether said game or games are of skill or chance, or both,
and whether said game or games be played and operated with or without
numbers or figures without first having obtained a license from the Board
of Commissioners of the City of Brigantine so to do. Said license shall be
issued pursuant to and subject to the provision of the Amusement Games
Licensing Law (Chapter 109 of the Laws of 1959).
A. It is hereby determined and declared and found that the City of
Brigantine constitutes a seashore resort with parts thereof customarily
constituting an amusement or entertainment area according to the
customary understanding of said terms in the community.
B. The amusement or entertainment area in said City are more
particularly described as follows:
(1) (Reserved)64
(2) The area bounded as follows: beginning at the intersection of the
northerly line of Brigantine Avenue and the easterly line of 13th
Street North; thence northwardly along the easterly line of 13th
Street North 125 feet; thence eastwardly parallel with Brigantine
Avenue 200 feet to the westerly line of 14th Street North; thence
southwardly along the westerly line of 14th Street North 125 feet
to the northerly line of Brigantine Avenue; thence westwardly along
the northerly line of Brigantine Avenue 200 feet to the point and
place of beginning.
64.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B(1), regarding the premises known as "1400C" and
"1400D" East Brigantine Avenue and situated on the premises known as the "Seahorse
Pier," was repealed 6-20-2012 by Ord. No. 20-2012.
65.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.
§ 91-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-3
1:169
§ 95-3. Application requirements.
Each applicant for such a license shall file with the City Clerk a written
application in such form as prescribed by and in accordance with said
Amusement Games Licensing Law, as amended and supplemented,66 and
the rules and regulations promulgated by the Amusement Games Control
Commissioner of the State of New Jersey.
§ 95-4. License fees. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
The annual fees for the type of licenses to be issued hereunder shall be
as follows, and said annual fees shall accompany the application for said
licenses:
A. For games permitted under Category and Certification No. 1 of the
Amusement Games Control State Commissioner, including games being
generally known as "balloon game," "barrel game," "basketball game,"
"bear pitch game," "break-the-dish game," "bullpen ball game,"
"cigarette cork rifle game," "cigarette dart game," "cigarette toss
game," "dart game," "dodgem game," "glass pitch game," "hoopla
game," "mammy doll game," "milk bottle game," "milk can game,"
"number dart game," "over-and-under game," "penny pitch game," "pig
slide game," "ping-pong ball game," "ring toss game," "shooting gallery
game," "stuffed cat game" and any similar type of game granted
certification, the license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
B. For games permitted under Category and Certification No. 2 of the
Amusement Games Control State Commissioner, including arcade
games generally known as "baseball machine," "basketball machine," "
bouncing ball machine," "bowling machine," "crane machine,"
"dexterity tester machine," "digger machine," "football machine," "golf
machine," "gun machine," "hockey machine," "intelligence tester
machine," "pinball machine," "pokerino machine," "pool table machine,"
"pusher machine," "roll down machine," "rotary arm machine,"
"shooting machine," "shuffle alley machine," "skee ball machine," "skill
tester machine," "strength tester machine" or any game of similar type
granted certification, the license fees shall be as set forth in Chapter
210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
C. For games permitted under Category and Certification No. 3 of the
Amusement Games Control State Commissioner, including nondraw
raffle games such as duck pond game, fish pond game, grab-bag game,
pick-the-stick game or any game of similar type granted certification,
the license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
D. For games permitted under Category and Certification No. 4 of the
Amusement Games Control State Commissioner, including competitive
66.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.
§ 95-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 95-4
1:170
§ 95-5. Supervision.
The Board of Commissioners of the City of Brigantine shall have and
exercise control and supervision over all amusement games held, operated
or conducted under such license with all the powers authorized or granted
to it under the Amusement Games Licensing Law and all amendments and
supplements thereto67 and the rules and regulation of the State Amusement
Games Control Commissioner.
§ 95-6. Revocation or suspension of license.
In the event that any licensee shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or the Amusement Games Licensing Law68 or the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Amusement Games Control
Commissioner or the terms of such license, such licensee shall be a
games generally known as "bowlo game," "fascination game,"
"greyhound game," "skilo game," "throw fascination game" or any game
of similar type granted certification, the license fee, depending upon
the seating capacity of the place to be licensed, shall be as set forth in
Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
E. For games permitted under Category and Certification No. 5 of the
Amusement Games Control State Commissioner, including games
commonly known as "stop and go" or like games granted certification,
the license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
F. For games permitted under Category and Certification No. 6 of the
Amusement Games State Control Commissioner, including games
commonly known as "guessing games," such as guess your weight
game, guess your age game or any like game granted certification, the
license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses,
Article II, Fees Schedule.
G. For games permitted under Category and Certification No. 7 of the
Amusement Games Control State Commissioner, including games
wherein a single player attempts to ring a bell or gong by striking with a
maul one end of a horizontal lever arm and the other end of which
propels a weight upward along a vertical wire at the top of which is a
bell or gong, generally known as "ring the bell game" or "high striker
game" or any like game granted certification, the license fee shall be as
set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees
Schedule.
H. For any game not listed or subsequently certified by the State
Commissioner, the license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
67.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 5:8-100 et seq.
§ 95-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-6
1:171
disorderly person and, if convicted as such, shall, in addition to suffering
any other penalties which may be imposed, suffer the forfeiture, revocation
or suspension of any license issued to such licensee under this chapter.
§ 95-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject by the Municipal Court to a penalty not to exceed
$200 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of
the Judge of said Court, and the same shall be in addition to the powers of
suspension or revocation of any such license as provided for by the City of
Brigantine. The above penalty and suspension are in addition to any penalty
or suspension of license which may be imposed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et
seq. or other applicable statutes.
Chapter 98
BAMBOO
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds and other debris — See Ch. 115. Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
§ 98-1. Prohibition.
No owner, tenant or occupant of a property, or person, corporation or other
entity, shall plant, install or cause or permit the planting or installation
of plant species commonly known as "running bamboo" or "clumping
(Sympodial) bamboo", including, but not limited to, the following plant
genera: Arundinaria, Bambusa, Chimonobambusa, Endrocalamus, Fargesia,
Phyllostachys, Pleioblastus, Pseudosasa, Sasa, Sasaella, or Semiarundinaria
upon any property located within the City of Brigantine.
§ 98-2. Duty to confine.
In the event any species commonly known as "running bamboo" or
"clumping bamboo" is located upon any property within the City of
Brigantine, prior to the effective date of this prohibition, the owner and
occupant of said property shall jointly and severally be required to confine
such species to prevent the encroachment, spread, invasion or intrusion of
same onto any other private or public property or public right-of-way. In lieu
of confining the species, the property owner or occupant may elect to totally
remove the bamboo from the property and all affected properties. Failure
to properly confine such bamboo shall require removal as set forth below.
The cost of said removal shall be at the bamboo property owner's expense.
This duty to confine shall not apply if the property owner and/or occupant
can establish to the satisfaction of the Code Enforcement Officer that the
§ 95-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 98-2
1:172
bamboo, which is on his/her property at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, originated on another property.
§ 98-3. Removal.
A. In the event running bamboo or clumping bamboo is present on the
effective date of this prohibition and a complaint is received by the City
regarding an encroachment of any bamboo plant or root, and the Code
Enforcement Officer of the City, after observation and/or inspection,
determines that there is an encroachment or invasion on any adjoining/
neighboring private or public property or public right-of-way
(hereinafter, "the affected property"), the City shall serve notice to the
bamboo property owner in writing that the bamboo has invaded other
private or public property(s) or public right-of-way(s) and demand the
removal of the bamboo from the affected property, and demand
approved confinement against future encroachment or, in the
alternative, the total removal from the bamboo property owner's
property. Notice shall be provided to the bamboo property owner, as
well as to the owner of the affected property, by certified, return receipt
requested mail and regular mail. Within 45 days of receipt of such
notice, the bamboo property owner shall submit to the Code
Enforcement Officer of the City, with a copy to the owner of the affected
property, a plan for the removal of the bamboo from the affected
property, which plan shall include restoration of the affected property
after removal of the bamboo. Within 120 days of receipt of the Code
Enforcement Officer's approval of the plan of removal and restoration,
the removal and restoration shall be completed to the satisfaction of the
Code Enforcement Officer of the City.
B. If the bamboo property owner does not accomplish the removal of the
bamboo from such other private or public property or public right-ofway
in accordance herewith, the Code Enforcement Officer of the City
of Brigantine shall cause a citation to be issued with a penalty up to
$100 for each day the violation continues, enforceable through the
Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine. The Administrative Officer
may request, and the Municipal Court may grant, a specific
performance remedy. The City may also institute civil proceedings for
injunctive or civil relief.
C. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as limiting the rights of a private
property owner to seek civil relief through a Court of proper
jurisdiction, nor the institution of civil proceedings against the property
parties.
D. When an encroachment is upon public property or public right-of-way
and the bamboo property owner and/or occupant has not complied with
the written notice provided as set forth above, the City of Brigantine, at
its discretion, may remove or contract for the removal of such bamboo
from the City property or public right-of-way. The cost of such removal
shall be the responsibility of the bamboo property owner and occupant
and shall be paid or assessed as a lien against the property on which the
§ 98-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 98-3
1:173
§ 98-4. Replanting prohibited.
Any running bamboo or clumping bamboo, either planted or caused to be
planted or existing on the effective date of this regulation, may not be
replanted or replaced once such bamboo is or has become dead, destroyed,
uprooted, or otherwise removed.
Chapter 101
BEACH AND DUNE PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 3,
§ 3-59.
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Bulkheads — See Ch. 127.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Excavations — See Ch. 165.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 181.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Sand removal — See Ch. 220, Art. I.
§ 101-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as "Beach and Dune Protection Ordinance."
§ 101-2. Findings; objectives; purpose.
bamboo growth originated. The cost of said removal from the Cityowned
property and/or public right-of-way shall include the installation
of an appropriate barrier to prevent future bamboo invasion.
A. Certain portions of the beachfront and strand bordering on the Atlantic
Ocean the entire length of the oceanfront from 14th Street North to the
stone jetty on the north side of Absecon Inlet have in the past suffered
severely from damage caused by storms and storm tides at which time
the sea has encroached upon the land and has caused serious damage
to public and private property and has endangered the safety and
welfare of the public at large.
B. The situation created along the beach by reason of such storm tides and
resulting damage has been so serious that many thousands of dollars of
both public and private funds have been expended for the erection of
bulkheads, sand fences and other devices intended to prevent
encroachment by the sea.
C. It has been clearly demonstrated that well-established and -protected
sand dunes, together with berms, beaches and underwater slopes of
suitable configuration and of proper grade and height, are a durable
and effective protection against high tides and flooding and against
§ 98-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 101-2
1:174
damage by the ocean under storm conditions and are the natural
protection of the coastal areas adjacent thereto, and the state and its
subdivisions and their inhabitants have an interest in the continued
protection thereof and in the right to restore them in the event of
damage or destruction.
D. Ocean- and bayfront dunes are irreplaceable physical features of the
natural environment possessing outstanding geological, recreational,
scenic and protective value. Protection and preservation in a natural
state is vital to this and succeeding generations of the citizens of the
City and the state. The dunes are a dynamic migrating natural
phenomenon that help protect lives and property in adjacent landward
areas and buffer barrier islands and barrier beach spits from the effects
of major natural coastal hazards such as hurricanes, storms, flooding
and erosion. Natural dune systems also help promote wide, sandy
beaches and provide an important habitat for wildlife species.
E. Sand dunes are vulnerable to erosion by both wind and water, but
primarily by wind, since its attacks against the dunes are sustained for
substantial and frequently recurring periods of time, whereas, if
protected by typical berms, beaches and underwater slopes, the dunes
are attacked by water only at infrequent intervals. The best available
means of protecting said dunes against wind erosion is by preventing
indiscriminate trespassing, construction or other acts which might
destroy or damage said dunes and through the use of native plantings,
supplemented by sand fencing and other devices designated to prevent
the free-blowing of sand and the maintenance of the surface tensions,
root accumulations, normal contours and other features found in typical
natural dunes.
F. The immediate dune and beach area are not capable of rigid definition
or delineation or of completely firm stabilization, so that particular
sites, at the time free of dunes, may, as a result of natural forces,
become part of the dune area necessary for the continuation of the
protection outlined above, and persons purchasing or owning such
property shall do so subject to the public interest therein.
G. It is the purpose of this chapter to define the dune and shore areas so
affected and establish regulations to assure their continued
effectiveness and to further the following objectives:
(1) To protect human life and welfare.
(2) To preserve the natural function of the dunes.
(3) To minimize expenditure of public funds for erosion control
projects.
(4) To minimize the destruction of existing beachfront structures.
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as sewer,
water, streets, etc.
§ 101-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-2
1:175
§ 101-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCRETION — Includes either natural or artificial accretion. "Natural
accretion" is the buildup of land, solely by action of the forces of nature,
on a beach by deposition of waterborne or airborne material. "Artificial
accretion" is a similar buildup of land by reason of an act of man, such
as the accretion formed by a groin, breakwater or beachfill, deposited by
mechanical means.
BACKSHORE — That zone of the shore or beach lying between the
foreshore and dune area and normally acted upon by waves only during
severe storms, especially when combined with exceptionally high waters.
BARRIER ISLAND — A land form consisting of single or multiple elongated
sand ridges, dunes, vegetated zones and marsh terraces rising above mean
sea level, running generally parallel to the coast, but separated from it by
lagoons or inlets.
BEACH — The zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from
the low-water line to the place where there is a marked change in the
material of physiographical form, i.e., dune or bulkhead. It includes the
foreshore and backshore.
BEACH ACCESS PLAN — An augmented version of the Dune and Shore
Management Plan delineating existing vehicular and pedestrian accessways
to be either maintained or closed and restored. This plan also delineates
dune fields to be restored or reconstructed due to elevation, location,
vegetative condition or absence of dune formation.
BERM — A nearly horizontal part of the beach, or backshore formed by the
deposit of material by wave actions.
(6) To preserve endangered and threatened wildlife.
(7) To facilitate the management, maintenance, restoration and
reconstruction of the existing dune system.
H. The erosion of the beachfront has created an immediate and imminent
threat and danger to life of persons and property in the City of
Brigantine by reason of the destruction of the sand barrier which
protects the City's oceanfront on both public and private property
within the City of Brigantine.
I. The interference with or the depletion of the beach and sand dunes
tends to permit encroachment by the sea, and conditions recited above
make it imperative that the governing body regulate and control the
removal of sand from the beach or dunes or any other interference with
or depletion of the protective barrier on the oceanfront of the City of
Brigantine.
§ 101-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 101-3
1:176
BULKHEAD — A structure or partition constructed of timber, sheet piling,
rock, etc., designed to retain or prevent sliding of the land or protect the
uplands against erosion due to wave action.
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION — Any application made under Chapter
198, Land Use, or any other law to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
the City of Brigantine, for site plan approval, for subdivision approval or for
variances of any kind or type or any application to the Construction Code
Official of the City of Brigantine for a building permit.[Added 4-2-1986 by
Ord. No. 7-1986]
DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTION LINE — An artificial boundary delineating
the various districts and area contained within the Dune and Shoreline
Management Plan and the developed community. This line shows the
extreme limit of allowable development along the shore prior to intrusion
into the existing dune fields and beaches.
DUNE AND SHORELINE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A topographic survey
of the dune fields and beaches delineating the following districts: Dune
Maintenance District, Dune Reconstruction District, Dune Restoration
District, development restriction line, special areas (City and private) and
least tern nesting area.
DUNE AREA — The area actually or normally occupied by dunes. For
purposes of this chapter, it shall be construed to include its actual
dimensions.
DUNE CREST — The point or line where the dune's highest elevation is
located.
DUNE LINE — A row of dunes, which may blend in with a berm or berms,
which blend in with each other, are roughly parallel to the ocean and serve
as a protective barrier against the elements.
DUNE MAINTENANCE DISTRICT — An artificial area delineating dune
fields containing two or more dune ridges and having a greater width than
400 feet. The dune surface is stabilized by natural vegetation.
DUNE RECONSTRUCTION DISTRICT — An artificial area delineating a
discontinuous dune field or beach area without dunes, poorly developed,
unstable and less than 75 feet in width.
DUNE RESTORATION DISTRICT — An artificial area delineating a dune
field containing one or more dune ridges which may be discontinuous
between the beach and upland structures and having a width of less than
300 feet.
DUNES — Systems or formations of drifting windblown material, usually
sand, which are upland of the beach and oriented roughly parallel to the
shoreline. These formations may be natural or of human origin and are
usually stabilized with natural vegetation. The term "dune" includes all
areas between the inland limits of the dry sandy beach and the foot of the
most inland slope. Dunes include the following subcategories:
§ 101-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-3
1:177
EROSION — The wearing away of land by the action of natural forces; on a
beach, the carrying away of beach materials by wave action, tidal currents,
littoral currents or by deflation.
FORESHORE — The part of the shore lying between the crest of the
seaward berm and the ordinary low-water mark and that is ordinarily
traversed by the uprush and backrush of the waves.
GROIN — A shore protection structure built (usually perpendicular to the
shoreline) to trap littoral drift or reduce erosion of the shore. A "groin field
or system" is a series of "groins" acting together to protect a section of
beach.
JETTY — A structure extending into a body of water and designed to prevent
shoaling of a channel by littoral materials and to direct and confine a stream
or tidal flow.
LEAST TERN NESTING AREA — A special area overlaying the Dune
Maintenance District which designates the nesting habitat of the least
tern, between the backshore and foredune, to be protected from human
disturbance and encroachment.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — Includes the term "sea level" and refers to the 1929
sea level datum as established by the United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey.
NATURAL VEGETATION — Includes the terms "native vegetation" and
"indigenous vegetation." Specifically, it shall mean such plants as beach
grass (ammophila brevigulata), dusty miller (artemisia stelleriana),
hudsonia (hudsonia tomentosa), sea rocket (cakile endentula), seaside
goldenrod (solidago sempervirens), bayberry (myrica pensylvanica) or
beach plum (prunus maritma) which normally grow or may be planted on
the slopes of dunes or behind them; no distinction is made as to how such
plants are introduced into their locations.
FOREDUNE or PRIMARY DUNES — The front dunes immediately
behind the backshore of the beach.
A.
PRIMARY BACKDUNES and SECONDARY AND TERTIARY DUNES —
The backslope of the foredune; extends from the dune ridges
immediately landward of the foredune to the inland toe of the most
inland slope.
B.
MIGRATING DUNES — Dunes which have changed location through
the course of time.
C.
ARTIFICIAL DUNES — Accumulation of sediment in dune form which
have been built by any nonnatural process such as bulldozing or sand
fencing.
D.
STABILIZED DUNES — Dunes maintained in a fixed location by
artificial means.
E.
DUNE FIELDS — Include but are not limited to any combination of
dune types previously defined.
F.
§ 101-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 101-3
1:178
PERMIT — Specific permission granted to an applicant to carry out the
activities described in any application brought pursuant to § 101-7 of this
chapter, first made to the City Engineer of this City. No permit shall be
effective unless formal permission for the requested activity is granted by
resolution or by ordinance of the City of Brigantine.[Added 4-2-1986 by
Ord. No. 7-1986]
SAND FENCE — Includes the term "snow fence." A form of barricade
established in a line or pattern along the backshore or within the dune
field for the express purpose of accumulating sand to aid the formation of
dunes. The sand fence shall be a picket type, i.e., a commercial type of light,
wooden fence, four feet in height, held together by wire and secured by
posts. Alternate forms of barricades may be utilized only with the approval
of the City Engineer.[Amended 5-5-1982 by Ord. No. 20-1982]
SLOPE, LEEWARD — The face or surface of the dune or berm going from
its crest or plateau away from the ocean.
SPECIAL AREA — An artificial area either overlaying or adjoining dune
districts delineating properties in either public or private ownership
warranting special consideration in either future development or
assessment. No development application shall be made for development of
privately owned property designated as, or claimed to be a special area,
without an application being first made to the Board of Commissioners
of the City of Brigantine a permit to develop the same area.[Amended
4-2-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986]
§ 101-4. Permitted construction activities.
Within the districts as delineated within the Dune and Shoreline
Management Plan, all construction activities are prohibited, with the
following exceptions:
§ 101-5. Access to beaches and dune fields.
A. Shore protection projects such as construction of bulkheads, jetties or
groins, as approved and/or undertaken by the City; Bureau of Shore
Protection, Division of Coastal Resources, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection; or Department of Army, Corps of Engineers.
B. Dune management programs designed to either maintain, restore or
reconstruct the existing dune fields, such as supplemental plantings of
natural vegetation, placement of sand fencing, construction of artificial
dunes of berms or any other programs that may be approved by the
City.
A. Access to the beaches and dune fields in all districts delineated by the
Dune and Shoreline Management Plan shall be limited to those
accessways shown on the Beach Access Plan. No accessway across a
dune field shall be constructed by a private owner without a permit
issued by the City.
§ 101-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-5
1:179
§ 101-6. Fencing.
The City may erect or require the construction of fencing in and along the
districts delineated by the Dune and Shoreline Management Plan as may be
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter and provide or require
suitable markings to identify the same. Persons may enter such areas only
to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Where walkways or boardwalks
exist, the dune shall be suitably bordered with fences to prevent damage to
the dunes or berms which they cross.
§ 101-7. Movement of sand; permit application requirements.
B. The development of beach access structures which protect the dune
fields and structures, as well as natural and artificial means used to
stabilize said dune fields and structures is hereby encouraged by this
chapter. In addition to those beach accessways shown in the Beach
Access Plan, the City of Brigantine may, from time to time, require and
request the development of additional beach access structures. In any
development application, the Planning Board or Zoning Board shall
require that persons seeking to develop property adjacent to the dune
restriction line for multifamily or commercial uses erect beach
accessways at the cost and expense of the applicant. Beach accessways
should be constructed in such a manner as to protect the right of public
access to the beaches. In cases where the most appropriate accessway
is determined to be at or emanating from a street end, the Planning
Board, Zoning Board or City shall require that the applicant erect, own
and maintain such accessways on an easement and under a declaration
of covenants and restrictions agreed to by the applicant and the City. In
the case of single lots for development of single-family structures, the
Construction Official shall refer the applicant to the Board of
Commissioners for determination as to whether the erection of any
beach accessway should be required. [Added 4-2-1986 by Ord. No.
7-1986]
A. No individual, firm or corporation shall authorize or participate in any
manner in the moving or displacement of sand within the districts as
delineated by the Dune and Shoreline Management Plan except to
protect improvements adjacent thereto or to restore such
improvements to their prior condition.
B. Prior to such activity, a permit shall be obtained pursuant to an
application to the City Engineer which shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location of the sand to be moved or displaced.
(3) The nature and purpose of the proposed moving or displacement.
§ 101-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 101-7
1:180
§ 101-8. Issuance of permit; regulations; fees.
(4) The proposed method by which the applicant desires to move or
displace the same, including a description of the equipment,
machine or other apparatus to be used.
(5) An estimate in terms of cubic yards as to the quantity of sand to be
moved or displaced.
(6) A topographic map of the area to be disturbed, including areas
adjacent thereto, with the final contours which will be established.
(7) A statement in detail indicating satisfactory methods of
stabilization, including a time schedule.
(8) Such other information as may be reasonably required by the City
Engineer.
C. This section shall not be applicable to the City.
A. All permits shall be issued by the City Council of the City of Brigantine,
in the form of a resolution, for temporary activities on City-owned
properties, or in the form of an ordinance granting an easement over
City-owned properties, for permanent activities on City-owned
properties, or in the form of an ordinance granting an easement over
City-owned properties, for permanent activities. Permits shall be issued
by resolution, on privately owned properties, within the area delineated
by the Dune and Shoreline Management Plan only for those activities
permitted by this chapter. [Added 4-2-1986 by Ord. No. 7-1986;
amended 10-3-2018 by Ord. No. 23-2018]
B. No such permit shall be issued without a determination by the City
Engineer, based upon an inspection of the area involved, that such
removal will not create or increase a danger or hazard to life or
property. No permit will be granted if the proposed moving or
displacement will:
(1) Adversely affect the littoral drift in the districts delineated by the
Dune and Shoreline Management Plan.
(2) Result in a reduction of dune protection as provided for in the Dune
and Shoreline Management Plan.
(3) Interfere with the general configuration of the districts as
delineated by the Dune and Shoreline Management Plan.
(4) Otherwise substantially impair or interfere with the intent and
purpose of this chapter and the objectives set forth in § 101-2G
hereof.
C. No permit will be granted for, and it shall be unlawful for any individual,
firm or corporation to authorize or participate in the following activities
§ 101-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-8
1:181
§ 101-9. Violations and penalties; stop-work orders and additional
remedies.
§ 101-10. Performance guaranty; engineering fee. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
A cash bond of not less than $1,000 shall be deposited by the applicant
at the time of issuance of a permit. The actual amount of said bond shall
be determined by the City Engineer, based upon the scope of work. An
engineering fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article
II, Fees Schedule, shall be paid to the City to defray the cost of engineering
inspections. The bond shall be refunded upon the City Engineer's approval
of the work which has been done. If the work has not been done in
compliance with the specifications contained in § 101-11 hereof, the City
shall have the right to have the work done as so required, charging the cost
within the area delineated by the Dune and Shoreline Management
Plan:
(1) The removal of sand.
(2) The removal or destruction of natural vegetation.
(3) The building of groins or any other tangential construction which
arrests the littoral drift, preventing sand from supplementing the
dunes.
D. (Reserved)69
A. Any person, partnership, corporation, public agency or other entity who
violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 per violation and not more than 90 days in jail, or
both, and each day in which such violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation or offense. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, the City Engineer is
empowered to pursue such equitable and legal relief as may be
necessary to abate any violation of this chapter. In the event that the
violation involves either the movement of or disturbance of sand or
conduct in violation of any permit issued hereunder, the City Engineer
is hereby empowered to issue a stop-work order, in addition to pursuing
any legal or equitable remedy hereunder. In addition to the foregoing
remedies, the City may compel replacement or reestablishment of any
sand or vegetation illegally removed or disturbed and, in the event that
such establishment or replacement is performed by the City, to
maintain an action for the recovery of the cost thereof and to impose a
lien for such costs on any lands within the City of Brigantine owned by
the responsible party.
69.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, Fees, as amended, was repealed 12-17-2008 by Ord.
No. 29-2008.
§ 101-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 101-10
1:182
thereof against the bond. Any portion of the deposit remaining unused for
such purpose shall be returned to the applicant. No interest will accrue on
funds deposited as a performance guaranty.
§ 101-11. Additional requirements and specifications.
Specifications for moving or displacement of sand shall be as follows:
§ 101-12. Adoption of plans by reference.
A. The applicant or the applicant's contractor shall, in the process of
performing work on the dune, maintain the elevation of the dune as
established by the City Engineer.
B. The applicant shall be required to preserve all existing dune grass
during the course of any construction work, removal or displacement of
sand within the dune field. The reestablishment or transplanting of
dune grasses shall be required in all disturbed areas. These grasses
shall be American beach grass (ammophila breviligulata) and planted in
conformance with the current standards of the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service. Reference is
made to Technical Note NJ-25, Guide for Dune Protection, New Jersey,
dated October 1978. [Amended 5-5-1982 by Ord. No. 20-1982]
C. The applicant shall place a one-inch mat of salt hay over the entire area
of the portion of the dune which has been disturbed during
construction.
D. Where required, in lieu of or in addition to the planting of dune grasses,
the applicant shall install sand fencing. Said fencing shall be set in a
parallel row or rows in the backshore area and along the foredune
according to the specification of the City Engineer. [Amended
5-5-1982 by Ord. No. 20-1982]
E. The applicant shall notify the City Engineer 72 hours prior to the start
of any construction or work.
F. The applicant will be notified within 15 workdays from the date of the
application or when a completed application was submitted as to
whether a permit will be granted or denied.
G. Where, by the action of high winds and/or tides, sand is blown or
washed upon the lands, including street ends, lying westwardly from
the dune line, said sand shall be placed only on the backshore area.
[Amended 5-5-1982 by Ord. No. 20-1982]
A. There is hereby made a part hereof by reference, as though specifically
included, the following:
(1) The Dune and Shoreline Management Plan as set forth and
delineated in Section III of the Dune and Shoreline Management
Plan prepared for the City of Brigantine by Pennoni Associates,
§ 101-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-12
1:183
§ 101-13. Effect on projects previously granted approval. [Amended
5-5-1982 by Ord. No. 20-1982]
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as provided by law but shall not be deemed to affect any project
for which Planning Board approval has been previously granted.
§ 101-14. Dune vegetation maintenance permit. [Added 10-3-2018
by Ord. No. 23-2018]
There is hereby established in the City of Brigantine a dune vegetation
maintenance permit (DVMP) which certain property owners who qualify
pursuant to this chapter may seek application for and receive from the City.
Such permits will be issued by the Office of the City Engineer of the City of
Brigantine.
§ 101-15. Property owners eligible to apply for permit. [Added
10-3-2018 by Ord. No. 23-2018]
§ 101-16. Area subject to permit.
Inc., consisting of an index map and 16 pages dated June 24, 1981,
and revised August 13, 1981.
(2) The Beach Access Plan prepared by Pennoni Associates, Inc.,
consisting of 16 pages dated August 14, 1981.
B. These plans are considered to be supplemental to the official Zoning
and Tax Map previously adopted by the City, all of which are on file in
the office of the Clerk.
A. A private property owner may apply for a dune vegetation maintenance
permit if such property owner owns property that is consistent with one
of the following categories:
(1) The property owner owns property that is contiguous to the dunes;
(2) The property owner is an owner of property, which property is
contiguous to City-owned facilities and which facilities are
contiguous to the City-owned dunes;
(3) The property owner owns property that is on a public right-of-way,
which public right-of-way is contiguous to dunes directly across the
right-of-way from the private property;
(4) A property owner who owns property directly across the public
right-of-way contiguous to a City-owned parking lot, which is then
contiguous to the City-owned dunes.
B. Such property owners shall make application to the City for the dune
vegetation maintenance permit through the Office of the City Engineer
on a form provided by the City Engineer or his or her designee.
§ 101-12 BRIGANTINE CODE § 101-16
1:184
§ 101-17. Application review and approval. [Amended 2-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 2-2019]
§ 101-18. Fees.
At the time of the filing of the application for dune vegetation maintenance
permit, the property owner shall pay a fee to the City in an amount provided
for on the permit application form. Specific additional fees may be imposed
by the City for certain tasks and maintenance functions, which additional
fees shall be identified and provided for in the application.
Chapter 105
BEACHES AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
A. Work area. The work area for maintenance of dunes is restricted to an
area within two parallel lines, perpendicular to the shoreline, extended
from the property corners to the lesser distance from the access road or
crest of the primary dune.
B. The nature of work. The types of work and maintenance that may be
conducted pursuant to the permit are described on the application form
to be provided to the property owner by the City Engineer, or his or her
designee. Conditions and restrictions have been approved by resolution
by the City Council and may, from time to time, be amended by City
Council to resolution.
C. Time for vegetative maintenance. Maintenance work that is being
performed pursuant to the dune vegetation maintenance permit must
be performed and completed between October 1 and April 30. No work
is to be performed later than April 30.
A. All applications for a dune vegetation maintenance permit are to be
reviewed by the City Engineer, or his or her designee, who shall review
such application, and as appropriate, approve such application, it being
the intention of this chapter that the Engineer, or his designee, shall
have final approval authority.
B. The approval authority provided to the office of the City Engineer is
herein provided for notwithstanding any other section of Chapter 101 of
the City Code.
C. The City Engineer's office shall be notified 48 hours prior to the start of
proposed work. Work cannot begin on-site until there has been an onsite
meeting between the City Engineer, or his or her designee, and the
contractor employed by the owner. Upon conclusion of the work, the
office of the City Engineer will be advised and the City Engineer's office
will perform a final inspection and close out.
§ 101-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-1
1:185
§ 105-1. Paid beaches and recreational areas established.
The City of Brigantine hereby establishes paid municipal beaches and
recreational areas for the public health, recreation and entertainment of
the general public. The paid municipal beaches and recreational areas shall
consist of the municipal beaches, the Cove Recreation Area, the Bayfront
Municipal Swim Area, the South Brigantine Jetty and the Seawall. For
purposes of this chapter, these areas are collectively referred to as the
municipal beaches and recreational areas.
§ 105-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAYFRONT MUNICIPAL SWIM AREA — Shall consist of the municipally
owned land identified as Block 236, Lots 8 and 9 and Block 237 Lot 1 on the
municipal tax map for the City of Brigantine.
CATAMARAN — A watercraft of twin pontoon construction, propelled wholly
by sails. The sailboat may not be either temporarily or permanently
equipped with machinery for propulsion and shall not exceed 18 feet in
length.
COVE RECREATION AREA — Shall consist of Block 8429, Lot 1 as depicted
on the official tax map of the City of Brigantine and include all beach, sand,
dunes, marsh and grass areas and the waters adjacent thereto.
MUNICIPAL BEACHES — Shall consist of all sand, dunes, marsh and grass
areas seaward from the landward side of any vegetation line or man-made
structure, from the North Brigantine Natural Area to the South Brigantine
Jetty, to the mean high tide water line and the waters adjacent thereto.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A power vessel defined as a Class "A" vessel
by the United States Coast Guard, and which is designed to be operated
from a sitting, standing or kneeling positions; equipped with an internal
combustion engine which powers a water jet pump; and cannot be operated
in a manner so as to disengage the pump so as to prevent the vessel from
making headway. Personal watercrafts are commonly referred to by such
registered trade names as jet ski, skidoo and wave runner.
SEAWALL — The man-made structure running parallel to the mean high
tide water line and extending from 9th Street North to 15th Street North
A. Safeguards, equipment and faculties. The City shall acquire, construct,
use and maintain safeguards, equipment and facilities as shall be
necessary in the proper establishment and maintenance of the
municipal beaches and recreational areas for public health, recreation,
bathing and entertainment. The City shall have the right and authority
to purchase, rent or otherwise acquire lifeboats, ropes, poles and other
safeguards, recreational facilities and equipment for the recreation,
protection and safeguard of the general public.
§ 105-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-3
1:186
§ 105-3. Beach tags.
A. Beach tags required. No person 12 years of age or over shall bathe at,
use or otherwise enter upon the municipal beaches or recreational
areas set forth in § 105-1, without having first acquired and then having
in his or her possession a proper and effective beach tag, which shall be
worn conspicuously by the person during said use, so that it shall be
visible at all times and shall be exhibited on demand to a beach tag
inspector, lifeguard, police officer or other duly authorized
representative of the City of Brigantine.
B. Dates and times beach tags required. Unless otherwise designated by
resolution of City Council, beach tags shall be required from June 1
through Labor Day, between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.,
prevailing time.
C. Regulations for beach tags. The following rules and regulations are
hereby established, and it shall be unlawful to violate any of the rules
and regulations or those subsequently adopted resolutions, during the
bathing season or at other times if specifically provided for:
(1) No privilege, right, badge, permit or other evidence to use the
beaches of the City, issued to or to be issued upon payment of any
of the fees provided for by this chapter, shall be sold, leased or
otherwise transferred to any person or entity by anyone other than
the City or its duly authorized representatives. However, daily
beach tags as provided for in § 105-3D(5) may be transferred from
person to person, provided no special or separate charge is made
for such transfer or use. Specifically, the City or its duly authorized
representatives shall be the sole and exclusive vendor and/or lessor
of the privileges, rights, badges or permits, as it is hereby deemed
unlawful for any person or entity to purchase or lease the badges
from anyone other than the City or its duly authorized
representatives.
(2) The counterfeiting, copying, duplication or other reproduction of
the beach badges or permits issued by the City by anyone other
than the City or its authorized representatives is hereby prohibited.
(3) The possession of counterfeit and/or fraudulently obtained badges
or permits is hereby prohibited.
D. Beach fees and charges: fee exemptions. In order to provide the
necessary funds to protect, guard, clean, police, maintain, and
otherwise manage the beaches of the City, the following fees shall be
charged:
(1) No fees shall be charged or collected from any person under the
age of 12 years.
(2) The applicable fee per person, per season, for seasonal beach tags
purchased prior to May 1 of the bathing season is set forth in
§ 105-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-3
1:187
§ 105-4. Municipal beaches and recreational area permits.
§ 210-37, Fees enumerated, of the City Code of the City of
Brigantine.
(3) The applicable fee per person, per season, for a senior citizen's
beach tag, which is available to individuals age 60 to 64, purchased
prior to May 1 of the bathing season is set forth in § 210-37, Fees
enumerated, of the City Code of the City of Brigantine.
(4) The applicable fee per person, per season, for seasonal beach tags
purchased on or after May 1 of the bathing season is set forth in
§ 210-37, Fees enumerated, of the City Code of the City of
Brigantine.
(5) The applicable fee per person for any day or fractional part thereof
is set forth in § 210-37, Fees enumerated, of the City Code of the
City of Brigantine. A daily badge shall be valid from 10:00 a.m. until
5:30 p.m. on the date of purchase. No daily badge may be used for
any day other than the date purchased.
(6) The applicable fee per person for any week or fractional part
thereof is set forth in § 210-37, Fees enumerated, of the City Code
of the City of Brigantine. A weekly badge shall be valid from 10:00
a.m. Saturday until 5:30 p.m. of the following Friday.
(7) No fee shall be charged or collected from any person age 65 or
older or to any person who meets the disability criteria for
disability benefits under Title II of the Federal Social Security Act.
(8) No fee shall be charged or collected from persons in active military
service in any of the Armed Forces of the United States. An active
military service member may obtain three additional beach tags at
no cost for his or her spouse or dependent children over the age of
12 years residing in the residence of the individual in active
military service.
(9) No fees shall be charged to those persons who have served in any
of the Armed Forces of the United States and who were honorably
discharged.
E. Records and verification for fee exemptions. As required by law, the
City shall maintain a list of all individuals to whom beach tags are
issued pursuant to § 105-3D(7), (8) and (9) above, including the names
of all individuals and, as applicable hereunder, their family members
who qualify for the beach fee exemption. The City Manager shall also
establish procedures for verifying that individuals and, as applicable
hereunder, their family members who qualify for the beach fee
exemption present appropriate credentials demonstrating entitlement
to the exemption.
§ 105-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-4
1:188
A. General regulations for municipal beaches and recreational area
permits.
(1) Application for permit. Unless otherwise provided, every applicant
for a permit under this chapter shall provide such information as is
required to process the application, on a form provided by the City
of Brigantine. At the time of filing the application, the applicant
shall provide proof of insurance, and agree to indemnify and hold
the City harmless, as provided for herein. Copies of the holdharmless
and indemnity agreement, along with a copy of the
applicant's insurance certificate, shall be kept with the applicant's
application through the entire year in which the permit is effective.
Failure to provide either document will result in the permit
application being denied.
(a) Insurance. The applicant shall provide, unless otherwise
provided for in this chapter, a certificate of insurance in the
amount of $500,000 liability coverage, (single limit bodily
injury and property damage).
(b) Indemnification and hold harmless. The applicant shall agree
to hold the City of Brigantine harmless and to indemnify and
defend the City of Brigantine for all claims, losses, expenses,
damages, suits or any other costs incurred by the City of
Brigantine arising out of the applicant's use of the permit.
(2) Fees. In order to offset the costs associated with the permitting and
inspection, the fees set forth in § 210-37, Fees enumerated, of the
City Code of the City of Brigantine shall apply.
(3) Nontransferable. Permits are nonassignable and nontransferable.
(4) Suspension and revocation. Any permit granted under this chapter
shall be subject to the terms, conditions, rules and regulations
relating to such use and permission. The holder of any permit shall
be governed by the terms, conditions, rules and regulations; and
any holder shall not acquire any right or title, but shall hold a mere
permit or permission which is subject to revocation without notice
in the event of a violation of any of the terms, conditions, rules or
regulations. The City Manager or his/her designee shall be and is
hereby empowered to suspend and/or revoke the use of any such
permit. No fee, charge or other sum paid for any such permit or
permission shall be returnable in the event of revocation.
(5) Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to City
employees who may be required to enter upon the beaches in the
performance of their municipal duties or functions or to any
governmental agency, its employees, agents, contractors and
subcontractors who may be engaged in beach restorations or
protection work.
B. Automobile permits.
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:189
(1) Four-wheel drive permit. Permits shall only be issued for fourwheel
vehicles which have passed inspection by the Motor Vehicle
Commission of the State of New Jersey for the current year or by
the equivalent department or agency of the state in which the
vehicle is permitted.
(2) Inspection. In addition to the requirements of § 105-4A, General
regulations for municipal beaches and recreational area permits,
prior to the granting of a four-wheel drive permit an applicant shall
present the vehicle for inspection on request at the Brigantine Fire
House, 1417 West Brigantine Avenue, Brigantine, New Jersey, or
such other location as may be designated during normal City Hall
working hours.
(3) Equipment required. Each vehicle to which a permit is to be issued
shall be in good working order and carry equipment consisting of a
first aid kit, shovel, tow chain or equivalent, road flares, Coast
Guard or I.C.C. approved fire extinguisher, jack with a large
support board (minimum of 12 inches by 12 inches), flashlight and
inflated spare tire.
(a) The applicant shall agree in writing at the time of submitting
an application to have the aforementioned required equipment
maintained in their vehicle while operating the permitted
vehicle upon the municipal beaches or recreational areas. The
applicant also consents to allow spot inspections by the
Brigantine Police Department and/or the Brigantine Beach
Patrol while operating the permitted vehicle upon the
municipal beaches or recreational areas.
(4) Area authorized for permitted four-wheel drive use. The operation
of permitted vehicles upon the municipal beaches or recreational
areas shall be limited to the following areas:
(a) The Cove Recreation Area;
(b) The area of the municipal beach from Sandy Lane (off Harbor
Beach Boulevard.) south to the Southern Brigantine Jetty; and
(c) The area of the Municipal Beach from the North Brigantine
Natural Area to North 15th Street.
(5) Rules and regulations. The following rules and regulations shall be
observed concerning the operation of four-wheel drive vehicles
upon the municipal beaches or recreational areas:
(a) To operate a permitted vehicle in an area of the upon the
municipal beaches or recreational areas not provided for in
§ 105-4B(4).
§ 105-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-4
1:190
(b) To operate a permitted vehicle upon the municipal beaches or
recreational areas without the equipment required in
§ 105-4B(3).
(c) To operate a permitted vehicle upon the municipal beaches or
recreational areas at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour.
(d) To fail to enter or exit from a location or locations designated
by the City Council.
(e) To operate a permitted vehicle over private property without
the permission of the owner of the property.
(f) To remove or fail to permanently affixed the permit to the
lower right corner of the rear window of the permitted vehicle.
Said permit must be affixed in a manner so the same may not
be removed.
(6) Donated permits for active members of military.
(a) Each year, the City of Brigantine, in its discretion, may donate
five permits each to the Brigantine VFW, Brigantine Elks Lodge
and American Legion. Said permits shall be transferable from
vehicle to vehicle; however, the same may only be used by
individuals or active members of the United States military.
The permits may only be placed on vehicles which are owned
by the individual who is an active member of the military or a
spouse residing in the same residence as the active military
member. For the purpose of this subsection, a person shall be
considered in active military service only if:
[1] He/she can show an active, valid and up-to-date military
service identification card; or
[2] He/she can show identification proving he/she is an active
member of the New Jersey National Guard who has
completed initial active duty training.
(b) For the purpose of this subsection, initial active duty training
means basic military training, for the members of the New
Jersey Air National Guard, and basic combat training and
advanced individual training, for members of the New Jersey
Army National Guard.
(c) The permits are strictly prohibited from being used by anyone
who is not an active member of the military service or his/her
spouse and are only authorized for use on a vehicle owned by
said member of the active military service or his/her spouse.
(7) Permit expiration. Permits shall be for a period not to exceed one
calendar year, expiring each year on December 31.
C. Catamaran permit.
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:191
(1) Catamaran permit. Permits shall only be issued for catamarans,
which comply with federal and state laws concerning the
regulations, licensing and operation of vessels and watercrafts.
(2) Area authorized for permitted catamaran use. The use and storage
of catamarans upon the municipal beaches or recreational areas
shall be limited to Club Drive.
(3) Storage and use rules and regulations. The following rules and
regulations shall be observed concerning the use of catamarans
upon the municipal beaches or recreational areas:
(a) Permit numbers and decals shall be permanently affixed to the
catamaran.
(b) Catamarans shall not be operated upon the municipal beaches
or recreational areas outside of Club Drive.
(c) Dolly wheels, if used, shall not be stored at the water's edge,
but must be kept a safe distance therefrom or in an area to be
designated by the Beach Patrol.
(d) Trailers shall not be stored on the beach nor in the streets
adjacent to beach access.
(e) The Beach Patrol retains the right to control the use of any
catamaran in the interest of public safety. Boats may not be
operated in the vicinity of bathers.
(f) Catamarans shall be equipped with righting lines, Coast Guard
approved lifesaving gear and proper rigging.
(g) The City may order the removal of any catamaran not
complying with any regulation or for the safety of the public.
(4) Permit expiration. Permits shall be for a period not to exceed one
calendar year, expiring each year on April 30 of the subsequent
year.
D. Personal watercraft permit.
(1) Personal watercraft permit. Permits shall only be issued for
personal watercrafts, which comply with federal and state laws
concerning the regulations, licensing and operation of vessels and
watercrafts.
(2) Area authorized for permitted personal watercraft use. The use of
personal watercrafts upon the municipal beaches or recreational
areas shall be limited to the Cove Recreation Area when authorized
by the City Manager pursuant to § 105-5G(5)(b).
(3) Rules and regulations. The following rules and regulations shall be
observed concerning the use of personal watercrafts upon the
municipal beaches or recreational areas:
§ 105-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-4
1:192
(a) The regulations contained in Title 7, Chapter 6 of the New
Jersey Administrative Code concerning boating regulations for
personal watercraft are hereby made applicable.
(b) The operator of a personal watercraft equipped with a lanyard
cutoff switch shall wear the safety switch lanyard at all times
when the personal watercraft is in operation upon any of the
waters of the municipal beach and recreational areas.
(c) The operator of a personal watercraft launching from or
landing shall maintain a speed no faster than that which is
necessary to safely navigate the surf until clear of the surf.
(4) Permit expiration. Permits shall be for a period not to exceed one
calendar year, expiring each year on December 31.
E. Ice cream vendor permit.
(1) Ice cream vendor permit. Permits shall only be issued to:
(a) United States Veterans who have been issued and hold a
current and valid certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9; and
(b) The vendor authorized by the City after procurement pursuant
to the Local Public Contracts Law.70
(2) Advertising prohibited. A successful bidder or anyone acting on its
behalf shall be prohibited from having any flag, banner,
advertising, pinwheel, or other similar device or display on any box,
container or equipment used to carry or transport the ice cream
product to be sold. Notwithstanding this section, the display of a
small American flag is permissible.
(3) Transporting of ice cream. The carrying and transporting of ice
cream products pursuant to this chapter is only permissible by:
(a) An insulated metal box with shoulder straps that is uniform in
color; or
(b) A push cart that is uniform in color, has four wheels, is made of
PVC pipe and has at least one trash receptacle attached
thereto which is capable of holding a sufficient amount of trash
and debris so that no litter results from the sale of ice cream on
the beach.
(4) Hours and dates permitted. Sale of ice cream on the beach shall
only be permitted between the hours of 10:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.
Sales shall be permitted from one week prior to Memorial Day until
one week after Labor Day. Sale on the beach is also permitted for a
special event on the beach outside of that time period if approval is
received in advance from the City of Brigantine.
70.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:193
(5) Zones delineated; one permit per zone. The sale of ice cream on the
beach shall be authorized in a single zone. The established zone
shall be on the beach starting at the northern seawall and
proceeding in a southerly direction to the jetty and then in a
westerly direction to the cove. It is the intention of this section to
create a single zone extending from the northern seawall to the
jetty and then to the Cove Recreational Area.
(6) Terms and conditions of permit. Any successful bidder must apply
for and receive a permit from the City of Brigantine to sell ice
cream on the beach. Said permit shall be subject to the following
terms and conditions:
(a) Any person selling ice cream on behalf of a vendor shall be at
least 18 years of age or older.
(b) All successful bidders must submit an application in a form as
prepared by the City Manager or her designee. The
application, at a minimum, shall include the name of the
successful bidder, home address of the bidder, the listing of
each and every employee and the address of said employee
who is going to sell ice cream on the beach for the bidder. A
statement as to whether the bidder or any employee who is to
be acting on behalf of the bidder has been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance and the
nature, date, and disposition of said offense, including any
punishment assessed therefor.
(c) The price bid by the successful bidder.
(d) A photograph of each person that the successful bidder intends
on employing to sell ice cream on the beach taken within the
last 90 days.
(e) The successful bidder and any employee acting on the
successful bidder's behalf shall submit their fingerprints to the
City of Brigantine Police Department. The State of New Jersey
has contracted with a vendor, Sagem Morpho, Inc., which
performs this service. The successful bidder shall be
responsible for ensuring that all individuals who will sell ice
cream on the beach are fingerprinted at Sagem Morpho, Inc.,
with said fingerprints being delivered to the City of Brigantine.
The charge for the same shall be the sole responsibility of the
successful bidder.
(f) By submitting said fingerprints, any person authorizes the City
of Brigantine and its police department and Sagem Morpho,
Inc., to run a criminal background history and otherwise
investigate each and every applicant to ensure they have not
been convicted of a crime. No individual shall be authorized or
permitted to sell ice cream on the beach in the City of
Brigantine who has a criminal record.
§ 105-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-4
1:194
(7) Prohibited acts. Any successful bidder or employee acting on its
behalf shall be in violation of this chapter if any of the following
occurs:
(a) Any person selling ice cream on the beach acts in an
unprofessional, discourteous, intimidating or offensive manner
to a member of the general public.
(b) Any person selling ice cream on the beach pursuant to this
chapter disregards or fails to obey any order or direction given
to them by a member of the Brigantine Police Department or
the Brigantine Beach Patrol.
(c) Any person selling ice cream on the beach pursuant to this
chapter commits conduct demonstrating a state of moral
turpitude.
(d) Any person selling ice cream on the beach pursuant to this
chapter makes a false or misleading statement or otherwise
gives incomplete or incorrect information during the
application process.
(e) Any person selling ice cream on the beach pursuant to this
chapter violates any of the conditions or requirements of this
chapter.
(f) Any person selling ice cream on the beach pursuant to this
chapter sells any product which is not authorized or sells
authorized products in a location or zone other than the
permitted location or zone awarded to the successful bidder
who employs said person.
(g) Any person selling ice cream on the beach pursuant to this
chapter sells any product for an amount in excess of the price
list required to be submitted to the City of Brigantine pursuant
to this chapter.
(h) Any person selling ice cream on the beach pursuant to this
chapter improperly disposes of debris, boxes or otherwise
causes trash or litter to be disbursed or accumulate on the
beaches of the City of Brigantine.
(i) Any successful bidder uses an employee who has not been
authorized and submitted as part of the application or who is
otherwise ineligible pursuant to this chapter to sell ice cream
on the beach.
(j) Any successful bidder neglects to attempt to first hire any
veteran that holds a certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9.
(8) Dress code. All individuals selling ice cream along the beach in the
City of Brigantine are required to appear in a neat and clean
manner and must wear a shirt at all times. Shirts with the name of
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:195
the business entity for which the employee is working are
encouraged.
(9) Use of bells, whistles, sirens and the like prohibited. No individual
selling ice cream on the beach in the City of Brigantine may use any
bell, whistle, horn, loud speaker, cymbal, siren or other such means
of drawing attention or promoting sales to said individual. Hawking
in a reasonable tone is permissible.
(10) Compliance with laws, rules and regulations: inspections. Any
successful bidder or employee acting on its behalf must comply
with all federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and
ordinances, including any requirements of the Atlantic County
Department of Health or other health department with jurisdiction.
Any successful bidder or employee acting on its behalf is subject,
without notice, to inspection of its product and equipment at any
time by any state, county or municipal official.
(11) Maintenance of equipment. All equipment used by any individual to
sell ice cream on the beach in the City of Brigantine shall be
maintained in a clean, neat and sanitary manner.
(12) Photo identification badge required: display of price list. Every
person selling ice cream on the beach pursuant to this chapter
must wear a photo identification badge which at a minimum
contains his/her picture, name and the company he/she is employed
by. The picture and lettering must be large enough so that the same
can be read from a distance of three feet. Additionally, there should
be a prominent display of a price list setting forth the price of the
items being sold by any individual selling ice cream on the beach
pursuant to this chapter.
(13) Restocking of product. No restocking of ice cream product may
occur on the beach in the City of Brigantine. To restock any
product, the individual must leave the beach. No restocking may
occur which would require a truck or other vehicle to be parked
illegally in any street or parking lot located within the City of
Brigantine. Any building, freezer, or other structure used to store
ice cream products which are to be sold pursuant to this chapter, if
located within the boundaries of the City of Brigantine, must be in
conformity with the requirements of the Municipal Land Use
Ordinance71 of the City of Brigantine and with all national building
codes and subcodes adopted and in use within the City of
Brigantine.
F. Special event permits.
(1) A special permit for group or special events held upon the
municipal beaches or recreational areas, which are otherwise
prohibited under this chapter, may be obtained by filing an
71.Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Land Use.
§ 105-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-4
1:196
application with the City of Brigantine in accordance with this
subsection.
(2) Special event permit application procedures. A person seeking
issuance of a special permit shall file an application with the City
Clerk stating:
(a) The name and address of the applicant;
(b) The name and address of the person, persons, corporation, or
association sponsoring the activity, if any;
(c) The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
(d) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired;
(e) An estimate of the anticipated attendance; and
(f) Any other information which the City shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
be issued hereunder.
(3) Standards for issuance of a use permit by the City shall include the
following findings:
(a) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the park;
(b) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health,
welfare, safety and recreation;
(c) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably
anticipated will not include violence, crime or disorderly
conduct;
(d) That the proposed activity will not entail, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the City;
(e) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use
at the date and hour requested in the application; and
(f) A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations
and all applicable ordinances fully as though the same were
inserted in said permits.
(4) The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall be liable
for all loss, damage, or injury sustained by any person whatever by
reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such
permit shall have been issued. The City shall have the right to
require any permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance
covering injuries to members of the general public arising out of
such permitted activities in such amounts as may be from time to
§ 105-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-4
1:197
§ 105-5. Rules and regulations for the use of municipal beaches and
recreational areas.
time determined by the City prior to the commencement of any
activity or issuance of any permit.
G. Appeal. Within five business days after the receipt of an application, the
City Manager shall notify an applicant, in writing, of the decision to
grant or deny a permit. Any aggrieved person shall have the right to
appeal to the City Council by service of a written notice thereof on the
City Manager and the City Clerk within five days of said notice. The City
Manager shall then immediately forward the application and the
reasons for its refusal to the City Council, who shall consider the
application under the standards set forth under § 105-4F. The appeal
shall be considered by the City Council not later than the second
regular meeting following the filing of the appeal. The decision of the
City Council shall be final.
A. The Mayor and Council are hereby authorized and empowered to:
(1) Adopt by resolution, in addition to the rules and regulations herein
enumerated, such other rules and regulations as may be necessary
for the proper control and regulation of the municipal beaches and
recreational areas.
(2) Determine and establish by resolution the period during each year
when each of the paid bathing beaches shall be opened and closed.
B. The City Manager, with the advice of the Chiefs of the Beach Patrol and/
or Police Department, is hereby authorized and empowered to:
(1) Swimming and surfing areas designation. Designate the protected
bathing and surfing areas within municipal beaches or recreational
areas where lifeguards are to be provided by the City and from
which beaches persons may bathe and swim.
(2) Restrictions and limitations on access. The City of Brigantine may
close, restrict and/or limit access to the municipal beaches or
recreational areas. The authority to restrict and/or limit access
shall be within the sole discretion of the City Manager or his/her
designee. A decision by the City Manager to restrict and/or limit
access may be based upon, but not limited to, a concern for the
health, safety and welfare of individuals accessing and/or using the
municipal beaches or recreational areas. In exercising this
authority, the City Manager may consult with federal, state, county
and municipal officials, including the Chief of Police, the Chief of
the Beach Patrol and the Mayor of the City of Brigantine.
(a) Any restriction and/or limitation placed upon access and use of
the municipal beaches or recreational areas shall be of such
limited scope and duration as is required in the opinion of the
City Manager to address the issue(s) or concern(s) that gave
§ 105-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-5
1:198
rise to the restriction and/or limitation. Once the issue(s) or
concern(s) have subsided, any restriction and/or limitation
shall be lifted.
(b) No individual shall be entitled to a refund or compensation for
the purchase of a beach badge or vehicle permit as the result
of a decision to restrict and/or limit access to the Cove
Recreation Area.
(3) Modification of operating hours. Modify the hours of operation for
any Municipal Beach or Recreational Area.
C. Beach badges required. In order to provide the necessary funds to
improve, maintain and police the municipal beaches and recreational
areas, all individuals, unless specifically exempted, are required to
comply with § 105-3, Beach tags, in accordance with the Code of the
City of Brigantine.
D. Municipal beaches and recreational areas operating hours. Unless
provided for otherwise in this chapter, including a decision by the City
Manager to extend the hours or close prohibit access, the daily
operating hours of all municipal beaches and recreational areas shall be
from 10:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. daily.
E. Municipal beaches and recreational areas rules and regulations. It shall
be unlawful to violate any of the following rules and regulations, or
those subsequently adopted by resolutions, within the municipal
beaches and recreational areas:
(1) To throw, bat or catch a baseball, football, basketball, softball or
engage in the playing of any game endangering the health and
safety of others on the beach except in areas specifically
designated for said activities.
(2) To swim or bathe beyond a safe depth as determined or regulated
by the lifeguards of the City of Brigantine.
(3) To use a life belt, surfboard, canoe, boat, raft, water wings, inner
tube or any floating or inflated object or device of any kind or
description in the bathing area adjacent to the beach except in such
areas designated by the Beach Patrol Chief for the use of such
devices.
(4) To use a surfboard, without a leash attached thereto, in the water
off the beach; to use a kayak, in the waters off the beach, without
wearing a life jacket.
(5) To throw, place, deposit or leave any bottles, glass, crockery, sharp
or pointed article or thing, paper, refuse or debris of any kind in any
area except in proper receptacles.
(6) To fail to immediately obey all orders, directions, whistles or other
signals used by the City lifeguards and/or police.
§ 105-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5
1:199
(7) To possess, actual or constructive, transport or consume alcoholic
beverages.
(8) To climb upon or stand on the railings, fences or benches so as to
cause or be likely to cause damage to the same on the beach or
approaches thereto or tamper with or handle the lifeguards' boats
or other equipment used by them.
(9) To revel, disport or behave in a noisy and boisterous manner,
emitting loud cries and other noises, so as to inconvenience others
or otherwise disrupt and disturb the public peace and dignity.
(10) To loiter, assemble, band or crowd together so as to interfere or be
likely to interfere with the ingress and egress of others at the street
ends.
(11) To act in a loud, indecent, obscene, offensive or lascivious manner
within said defined areas.
(12) To dress, undress or change clothing for bathing or other purpose
in any passenger automobile, bus, truck or vehicle of any kind,
regardless of whether the doing thereof is in public view or can be
seen by any other person or persons.
(13) To sleep during anytime between sunset and sunrise.
(14) To permit or allow any dogs or other animals, except as otherwise
provided for by law. This provision shall not apply in the following
areas and dates:
(a) October 1 through May 1: all Municipal Beach and
Recreational Areas.
(b) May 1 through October 1: North Brigantine Beach to 15th
Street North.
(15) To fail to keep any dog or other animal on a leash.
(16) To operate any personal watercraft, motorboat, catamaran or
sailboat, within 100 feet of the shoreline and within 100 feet of any
person in the water. This provision shall not apply to personal
watercrafts or motorboats operated by City, state or federal
officials in the course of official business or those experiencing an
emergency requiring the immediate grounding of a vessel to obtain
emergency services or as a result of the vessel's malfunction
rendering it inoperative.
(17) To launch, moor, ground or abandon any motorboat, personal
watercraft, sailboat or catamaran. This provision shall not apply to
personal watercrafts or motorboats operated by City, state or
federal officials in the course of official business or those
experiencing an emergency requiring the immediate grounding of
§ 105-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-5
1:200
a vessel to obtain emergency services or as a result of the vessel's
malfunction rendering it inoperative.
(18) To use a motorboat, personal watercraft, sailboat or catamaran to
ride waves within the waters adjacent to the municipal beaches and
recreational areas.
(19) To impersonate a lifeguard of the City of Brigantine.
(20) To use; enter upon; possess, wander; or loiter upon any public,
quasipublic or private property adjacent to or upon the beach in a
manner not authorized by the owner thereof or in a manner likely
to interfere with the owner's use thereof or, in the case of public or
quasipublic property, likely to interfere with the reasonable use
thereof by others.
(21) To bring a cooler larger than 24 inches in width, or length, or
height and/or has a capacity greater than 36 quarts.
(a) The prohibition of this subsection shall not apply to any
container that has been inspected by a representative of the
City to inspect the contents of such container, cooler, or object.
It is the intention of this provision to allow an agent or
representative of the municipality to inspect the contents of
such containers so to ensure the general health, safety and
welfare of individuals accessing and enjoying the municipal
beaches and recreational areas. Signs informing beach patrons
of the inspection requirement and the option to not bring such
container or cooler onto or in municipal beach or recreational
areas shall be posted at the entrances.
(22) To set-up or otherwise establish a canopy on the beach except in
either the front or back of a vehicle permitted pursuant to § 105-4A.
No canopies shall be placed on the side of the vehicles nor shall
they be placed in such a manner as to reserve a space or spot on
the beach for another permitted vehicle. Upon the request of a
lifeguard or police officer, canopies otherwise in compliance with
this section, shall immediately be removed from the beach for the
purposes of public health, safety and welfare.
(23) To smoke or burn a lighted cigar, cigarette or pipe, including any
handheld electronic device which vaporizes a liquid (e.g., ecigarettes,
e-cigs, electronic nicotine delivery systems, electronic
nonnicotine delivery systems, personal vaporizers, PVs), or any
other matter or substance which contains tobacco.
(24) To drive a motorcycle, or any motor operated or horse drawn
vehicle or to ride a horse upon the beach or approaches thereto
without first obtaining a permit as provided for in § 105-4. This
provision shall not apply to City-owned vehicles in the course of
public needs or requirements.
§ 105-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5
1:201
(25) To operating a bicycle upon the beach or approaches thereto while
lifeguards are on duty.
(26) To bring, permit to be brought, or to use any catamaran without
first obtaining a permit as provided for in § 105-4B(3).
(27) To enter, remain in, fail or refuse to depart from once leave the
closed Cove Recreation Area or any portion thereof while such
restriction is in effect.
(28) To fish, cast, crab or other activities of similar nature. This
provision shall not apply to the municipal beach from Sandy Lane
(off Harbor Beach Boulevard) south to the Southern Brigantine
Jetty and areas as may be determined, from time to time, by the
Chief of the Beach Patrol.
(29) To enter upon or traverse the sand dunes.
(30) To conduct any commercial activity or business, unless specifically
authorized to do so by City Council, or unless permitted to do so by
the City of Brigantine. In addition, no person shall offer as a gift or
free sample any article, goods, wares, merchandise, or any
materials advertising any article, goods, wares or merchandise for
sale, to any person.
F. Seawall regulations. Rules and regulations for use of the seawall. In
addition to the rules and regulations enumerated in § 105-5E, the
following rules and regulations are hereby established, and it shall be
unlawful to violate any of said rules and regulations at any on the
seawall/promenade of the City of Brigantine:
(1) To use or operate any bicycle, unicycle, moped, go-ped, scooter,
skateboard, rollerskate or rollerblade or any other mechanical item
or vehicle used for transportation whether powered by motor or
otherwise. However, nothing herein shall be interpreted so as to
prohibit any wheelchairs motorized or otherwise, or other similar
device used to assist any individual with a physical disability.
(2) Fishing, casting, crabbing or other activities of similar nature.
(3) The consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(4) The walking of any dog, cat or other pet or animal of any kind.
(5) Undressing or disrobing in any manner.
(6) Sleeping.
(7) Picnicking or specifically transporting and using any cooler, box,
basket, bag or tub which contains food, beverage or both and the
consumption of such food, beverage or both therefrom.
(8) The throwing of any ball, frisbee or other such items designed for a
game or sporting activity or the flying of any kite.
§ 105-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-5
1:202
(9) The placement of any glass, bottle, trash or debris of any kind.
(10) The hawking or peddling or sale of any goods, articles, wares or
other merchandise.
G. Cove recreation area.
(1) Hours. The Cove Recreation Area shall be open daily during the
summer season from dawn until dusk, unless access is limited by
the City Manager or his/her designee pursuant to § 105-5B(2) of
this chapter.
(2) Access to the cove recreation area. Any individual upon the Cove
Recreation Area, which includes the water adjacent thereto, is
required to comply with the provisions § 105-3, Beach tags, of this
chapter. This requirement shall apply to all individuals, regardless
of the manner in which the individual accesses the Cover
Recreation Area, including but not limited to by vehicle, jet ski or
motorboat.
(3) Cove recreation area rules and regulations. The rules and
regulation enumerated in § 105-5E, unless otherwise provided for
herein, are applicable to the Cove Recreation Area as if fully set
forth herein.
(4) Four-wheel drive vehicle use in the cove recreation area.
(a) Vehicles accessing the Cove Recreation Area shall enter and
exit at the designated beach gateway at the end of Lagoon
Boulevard.
(b) Vehicles must be removed from the Cove Recreation Area prior
to closing as provided for in § 105-5E(5) of this chapter.
(c) Vehicles shall not stand, park or loiter at the end of Lagoon
Boulevard in anticipation of the Cove Recreation Area opening.
(d) In addition to all of the other rules and regulations contained in
§ 105-4B, which are hereby made applicable to the Cove
Recreation Area by reference, all persons operating motor
vehicles in the Cove Recreation Area shall do so only in
conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:3-3 through
39:3-83.
(5) Use of motorboats and personal watercrafts in the cove recreation
area.
(a) Prohibition. The launching, landing, mooring and grounding of
motorboats and personal watercrafts is prohibited within the
Cove Recreation Area, unless authorized by the City Manager.
(b) The City Manager, with the advice of the Chief of the Beach
Patrol, is hereby authorized and empowered to designate
§ 105-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5
1:203
§ 105-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 111
BOATS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Bulkheads — See Ch. 127.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Mercantile businesses — See Ch. 210.
Noise — See Ch. 216.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Parking lots — See Ch. 234.
Sailboats — See Ch. 105, Art. IV.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 284.
certain areas of the Cove Recreation Area for the launching
and/or landing of motorboats and/or personal watercrafts.
A. Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter shall upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
more than $1,000, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or
by community service of not more than 90 days, or any combination of
fine, imprisonment or community service as determined in the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
B. Any beach tag, four-wheel drive permit, catamaran permit or special
event permit hereafter issued may, in addition to the imposition of any
penalties provided hereunder against the responsible individual or
vehicle or catamaran owner, be revoked temporarily by any police
officer, lifeguard or other agent of the City for the refusal or failure of
such person to display such tag or permit or to comply with any rule or
regulation governing the use of the municipal beaches or recreational
areas, to obey the reasonable directions of the officer or employee
charged with the maintenance of good order thereon, for engaging in
any noxious or offensive conduct or language or for other good cause.
C. Any person found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating
any rules or regulation promulgated hereunder, shall be prohibited
from accessing municipal beaches or recreational areas for a one-year
period commencing on the date of conviction.
§ 105-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 105-6
1:204
ARTICLE I
Boat Rental
[Adopted 6-16-1954 by Ord. No. 7-1954; amended in its entirety
5-4-1955 by Ord. No. 7-1955]
§ 111-1. Findings.
The Board of Commissioners hereby finds as a fact that lack of adequate
space in the conducting of the business of boat rental in the City of
Brigantine creates fire and other hazards to persons and property in the
City of Brigantine and that it is necessary that minimum standards to
provide adequate space be established for any such businesses hereafter
established or for any existing such businesses hereafter enlarged.
§ 111-2. Requirements.
No business of boat rental in the City of Brigantine shall be hereafter
established unless it shall have, and shall thereafter continue to have, not
less than 10 consecutive feet of water frontage for each boat to be rented
and not less than one off-street parking space, as defined in Chapter 198,
Land Use, with proper access from a street or alley in connection with each
boat to be rented.
§ 111-3. Enlargement of presently existing businesses.
No business of boat rental presently existing in the City of Brigantine shall
be hereafter enlarged beyond its present capacity, as shown by the list on
file in the office of the City Clerk entitled "Number of boats owned and
rented by liveries on Brigantine," dated March 15, 1955, unless it shall, with
respect to such enlargement thereof, provide not less than one off-street
parking space, as defined in Chapter 198, Land Use, with proper access
from a street or alley in connection with each additional boat to be rented,
except that in no event shall there be required any more than enough such
off-street parking spaces to equal the total number of boats to be rented.
§ 111-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
Any person or persons who shall violate any provisions of this article shall
be subject to a fine in an amount not exceeding $1,000, or to imprisonment
in the City or county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both.
§ 111-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-4
1:205

ARTICLE II
Motorboats
[Adopted 6-18-1958 by Ord. No. 5-1958]
§ 111-5. Hours permitted to water-ski and aquaplane.
No person shall water-ski, aquaplane or ride in or on any similar
contrivance or operate a motorboat towing such person on the waters lying
within the City of Brigantine between the hours of sunset and sunrise.
§ 111-6. Second person aboard boat towing water-skier.
No person shall tow another person on water skis or aquaplane or any
similar contrivance on the waters lying within the City of Brigantine, unless
there is a second person in the boat whose duty it shall be to tend the waterskier
or aquaplane rider.
§ 111-7. Restricted locations for waterskiing; exceptions.
§ 111-8. Restricted locations for motorboats; exceptions.
No person shall operate a motorboat in waters, lying within the City of
Brigantine within 100 feet of any wharf, pier, dock, bulkhead, swimming
area, other craft or person in the water except when docking or leaving
a dock or except under circumstances that such motorboat cannot keep
said distance, in which event such motorboat must reduce its speed to a
minimum consonant with the safety of other persons, craft and property.
§ 111-9. Racing.
No racing of motorboats shall be permitted in any waters lying within the
City of Brigantine except in the case of races sponsored by an organized
yacht or boating club and sanctioned by the governing body of the City.
A. Waterskiing, aquaplaning or riding any similar contrivance, or the
towing thereof, shall be prohibited within the following areas:
(1) Northeast of the southwesterly side of the channel, as marked,
from Obe's Thoroughfare through Bonita Cove to the extension of
the line of 16th Street South northwestwardly across the southerly
portion of Bonita Cove.
(2) Within 100 feet of any wharf, pier, dock, bulkhead, swimming area,
other craft or person in the water.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit such operation
when leaving or returning to land or pier or dock.
§ 111-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-10
1:207
§ 111-10. Speed restricted.
The speed of motorboats shall at all times be regulated so as to avoid danger
or injury to all manner of craft, whether floating or moored, anchored
or underway, or to piers, wharfs, docks, bulkheads or other waterfront
construction, either directly or by the effect of the wash or wave raised by
such motorboat through its speed or otherwise.
§ 111-11. Reckless operation.
No motorboat shall be operated in a reckless manner. "Reckless operation"
shall include operating such boat in any manner which unnecessarily
interferes with the free and proper use of waters lying within the City of
Brigantine, or which endangers other craft therein or the life or limb of any
person upon such other craft or in the water.
§ 111-12. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORBOAT — Any vessel, boat or craft temporarily or permanently
equipped with a motor or any other means of propulsion except sails or
muscular power.
§ 111-13. Enforcement.
The Harbormasters, the Brigantine Police Department and the Brigantine
auxiliary police shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this
article, to serve and execute process upon any person violating any of the
provisions hereof and to arrest without warrant any person violating any of
the provisions hereof, provided that the offense for which the arrest is made
has been committed in the presence of the arresting officer.
§ 111-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-19-1964 by Ord. No.
6-1964; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction over any offense committed
under this article. Any person convicted of a violation hereof shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment not to exceed
90 days.
§ 111-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 111-14
1:208
ARTICLE III
Public Boat Ramp72
[Adopted 7-7-1982 by Ord. No. 24-1982]
§ 111-15. Title.
This article shall be titled the "Brigantine Public Boat Ramp Ordinance."
§ 111-16. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of that City property
located on the bay at 6th Street South, in order that the facilities thereon
may be safely used for the recreational benefit of the general public.
§ 111-17. Applicable area.
The area described in § 111-16 above shall be divided into a senior citizen
area, a public boat ramp area and a public rowing sports area, each area
being separately and clearly marked.
§ 111-18. Conduct of business, solicitation and advertising.
No person shall, upon any such lands, engage in, conduct or carry on any
business, trade or occupation whatsoever, nor solicit nor take orders for
goods, wares and merchandise, carry or expose advertising signs, distribute
circulars, pamphlets or other printed matter, nor beg nor solicit alms.
§ 111-19. Dressing and undressing.
No person shall be permitted to dress or undress on the docks, ramp or
parking area, or in any vehicle parked thereon.
§ 111-20. Ballplaying.
No person shall be permitted to play ball, paddle tennis or engage in other
activities dangerous to or constituting a nuisance to the users of the facility.
§ 111-21. Advertising in vicinity.
No person shall set up, post or maintain any sign or advertising matter upon
or over said lands or upon vessels or objects floating or stationed in the
waters or in the air above or adjacent thereto.
§ 111-22. Littering.
No person shall in any way litter the facility or cast any waste material,
paper, trash, rubbish or any other matter thereon.
§ 111-23. Parking.
72.Editor's Note: See also Art. IV, Boat Ramp and Parking Lot Permit, of this chapter.
§ 111-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-23
1:209
§ 111-24. Blocking ramp.
No person shall block or impede the public boat ramp beyond a reasonable
time required to launch or recover a boat.
§ 111-25. Discharging of chemicals.
No person shall discharge any oil, gasoline or other chemical substance
upon the facility or the adjacent waters.
§ 111-26. Maneuvering of vehicles and vessels.
No person shall maneuver any vehicle or vessel on or adjacent to the facility
in any manner that may endanger the life, safety or property of any other
user of the facility or of the public.
§ 111-27. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by members of the Police Department and
auxiliary police of the City of Brigantine.
§ 111-28. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall park any vehicle on the facility except in places clearly
designated for parking.
B. No person shall park any trailer except in that portion designated the
public boat ramp area, nor shall any person park any vehicle or vessel
overnight.
A. Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of the provisions of this
article shall be fined for each offense in an amount not more than
$1,000 or be imprisoned in the county jail or place of detention
provided by the municipality for any term not exceeding 90 days or
both. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
B. Any person who aids, assists or abets in the violation of any provisions
of this article shall be subject to the penalties herein provided for.
§ 111-23 BRIGANTINE CODE § 111-28
1:210
ARTICLE IV
Boat Ramp and Parking Lot Permit73
[Adopted 1-20-1988 by Ord. No. 28-1987]
§ 111-29. Permit to be displayed.
All persons who use the Municipal Boat Ramp and Parking Lot in the City
of Brigantine between May 15 and September 15 shall display on their boat
trailers and boat a permit issued by the City of Brigantine. Such permit shall
be in a form to be designated by the governing body.
§ 111-30. Overnight parking prohibited; permitted parking hours.
There shall be no overnight parking in the Municipal Boat Ramp parking
area. Users having the proper permit may park a single vehicle and trailer,
space permitting, only during the daylight hours, except that parking is
permitted up to two hours before daylight and two hours after dusk.
§ 111-31. Fees; waiver.
§ 111-32. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992]
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of the terms and conditions
of this article shall pay a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or both.
A. Fees shall be charged for the following types of permits, which fees are
as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees
Schedule: [Amended 6-3-1992 by Ord. No. 15-1992; 12-28-1992
by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(1) One-day permits purchased any time.
(2) One-week permits purchased any time.
(3) Permits purchased prior to June 1.
(4) Permits purchased on or after June 1.
B. Fees and charges may be waived by appropriate action of the City
officials during a declared emergency.
73.Editor's Note: See also Art. III, Public Boat Ramp, of this chapter.
§ 111-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 111-32
1:211
Chapter 115
BRUSH, WEEDS AND OTHER DEBRIS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 187.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
§ 115-1. Declaration of nuisance; removal of injurious substances.
[Amended 6-17-1987 by Ord. No. 9-1987; 9-2-2015 by Ord. No.
13-2015]
The accumulation of brush, weeds, stumps, roots, debris, trash or other
substances creating a fire hazard or the collection of stagnant waters
or the existence of some other condition injurious to the public health
and safety upon any lands lying within the City of Brigantine is hereby
declared a nuisance, and the owner of said land shall, after notice from the
City Health Officer, Zoning Officer, Construction Official, police officer, fire
officer or other official designated to act by the City Manager (hereinafter
the City's "authorized representatives") of the City of Brigantine, remove
brush, weeds, stumps, roots, debris or other such substances from such
lands or, in the case of stagnant waters or condition injurious to the public
health or safety, shall cause such land to be filled with fresh earth, gravel,
sand, ashes or cinders in order to raise the land to the established grade
and to eliminate such conditions.
§ 115-2. Inspections; notice of removal. [Amended 6-17-1987 by
Ord. No. 9-1987; 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 13-2015]
The City of Brigantine by its duly authorized representatives shall have the
power to make periodic inspections within the City in order to ascertain
when and wherein there exist conditions, or any of them, as hereinbefore
described, which constitute a fire hazard or are injurious to the public
health and safety, and where such conditions are found to exist, to notify
the owner of the lands to remove or abate such conditions within 10 days
from the date of the notice. Any such notice may be served personally upon
the owner, tenant, agent of owner or tenant, or occupier of the land upon
which such condition exists or, if such person cannot be personally served
within the City of Brigantine, may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the address of the owner as set forth on the tax duplicate
of the City of Brigantine. Notice to the tenant, agent or occupier shall be
constructive notice to the owner.
§ 111-32 BRIGANTINE CODE § 115-3
1:212
§ 115-3. Failure to remove; lien. [Amended 6-17-1987 by Ord. No.
9-1987; 9-2-2015 by Ord. No. 13-2015]
In the event of the failure of the owner so notified to remove or abate the
condition within 10 days from the date of the service of notice as aforesaid,
the City's authorized representatives shall notify the City Manager who may
direct the authorized representative to cause the removal or abatement
of such condition or conditions, and in such case the officer in charge of
removal or abatement shall certify in writing to the City Manager, who
shall advise City Council the cost thereof, which cost, if found correct, shall
be charged against said land, and the amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien upon said land and shall be added to and become a part of the
taxes next to be assessed and levied upon said land and shall bear interest
at the same rate as taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same
officer and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 115-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-3-1964 by Ord. No.
12-1964; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
In the event of the failure of the owner of said land to remove or abate
such condition existing thereon, within the time required after the service
of the notice hereinbefore mentioned, and in addition to the remedies
hereinbefore provided, such person shall be in violation of this chapter
and, upon conviction thereof by the Judge of the Municipal Court of the
City of Brigantine, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment in such place as is maintained for offenders in the City of
Brigantine for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each day during
which the violation continues after notice shall be considered a separate
offense.
§ 115-5. Brush, hedges and other plant life within 10 feet of
roadway or 25 feet of intersection. [Added 10-17-2012 by Ord. No.
26-2012]
All brush, hedges and other plant life, growing within 10 feet of any
roadway or within 25 feet of any intersection of two roadways must be cut
to a height of no more than 2 1/2 feet when it is deemed expedient for
the preservation of public safety as determined by the Code Enforcement
Officer of the City of Brigantine. The term "roadway" as set forth above
means cartway.
§ 115-6. Notice. [Added 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 26-2012]
When the Code Enforcement Officer determines that any brush, hedges
or other plant life must be cut pursuant to § 115-5 above, notice of the
same must be given to the registered property owner as contained in
the Tax Assessor's office of the City of Brigantine. Said notice shall state
that the property owner has 10 days in which to cut the height of the
offending brush, hedges or other plant life to 2 1/2 feet. To the extent that
said brush, hedges and other plant life is not cut to 2 1/2 feet within 10
§ 115-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-6
1:213
days after receipt of the notice as set forth herein, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall forward or deliver a second letter indicating that if, after
an additional 10 days, said brush, hedges and plant life is not cut, then
the Code Enforcement Officer, working in conjunction with the Director
of Public Works, shall be authorized to take any action to cut said brush,
hedges and other plant life to 2 1/2 feet and, further, to issue a summons
seeking penalties pursuant to § 115-4 above.
Chapter 119
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 123.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Moving of structures — See Ch. 264.
§ 115-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 115-6
1:214
ARTICLE I
Pile Foundations
[Adopted 3-17-1982 by Ord. No. 16-1982]
§ 119-1. Adoption of BOCA provisions for certain locations.
All buildings or structures erected in the City of Brigantine on Block 263-B,
Lots 2A, 4A, 6A and 8A and Blocks 268-B, 275-B, 276-B, 294-B and 303-B
on the seaside of Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard bordering on St. George's
Thorofare shall be erected on pile foundations as set forth in Article 10 of
the BOCA Basic Building Code/1981, as amended, and which is hereinafter
referred to as "the code."
§ 119-2. Certification of compliance required.
Certification of compliance with the code is required by a professional
engineer or architect registered in the State of New Jersey prior to issuance
of a building permit.
§ 119-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-2
1:215
Chapter 123
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Rental property — See Ch. 246.
§ 123-1. Findings.
The City of Brigantine hereby declares and finds that there exist in the
municipality dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other
calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, or due to other
conditions rendering such dwellings unsafe or insanitary or dangerous or
detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical to the welfare of
the residents of such municipality; and the City of Brigantine desires to
exercise the powers set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq. in reference to the
same.
§ 123-2. Enforcement officer. [Amended 10-17-2013 by Ord. No.
11-2013]
The City Manager shall have the authority to appoint the public officer to
exercise the powers prescribed in this chapter, and, if necessary, shall have
the power to designate additional public officers. Nothing contained herein
shall preclude the City Manager from acting as the public officer if the City
Manager chooses.
§ 123-3. Complaint hearing; order to repair; failure to comply; lien.
A. Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the City of Brigantine charging that any
dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the
public officer, on his own motion, that any dwelling is unfit for human
habitation, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon
the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a complaint stating
the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will
be held before the public officer (or his designated agent) at a place
therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the
serving of said complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in
the complaint, and the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall
not be controlling in hearings before the public officer.
§ 119-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 123-3
1:216
§ 123-4. Conditions constituting unfit dwellings; continuance
unlawful.
B. If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he shall
state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of such determination
and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof and the
parties in interest an order requiring the repair and improvement of the
building, including making the building compliant with all applicable
codes, within a specified time and stating that, if the building is not so
repaired and brought up to code within such specified time, a hearing
will occur seeking the demolition of said building. [Amended
12-2-2009 by Ord. No. 28-2009]
C. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the dwelling, the public
officer may cause such dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved, or
to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on
the main entrance of any dwelling so closed a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or
occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and
unlawful." It shall be unlawful for any person to own, have, keep,
maintain or live in any building on which there has been posted a
placard as herein provided for or to remove or cause the removal of any
such posted placard.
D. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
dwelling, the public officer may cause such dwelling to be removed or
demolished.
E. The amount of such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements,
or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition shall be a municipal
lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the
dwelling is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the
materials of such dwelling and shall credit the proceeds of such sale
against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance
remaining shall be deposited in New Jersey Superior Court by the
public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by
such Court and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment
to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of
such Court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the City of
Brigantine to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal
or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise.
A. Said public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation if he finds that conditions exist in such dwelling which are
dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such
dwelling, the occupant of neighboring dwellings or other residents or
the City of Brigantine. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
such conditions may include the following: defects therein increasing
§ 123-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-4
1:217
§ 123-5. Service of notice.
Any complaint or complaints, order or orders issued by said public officer
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be served upon persons
either personally or by registered mail, but if the whereabouts of such
person is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer
in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall make
an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the City
of Brigantine, or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and
published in the County of Atlantic and circulating in the City of Brigantine.
A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint
or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the Clerk of the
County of Atlantic.
§ 123-6. Powers and duties of public officer.
Said public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and
provisions of this chapter, including the following powers, in addition to the
other powers herein granted:
the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, dilapidation, disrepair, structural
defects or uncleanliness.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep or maintain a dwelling
that is unfit for human habitation or which is dangerous or injurious to
the health or safety of the occupants of said dwelling or the occupants
of neighboring dwellings or other residents or people of or in the City of
Brigantine, as specified in this section.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the City of Brigantine in order
to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The officer,
agent and employee to whom the powers and functions of the public
officer have been delegated is hereby authorized to exercise the powers
contained in Subsections A, B and C.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 123-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 123-7
1:218
§ 123-7. Performance of repairs by City; recovery of costs.
Any repair, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition, as above
provided, may be performed by the municipality, through its proper officials
or employees, or the municipality may contract with any person to render
such service on behalf of the municipality, under its control and direction,
and pursuant to specifications showing in detail the service to be rendered
and to rules and regulations adopted by the governing body for the same,
and upon ample security for proper performance being given to the
municipality. The procedure to be followed in adopting any such contract
shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-5. The municipality may recover
the cost thereof from said owner by action at law, which action shall be
in addition to any other remedy provided for by this chapter and shall not
make void any lien upon real estate provided for by this chapter nor prevent
the imposition of any penalty imposed for violation of this chapter or any
ordinance of this municipality.
§ 123-8. Construal of provisions; enforcement provisions to be
supplemental. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of any department of the City of Brigantine to enforce any provisions of
its Administrative Code,74 ordinances or other regulations or statutes nor
to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this
chapter shall be in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by
any other ordinance of the City of Brigantine.
§ 123-9. Definitions.
The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this chapter, shall have
the following respective meanings for the purposes of this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
DWELLING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied
for human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses,
and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Commissioners of the City of Brigantine
charged with governing the municipality.
OWNER — The holder of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession
thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the City of
Brigantine, County of Atlantic or State of New Jersey, relating to health,
fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings in the
City of Brigantine.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 3, Administration.
§ 123-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 123-9
1:219
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer or officers who are authorized by this
chapter to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter.
§ 123-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter declared to be
unlawful shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of Brigantine, be
punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment
for any term not exceeding 90 days in the county jail or in any place
provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners, or both. The
Municipal Judge before whom any person is convicted of violating this
chapter shall have the power to impose any fine or term of imprisonment
not exceeding the maximum fixed in this chapter.
Chapter 127
BULKHEADS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and dune protection — See Ch. 101.
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 181.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
§ 127-1. Minimum specifications.
In any location in the City of Brigantine where bulkheads are to be
constructed pursuant to any ordinance of the City or state or federal statute
or regulation, such bulkhead shall be constructed, repaired or
reconstructed to the following minimum specifications.
A. The elevation of the top of the bulkhead shall be a minimum of 11 feet
above mean sea level on property fronting on the beach adjacent to the
Atlantic Ocean north of the stone jetty on the northerly side of the
Atlantic City Inlet and nine feet above mean sea level in all other areas.
B. Sheet piling shall have a penetration of solid ground of 1/2 of the length
of the board. Sheet piling shall be a double row of two-by-ten-inch
boards and shall be driven plumb with all joints tight.
C. Front piling shall have a minimum of twelve-inch diameter butts with
the center to center spacing not to exceed five feet. Piling shall have a
minimum penetration of five feet more than the sheet piling.
D. Wales shall be a minimum of six inches by six inches, spaced at three
feet from center to center with a minimum of three wales per section.
Every wale shall be bolted to each piling with three-fourths-inch
§ 123-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 127-1
1:220
diameter galvanized bolts. Splicing of wales shall be staggered so that
no two joints will be at the same piling.
E. Back piling and drag planks shall be twenty-pound treated. Piling shall
have twelve-inch diameter butts with the same penetration as front
piling and shall be connected by the use of a three-by-ten-inch drag
plank. Each front piling shall be connected to an individual back piling
with a three-fourths-inch galvanized tie-rod. [Amended 7-17-1991 by
Ord. No. 7-1991]
F. All lumber and piling, except back piling and drag planks, shall be
pressure-treated to a minimum retention of 25 pounds of creosote per
cubic foot of wood. [Amended 7-17-1991 by Ord. No. 7-1991]
G. All hardware shall be hot-dipped galvanized. All bolts and tie rods shall
be a minimum of 3/4 inch in diameter, with the length of the tie rods
being at least 16 feet.
H. A four-by-six-inch fascia board shall be constructed along the top of the
bulkhead and shall be bolted to each pile and top wale with threefourths-
inch galvanized bolts. The top of the bulkhead shall be capped
with three two-by-twelve-inch boards.
I. All cuts in treated timber shall be painted with at least two applications
of hot creosote oil and covered with hot roofing pitch.
J. Notwithstanding the above, any other described bulkheading
procedure, as approved and contained in the BOCA Code, shall be
acceptable within the City of Brigantine. [Added 7-17-1991 by Ord.
No. 7-1991]
K. All private bulkheads within the City of Brigantine must be maintained
in such a manner so the same are not injurious or dangerous to the
health, safety or welfare of the citizens of Brigantine. Said bulkheads
shall be kept in such a state of repair so as to maintain the filling in of
land around and about said bulkhead to the grade above the mean high
tide level as established for Brigantine and shall also be maintained to
prevent erosion or damage to abutting, adjacent or adjoining
properties. [Added 5-19-1993 by Ord. No. 16-1993]
L. Any person or entity who violates this section of the Code of the City of
Brigantine may be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or jail time not
to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the Municipal Court
Judge of the City of Brigantine. [Added 5-19-1993 by Ord. No.
16-1993]
M. No private contractor shall use a City street end or place any material,
supplies or equipment on or over bulkheads at a City street end without
first receiving specific written approval of the City of Brigantine. Any
person or business entity who does not receive such permission and
violates this subsection shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Subsection L as well as the cost to repair any and all damage which
§ 127-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 127-1
1:221
Chapter 130
CAFES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 91. Signs — See Ch. 256.
§ 130-1. Permit required.
Each and every business establishment which wishes to sell food items at
an outdoor cafe pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter must
apply to the City Manager or its designee for a permit to so conduct said
business.
§ 130-2. Submission and approval of plans required.
Any and all applicants seeking to obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter
must submit plans which are drawn to scale indicating the proposed layout
and design of any usage. Said plans shall be submitted to the City Manager
or his designee, and no permits shall be issued pursuant to this chapter
until said plans are approved by said City Manager or his designee. All plans
must show the location of any and all tables, chairs, awnings, plants or any
other temporary pieces of equipment or other accessories which are to be
placed outside of the applicant's business establishment pursuant to the
terms and conditions of this chapter.
occurs on the City bulkhead, street or other City property. If any such
damage occurs to the City street, bulkhead or other City property by
an individual or business entity who has received written permission
from the City of Brigantine pursuant to this subsection, said individual
or business entity will specifically indemnify and hold harmless the City
of Brigantine and be responsible for the cost of repair of any such
damage or destruction to said City street, bulkhead or City property.
Any individual or business entity who owes money to the City of
Brigantine pursuant to this subsection and who has not paid the same
can be denied the permission referred in this subsection and, after
an appropriate hearing before the governing body of the City of
Brigantine, can have the mercantile license of said individual and/or
business entity revoked until such time as all costs for any such damage
and destruction has been paid in full to the City of Brigantine. [Added
11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 17-2002]
N. To the extent that a foreclosure complaint has been filed in any court
within the State of New Jersey, § 127-1K as set forth above shall be
enforceable against the bank, mortgage company, or other financial
institution who is a holder of a mortgage on the property or who has
instituted foreclosure proceedings. [Added 10-17-2012 by Ord. No.
27-2012]
§ 127-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 130-3
1:222
§ 130-3. Current use only.
If any permits are issued pursuant to this chapter, the same shall be issued
strictly for the business currently being engaged in by the applicant. The
permits shall not permit any additional use of any kind or nature different
from the business already engaged in by said applicant.
§ 130-4. Food establishments only.
The only business establishments who shall be granted permits pursuant to
this chapter are those whose primary business is the sale of food prepared
on site for service to customers.
§ 130-5. Use of sidewalk.
Each and every applicant issued a permit pursuant to this chapter agrees
and understands that they must leave an area of clear and open space
the entire length of their property from the curbline toward their business
establishment which is 10 feet wide. This area is specifically reserved
for the passage of pedestrian traffic, and all applicants issued a permit
pursuant to this chapter will take all steps necessary to ensure the safe and
clear passage of any and all pedestrian traffic by their respective properties.
§ 130-6. Width of outdoor establishment.
All applicants issued a permit pursuant to this chapter understand and
agree that any tables, chairs, awnings, plants or any other temporary pieces
of equipment or accessories placed outside their business establishments
shall not be placed beyond their property line so as to infringe on the
property of an adjoining property owner.
§ 130-7. Area maintenance.
Each applicant issued a permit pursuant to this chapter is responsible for
keeping their area of operation in a clean, neat and orderly fashion. All
tables of food establishments must be bussed in an expeditious fashion and
trash containers must be located in such a fashion as to prevent the blowing
or accumulation of trash and other debris. All applicants who receive a
permit pursuant to this chapter are encouraged to sweep or "hose down"
the outside of their business establishments either prior to the opening of
business on any particular day or subsequent to the close of business on any
particular day.
§ 130-8. Drainage.
No applicant issued a permit pursuant to this chapter will take any actions
or place any obstacle that would prevent the normal flow of rainwater
into the appropriate storm drainage system near their respective business
establishment.
§ 130-9. Insurance.
§ 130-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-9
1:223
§ 130-10. Hold harmless agreement.
Each applicant receiving a permit pursuant to this chapter must also agree
to save, hold and keep harmless and indemnify the City of Brigantine from
and for any and all payments, expenses, costs, attorneys' fees and from
any and all claims and liability of any and all nature for bodily injury,
damage to property or any other losses occasioned wholly or in part by
or resulting from any acts or omissions to act by the applicant or any of
the applicant's agents, guests, licensees, invitees, assignees, or successors
or for any cause or reason whatsoever arising out of or by reason of the
use of the permit issued pursuant to this chapter and the conduct of said
applicant's business within the outdoor areas described in this chapter. Any
application made pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be deemed
conclusive evidence of the applicant's agreement to indemnify the City as
mentioned hereinabove in this chapter.
§ 130-11. Signs.
No additional signs or advertisement shall be permitted by this chapter
unless approval for the same is obtained pursuant to the appropriate laws
and resolutions governing the City of Brigantine.
§ 130-12. Date of applicability.
The allowance of the conduct of business in outdoor areas pursuant to the
terms and conditions of this chapter shall be permitted as of Memorial Day
weekend and shall extend until the conclusion of Columbus Day weekend.
§ 130-13. Hours of operation.
No applicant pursuant to this chapter may conduct sales of food at the
outdoor cafes established pursuant to this chapter except when said
establishment is open for business.
A. Each applicant issued a permit pursuant to this chapter must supply a
certificate of general comprehensive liability insurance to the City of
Brigantine as part of the application process showing adequate
insurance as determined by the City Manager or his designee but in any
event no less than $1,000,000 for bodily injury or death to any one
person and $25,000 property damage for any one accident or
occurrence.
B. The City of Brigantine must be added to said liability insurance policy
as an additional insured. The policy or policies of insurance must be
with a company or companies authorized to do business in the State of
New Jersey, and evidence of payment of premiums shall be shown prior
to the issuance of any permit pursuant to this chapter.
§ 130-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 130-14
1:224
§ 130-14. Health requirements.
All applicants for permit pursuant to this chapter must continue to comply
with any and all requirements of the Atlantic County Board of Health, the
ordinances of the City of Brigantine, the laws of the State of New Jersey and
any and all other rules, regulations and statutes.
§ 130-15. No food to be purchased outdoors.
Any food or drink to be sold for consumption at the outdoor cafes
established pursuant to this chapter may not be sold at any temporary or
permanent area which is located outdoors. Any such food and drink shall
either be purchased inside of the business establishment by the customer
then brought to the outdoor cafe or ordered inside of the business
establishment and brought to the outdoor cafe by a waiter or waitress.
§ 130-16. Tables must have umbrellas.
Each table placed outdoors pursuant to this chapter must be covered by an
umbrella which can be placed inside of or otherwise securely fastened to
said table.
§ 130-17. Chairs, tables and umbrellas must be uniform.
All chairs and tables with umbrellas placed outdoors pursuant to this
chapter must be uniform and in conformity as far as size, shape and color
with other chairs and tables with umbrellas located within the area.
§ 130-18. Access for ingress and egress.
Each business establishment creating an outdoor cafe pursuant to this
chapter shall at all times maintain a four-foot-wide space for ingress and
egress of patrons which extends from the curbline up to and through the
front door of said business establishment.
§ 130-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity violating the terms and provisions of this chapter or
any extension hereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or up to
90 days in jail, all in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 130-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-19
1:225
Chapter 131
(RESERVED)
Chapter 134
CERTIFICATE OF LAND USE COMPLIANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 123.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Rental property — See Ch. 246.
§ 134-1. Authority to issue certificates. [Amended 11-27-1991 by
Ord. No. 23-1991]
The Construction Official or his duly authorized designee shall have the
authority to issue certificates of land use compliance, but only in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 134-2. When certificate required.
A certificate of land use compliance shall be required prior to the sale or
any other type of transfer of title of any structure in the City of Brigantine,
including but not limited to any time sharing unit.
§ 134-3. Application; decision; appeal. [Amended 11-27-1991 by
Ord. No. 23-1991; 5-18-1994 by Ord. No. 11-1994]
A. Applications for certificates of land use compliance shall be submitted
to the Construction Official or his designee in such number of copies as
he or she may from time to time require, on such forms as shall be
prepared by said Construction Official. Within five working days
following the receipt of a completed application for certificate of land
use compliance, the Construction Official or his designee shall cause
the application to be acted upon by either granting or denying the
same. If in fact a denial occurs, then it shall be the obligation of the
Construction Official or his designee to state the reason therefor and to
allow an appropriate time for abatement if the property owner chooses
to abate any nonconformity. Any applicant who is denied a certificate of
land use compliance, who deems that he or she shall have been entitled
to the same, shall have the right to appeal the decision before the
Zoning Board of the City of Brigantine or shall have the right to apply to
said Zoning Board for a certificate of nonconformity, within 10 working
days of the denial thereof by filing a notice of appeal with the Secretary
§ 130-19 BRIGANTINE CODE § 134-3
1:226
§ 134-4. Fee.
The fee for applying for a certificate of land use compliance in the City of
Brigantine shall be in accordance with the fee schedule established in the
City from time to time.75
§ 134-5. Designation of enforcement officer. [Amended 11-27-1991
by Ord. No. 23-1991]
The Construction Official or his designee shall be and he is hereby
designated as the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter
and to enforce the provisions thereof. All references hereafter in this
chapter to the Construction Official shall relate to and include the person or
persons designated by the Construction Official as his designee inspector.
§ 134-6. (Reserved)76
§ 134-7. Notice to abate.
Whenever the enforcement officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there is a violation of any provision of this chapter
or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice
of such alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor,
along with what actions would be necessary to abate said violation(s) as
hereinafter provided.
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and filing a copy thereof with the
Clerk of the City of Brigantine.
B. In each instance where a hearing is requested before the Zoning Board
of Adjustment of the City of Brigantine, New Jersey, said hearing shall
be scheduled within 45 days of the filing of the appeal therefor or of the
filing of an application for a certificate of nonconformity. The forty-fiveday
period mentioned above will begin to run at the time any
application submitted to the Zoning Board is deemed complete.
A. Such notice shall:
(1) Be put in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(3) Allow an appropriate time as determined by the enforcement
officer for the performance of any act required to abate such
violation.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his designee and the occupant as the
case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Art. II, Fees Schedule; current fee amounts are also available
at the office of the City Clerk.
76.Editor's Note: Former § 134-6, Inspections; access to be granted, was repealed 11-27-1991
by Ord. No. 23-1991.
§ 134-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-7
1:227
§ 134-8. Hearings. [Amended 11-27-1991 by Ord. No. 23-1991;
5-18-1994 by Ord. No. 11-1994]
The enforcement officer or his designee will have the authority to issue
summonses for violations of this chapter. All hearings concerning said
violations will be heard in the Brigantine Municipal Court or other court of
competent jurisdiction. Whenever there is a violation of this chapter of the
Code of the City of Brigantine, a summons may be issued to the immediate
former owner of the property, the current owner of the property, any real
estate agent who was involved with the sale of the property or any title
agency which was involved with said sale.
§ 134-9. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The enforcement officer is hereby authorized and empowered to make and
adopt such written rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the
proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter nor in any way alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The enforcement officer shall file a certified copy of all adopted
rules and regulations in the office of the City Clerk with copies to be
transmitted to the City Manager and the City Council of Brigantine.
§ 134-10. Regulations.
properly served upon such owner or agent or upon such occupant
if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a copy thereof
is sent by registered mail to his last known address or if a copy
thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling
affected by the notice or by any other method authorized under the
laws of this state.
B. Such notice may contain an outline of action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. No owner or occupant of a dwelling, house or other structure and no
person or entity on behalf of said owner or occupant shall sell, transfer
or otherwise dispose of any ownership interest, whether or not for
consideration and whether or not such disposal is temporary or
permanent, unless a certificate of land use compliance is previously
issued by the Building Inspector or his designee. Such certificate shall
state that the dwelling, house or other structure is an appropriate and
allowable use where located within the City of Brigantine.
B. The Construction Official or his designee shall cause to be prepared in
appropriate form an application for certificate of land use compliance,
which form shall be available to applicants at the office of the Building
Inspector. The Construction Official or his designee may conduct an
inspection of any dwelling, house or other structure within five working
days of the date the application is filed in the office of the Construction
§ 134-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 134-10
1:228
§ 134-11. Deconversion of illegally converted property.
The Building Code Official of the City of Brigantine shall hereinafter be
authorized to set forth criteria for deconversion of any dwelling, house
or other structure in the City of Brigantine that shall be or have been
illegally converted to create more units than permitted in a designated zone
in which the property is located without first having secured appropriate
approvals from the City for said construction. The criteria for deconversion
shall be approved by resolution of the Council of the City of Brigantine. Any
amendments to said criteria shall thereinafter be approved by the Council
of the City of Brigantine.
§ 134-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter or
of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or by both. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 137
CHECKS, INSUFFICIENT FUNDS FOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Claims approval and payment — See Ch. 7.
Official. Thereafter, the Construction Official or his designee shall issue
a certificate of land use compliance to notify the applicant, in writing,
as to the reasons why such a certificate has not been issued. However,
failure on the part of the applicant to allow an inspection to occur by
the Construction Official or his designee within the time period stated
herein will cause the delay or denial of the issuance of a certificate
of land use compliance and thereby will prohibit the applicant from
selling, transferring or otherwise disposing of the ownership or
occupancy of any dwelling house or other structure pursuant to the
terms of this chapter. [Amended 11-27-1991 by Ord. No. 23-1991;
5-18-1994 by Ord. No. 11-1994]
C. A charge as previously described in this chapter shall be paid to the
Building Inspector for each application for a certificate of land use
compliance. No application shall be complete without payment of this
fee. Any reinspection of the dwelling, house or other structure caused
by a lack of compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall require
an additional fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses,
Article II, Fee Schedule, to be paid prior to said inspection.
§ 134-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-12
1:229
§ 137-1. Charge for returned checks.
There is hereby instituted in the City of Brigantine a minimum charge of
$20 for receipt by the City of Brigantine of checks which are returned for
insufficient funds. If the actual cost of collection of amounts due to the City
of Brigantine exceeds $20, then the maker of such check shall pay the actual
costs incurred by the City of Brigantine, including but not limited to all bank
charges, attorneys' fees and other costs associated with the collection of the
debt for which the insufficient funds check was proffered.
Chapter 141
CONDOMINIUM SERVICES
§ 134-12 BRIGANTINE CODE § 137-1
1:230
ARTICLE I
Reimbursement
[Adopted 10-6-1993 by Ord. No. 24-1993]
§ 141-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — Any condominium, homeowners' or property owners'
association or cooperative which privately contracts for snow removal,
streetlighting, solid waste collection and disposal and roadway
maintenance, or any such organization where individual members privately
contract for the above referenced services.
CONDOMINIUM — The form of real property ownership provided for under
the Condominium Act, P.L. 1969, c.257 (N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.).
COOPERATIVE — A housing corporation or association wherein the holder
of a share or membership interest in the corporation or association is
entitled to possess and occupy, for dwelling purposes, a house, apartment
or other unit of housing owned by the corporation or association, or to
purchase a unit of housing constructed or erected by the corporation or
association.
FEE SIMPLE COMMUNITY — A private community which consists of
individually owned lots or units and provides for common or shared
elements or interests in real property.
HORIZONTAL PROPERTY REGIME — The form of real property ownership
provided for under the Horizontal Property Act, P.L. 1963, c.168 (N.J.S.A.
46:8A-1 et seq.).
LOCAL PURPOSES TAX RATE — That portion of the municipal tax rate
levied in support of municipal purpose appropriations. Said rate is identified
on City of Brigantine tax bills as "municipal tax."
QUALIFIED PRIVATE COMMUNITY — A residential condominium
cooperative, fee simple community or horizontal property regime, the
residents of which do not receive any tax abatement or tax exemption
related to its construction, comprised of a community trust or other trust
device, condominium association, homeowners' association or council of coowners,
wherein the cost of maintaining roads and streets and providing
essential services is paid for by a not-for-profit entity consisting exclusively
of unit owners within the community. No apartment building or garden
apartment complex owned by an individual or entity that receives monthly
rental payments from tenants who occupy the premises shall be considered
a qualified private community.
REIMBURSEMENT PERCENTAGE — The percentage derived by dividing
the sum of municipal expenditures for snow removal, streetlighting, solid
waste collection and disposal and roadway maintenance by the total
municipal current fund expenditures for the calendar year.
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-2
1:231
§ 141-2. Threshold requirements.
The following threshold requirements shall be met by each qualified private
community prior to the City of Brigantine providing service or entering into
a reimbursement agreement with same pursuant to this article.
§ 141-3. Reimbursement agreement.
A. The master deed for the qualified private community shall be provided
to the City Manager to document the recorded intent of the owner to
establish and develop the condominium complex as a qualified private
community consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.,
complete with improvements intended for the common use and
enjoyment of the residents of the property.
B. The site plan for the development shall be supplied to the City of
Brigantine and shall be clearly marked with the agreed-upon public
area of the property and the remaining private areas of the property.
C. The owners shall indicate their desire or intent to dedicate the public
street areas to the City or to retain the same as private areas of the
community. It shall be in the sole discretion of the City of Brigantine
whether to accept or reject street areas offered for dedication to the
City. The condition precedent to consideration of street dedication to
the City of Brigantine shall be the ability of the condominium property
owners to meet existing City street standards as set forth in the City of
Brigantine Land Use Ordinance,77 the Code of the City of Brigantine
and the statutes of the State of New Jersey, with the exception of width.
It is established by this section that the City of Brigantine shall bear no
responsibility for maintenance of streets it does not own through
dedication and acceptance by this municipality.
D. It is herein determined that the manner and conditions under which
service shall be provided is based upon conveyance of a deed of
dedication by the owner to the City and acceptance thereof by the
Planning Board and the City Council of the City of Brigantine. Unless
the streets are dedicated to this municipality, the City will not provide
service, but shall enter into a reimbursement agreement therefor
acceptable to the City Solicitor and authorized by the City Council of
the City of Brigantine.
E. The Tax Assessor shall certify if the residents of the qualified private
community are the beneficiary of any existing tax abatements or tax
exemptions related to the construction thereof.
F. The Tax Assessor shall certify to the City Manager that the
condominium complex meets the definition of a "qualified private
community" as established by N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.2, which definition is
recited under § 141-1 of this article.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Land Use.
§ 141-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 141-3
1:232
§ 141-4. Eligible reimbursement expenses.
The governing body of the City of Brigantine shall reimburse a qualified
private community for the following services or provide the following
services within a qualified private community, if said streets are dedicated
to the City of Brigantine, in the same fashion as the municipality provides
these services on public roads and streets:
A. In lieu of providing some or all of the services set forth in § 141-4 of this
article, the City of Brigantine shall enter into a written agreement to
annually reimburse a qualified private community in an amount as set
forth in this article.
B. The amount to be reimbursed to the qualified private community shall
be used by the qualified private community to pay for the service which
the municipality chooses not to provide, and that amount shall be the
actual documented cost to the qualified private community of providing
that service, but not exceeding the amount which the City would have
expended on that service if it were provided directly by the municipality
to the qualified private community.
C. An agreement entered into pursuant to this section shall provide for an
accounting by the qualified private community of the use of the money
paid over to it by the City of Brigantine, and for the refunding to the
City of Brigantine of any payments in excess of the amounts actually
expended or contractually committed by the qualified private
community during the accounting period in order to provide for the
services covered by the agreement.
D. The City of Brigantine shall be indemnified and held harmless by the
association or the qualified private community property owner from any
lawsuit by virtue of providing service on dedicated streets or through
the reimbursement procedure.
E. The City will not be responsible to pay, to any qualified private
community, a greater percentage for reimbursement of services not
provided than those percentages listed for each respective year in the
phase-in schedule listed as a "Whereas" clause in this ordinance.78
A. Removal of snow, ice and other obstructions from the roads and streets.
B. Lighting of the roads and streets, to the extent of payment for
electricity required, but not including the installation or maintenance of
lamps, standards, wiring or other equipment.
C. The collection of trash and garbage, if requested, to a qualified private
community. The applicable tax rate shall be charged to the qualified
78.Editor's Note: The phase-in schedule, as stated in the preamble to Ord. No. 24-1993, is as
follows: Fiscal year 1993: 20% of the total cost of services in fiscal year 1993. Fiscal year
1994: 40% of the total cost of services in fiscal year 1994. Fiscal year 1995: 60% of the
total cost of services in fiscal year 1995. Fiscal year 1996: 80% of the total cost of services
in fiscal year 1996. Fiscal year 1997: 100% of the total cost of services in fiscal year 1997.
§ 141-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:233
§ 141-5. Designation of municipal services coordinators.
§ 141-6. Reimbursement procedures.
§ 141-7. Proof of expenditures; annual audit.
private community for providing said services in the same manner as
charged to all other property owners participating in and receiving
services for said collection services.
A. A qualified private community shall designate a coordinator for the
purpose of negotiating and implementing an agreement with the City of
Brigantine pursuant to the Condominium Act.79
B. A resolution of the Board of Directors of the qualified private
community appointing its designated representative and empowering
said representative to negotiate said agreement shall be filed with the
City Clerk of the City of Brigantine.
C. The City of Brigantine's designated Municipal Services Coordinator
shall be the City Manager or his designee.
A. The City of Brigantine shall budget annually the reimbursement
percentage required to compensate the qualified private community,
said appropriation to be subject to a "cap" base budget adjustment as
provided by the State of New Jersey, Director of the Division of Local
Government Services.
B. The City of Brigantine shall issue a check to the qualified private
community property owner prior to June 1 of the subsequent year for
the previous calendar year as reimbursement for municipal service
costs incurred for services covered pursuant to this article. The amount
of the reimbursement check shall be calculated in accordance with the
formula established by the City of Brigantine Chief Financial Officer.
C. Reimbursement checks received by the qualified private community
from the City of Brigantine shall be distributed as agreed in the
reimbursement agreement.
D. It shall be the qualified private community's responsibility to provide
the City of Brigantine with a properly itemized and certified invoice for
agreed reimbursable items prior to the issuance of any said check.
A. The City of Brigantine shall be provided with required data to support
and justify eligibility for reimbursement of expenses incurred by the
qualified private community. In no event shall the qualified private
community receive more, based on City cost for services, than actually
expended during the fiscal year.
79.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
§ 141-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 141-7
1:234
B. The qualified private community shall furnish its fiscal year annual
audit if requested by the City of Brigantine Chief Financial Officer.
§ 141-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-7
1:235
Chapter 143
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 123.
Dumpsters — See Ch. 144.
Excavations — See Ch. 165.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 187.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Mercantile businesses, fees schedule — See
Ch. 210, Art. II.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Sewers — See Ch. 252.
Moving of structures — See Ch. 264.
Water — See Ch. 290.
§ 141-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 141-7
1:236
ARTICLE I
Enforcement and Fees
[Adopted 1-5-1977 by Ord. No. 22-1976]
§ 143-1. Enforcing agency.
§ 143-2. Appeals. [Amended 9-15-1982 by Ord. No. 27-1982]
Whenever the Bureau of Inspections shall deny an applicant for a
construction permit, fail to act upon an application for a construction
permit, fail to act upon an application for a certificate of occupancy, refuse
to grant a variation pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code Act or
N.J.A.C. 5:23 or make any other decision pursuant to the Act or the
regulations,82 including the assessment of any monetary penalties, an owner
or his authorized agent may appeal to the Atlantic County Construction
Board of Appeals. The application for appeal shall be taken within 20
business days of the receipt of written notice of the denial or other decision
of the Bureau of Inspections.
§ 143-3. Fees. [Amended 9-15-1982 by Ord. No. 27-1982; 2-1-1984
by Ord. No. 2-1984; 12-18-1985 by Ord. No.34-1985; 11-28-1990 by
Ord. No. 16-1990; 4-20-1994 by Ord. No. 7-1994; 9-6-1995 by Ord.
No. 19-1995; 5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 11-1996]
A. There is hereby established in the City of Brigantine a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Bureau of
Inspections," consisting of a construction official, building subcode
official, plumbing subcode official, electrical subcode official, fire
protection official and such other subcode officials and inspectors for
such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code.80 The Construction Official shall
be the chief administrator of the enforcing agency. [Amended
9-15-1982 by Ord. No. 27-1982]
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,81 as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position may be
held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
80.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:23.
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
82.Editor's Note: "The regulations" refers to the regulations promulgated by the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey
pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.).
§ 143-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-3
1:237
A. Payment of fees. [Amended 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 31-2011]
(1) The fee for plan review shall be paid at the time of application for a
permit. The amount of this fee shall then be deducted from the
amount of the fee due for a construction permit, when the permit is
issued. Plan review fees shall be nonrefundable.
(2) The fee to be charged for a construction permit shall be paid before
a permit is issued. Construction permit fees shall be refundable
only in the fiscal year that they are received.
(3) The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be paid
before a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition to the
construction permit fee.
(4) The fee to be paid for the periodic reinspection of equipment and
facilities granted a certificate for a specified duration shall be paid
before reinspection.
(5) Checks shall be made payable to the City of Brigantine.
(6) Newly constructed residential units that are to be legally restricted
to occupancy by households of low or moderate income shall be
exempted from the fees set forth below.
B. Fees enumerated. [Amended 11-4-1998 by Ord. No. 18-1998;
12-6-2000 by Ord. No. 29-2000; 1-18-2006 by Ord. No. 3-2006;
2-21-2007 by Ord. No. 5-2007; 9-19-2007 by Ord. No. 19-2007;
4-2-2008 by Ord. No. 11-2008; 1-21-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009;
12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 31-2011]
(1) The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to be charged
for a new construction permit.
(2) The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed
on the basis of the volume or the cost of construction, the number
of plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of
electrical fixtures and devices and the number of sprinklers,
standpipes and detectors (smoke and heat) at the unit rates
provided herein, plus any special fees. All construction permits are
subject to a New Jersey state permit surcharge fee as set forth by
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19. The minimum fee for a basic construction permit
covering any and all building work shall be $55.
(a) The fees for new construction or alteration are as follows:
[1] Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume
of the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be
in the amount of $0.034 per cubic foot of volume for
buildings of all use groups and types of construction as
classified in Chapters 3 and 6 of the building subcode,
except that the fee shall be $0.019 per cubic foot of volume
§ 143-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 143-3
1:238
for use groups of A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2.
The minimum fee shall be $55.
[2] Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs or site
construction associated with premanufactured
construction, and the external utility connection for
premanufactured construction shall be based upon the
estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be in the amount
of $32 per $1,000 for the first $50,000, prorated. From
$50,001 to and including $100,000, the fee shall be in the
same amount of $24 per $1,000 of estimated cost above
$50,000. Above $100,000, the additional fee shall be in the
amount of $21 per $1,000 of estimated cost above
$100,000. For the purpose of determining estimated cost,
the applicant shall submit to the Construction Official such
cost data as may be available produced by the architect or
engineer of record or the recognized estimating firm or by
the contractor. A bona fide contractor's bid, if available,
shall be submitted. The Construction Official shall make
the final decision regarding estimated cost. The minimum
fee shall be $55.
[3] Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis as
for new construction for the added portion.
[4] Fees for combination renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Subsection B(2)(a)[2] and [3] above.
[5] The fee for tents in excess of 900 square feet or more than
30 feet in any dimension shall be $125.
[6] The fee for roofing and siding work completed on
structures in Use Groups R-3 and R-5 shall be $58.
[7] The fee for an aboveground swimming pool shall be $126
for a pool with a surface area greater than 550 square feet;
the fee in all other cases shall be $63. The fee for an inground
swimming pool shall be $200 for a pool with a
surface area greater than 550 square feet; the fee in all
other cases shall be $95.
(b) The fees for plumbing fixtures and equipment shall be as
follows:
[1] The fee shall be in the amount of $15 per fixture, piece of
equipment or appliance connected to the plumbing
system, and for each appliance connected to the gaspiping
or oil-piping system, except as indicated in
Subsection B(2)(b)[2] below. The minimum fee shall be
$55.
§ 143-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-3
1:239
[2] The fee shall be $85 per special device for the following:
grease traps, oil separators, refrigeration units, utility
service connections, backflow preventers equipped with
test ports (double check valve assembly, reduced pressure
zone and pressure vacuum breaker backflow preventers),
steam boilers, hot water boilers (excluding those for
domestic water heating), active solar systems, sewer
pumps and interceptors. There shall be no inspection fee
charged for gas service entrances.
(c) The fees for electrical fixtures and devices shall be as follows:
[1] For the block consisting of one to 50 receptacles, fixtures
or devices, the fee shall be $55; for each additional block
consisting of up to 25 receptacles, fixtures or devices, the
fee shall be $15. For the purpose of computing this fee,
receptacles, fixtures or devices shall include lighting
fixtures, wall switches, convenience receptacles, sensors,
dimmers, alarm devices, smoke and heat detectors,
communication outlets, light standards eight feet or less in
height, including luminaries, emergency lights, electric
signs, exit lights or similar electric fixtures and devices
rated 20 amperes or less, including motors or equipment
rated less than one horsepower or one kilowatt. The
minimum fee shall be $55.
[2] For each motor or electrical device rated from one
horsepower or one kilowatt to 10 horsepower or 10
kilowatts; for each transformer or generator rated from
one kilowatt or one KVA to 10 kilowatts or 10 KVA; for each
replacement of wiring involving one branch circuit or part
thereof; for each storable pool or hydro massage bathtub;
for each underwater lighting fixture; for household electric
cooking equipment rated up to 16 kilowatts; for each fire,
security or burglar alarm control unit; for each receptacle
rated from 30 amperes to 50 amperes; for each light
standard greater than eight feet in height, including
luminaries; and for each communications closet, the fee
shall be $15.
[3] For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 10 horsepower or 10 kilowatts to 50 horsepower or
50 kilowatts; for each service equipment, panelboard,
switchboard, switch gear, motor-control center, or
disconnecting means rated 225 amperes or less; for each
transformer or generator rated from greater than 10
kilowatts or 10 KVA to 45 kilowatts or 45 KVA; for each
electric sign rated from greater than 20 amperes to 225
amperes, including associated disconnecting means; for
each receptacle rated greater than 50 amperes; and for
each utility load management device, the fee shall be $58.
§ 143-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 143-3
1:240
[4] For each motor or electrical device rated from greater
than 50 horsepower or 50 kilowatts to 100 horsepower or
100 kilowatts; for each service equipment, panelboard,
switchboard, switch gear, motor-control center or
disconnecting means rated from greater than 225 amperes
to 1,000 amperes; and for each transformer or generator
rated from greater than 45 kilowatts or 45 KVA to 112.5
kilowatts or 112.5 KVA, the fee shall be $116.
[5] For each motor or electrical device rated greater than 100
horsepower or 100 kilowatts; for each service equipment,
panelboard, switchboard, switch gear, motor-control
center or disconnecting means rated greater than 1,000
amperes; and for each transformer or generator rated
greater than 112.5 kilowatts or 112.5 KVA, the fee shall be
$576.
[6] The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently
installed private swimming pool as defined in the building
subcode, spa, hot tub or fountain shall be a flat fee of $69,
which shall include any required bonding and associated
equipment such as filter pumps, motors, disconnecting
means, switches, required receptacles and heaters, etc.,
excepting panelboards and underwater lighting fixtures.
For public swimming pools, the fee shall be charged on the
basis of number of electrical fixtures and rating of
electrical devices involved in accordance with Subsection
B(2)(c)[1], [2], [3], [4] and [5] above.
[7] The fee charged for the installation of single- and multiplestation
smoke and heat detectors and fire, burglar or
security alarm systems in any one- or two-family dwelling
shall be a flat fee of $29 per dwelling unit. For fire, burglar
and security alarm systems and detectors in buildings
other than one- or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be
charged in accordance with Subsection B(2)(c)[1] and [2]
above. The minimum fee shall be $55.
[8] For installations consisting of multimeter stacks, the fee
shall be based on the ampere rating of the main bus and
not upon the number of meters or rating of disconnects on
the meter stack. Individual loadside panelboards shall be
charged in accordance with Subsection B(2)(c)[3], [4] and
[5] above. There shall be no additional fee charged for the
concurrent installation of individual feeder conductors.
[9] For motors or similar devices requiring concurrent
installation of individual controls, relays and switches, the
fee shall be based only upon the rating of the motor device.
There shall be no additional fee charged for the concurrent
§ 143-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-3
1:241
installation of individual circuit components, for example,
controllers, starters and disconnecting means.
[10] For electrical work requiring replacement of service
entrance conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee
shall be in accordance with Subsection B(2)(c)[2], [3], [4]
and [5] above based on the designated ampere rating of
the overcurrent device of the service or feeder.
[11] The fee charged for process equipment shall be based on
the ampere rating of the overcurrent device protecting the
conductor feeding the process equipment or the cutoff
device.
[12] For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communications devices, utilizing equipment and motors
which are part of premises wiring, except those which are
portable plug-in type, shall be counted.
[13] For annual electrical inspection of swimming pools, spas
and hot tubs, the fee shall be $75 before April 15 and $110
as of April 15 or thereafter in any given year.
[14] The fee for a newly installed automatic lawn sprinkler
system with an automatic rain sensor device or switch
shall be $29. The minimum fee shall be $55.
(d) Fire protection and other hazardous equipment; sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered
suppression systems, gas- and oil-fired appliances not
connected to plumbing system, kitchen exhaust systems,
incinerators and crematoriums:
[1] The fee for 20 or fewer heads shall be $82; for 21 to and
including 100 heads, the fee shall be $151; for 101 to and
including 200 heads, the fee shall be $289; for 201 to and
including 400 heads, the fee shall be $748; for 401 to and
including 1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,036; for over
1,000 heads, the fee shall be $1,323.
[2] The fee for one to 12 detectors shall be $45; for each 25
detectors in addition to this the fee shall be in the amount
of $15. The minimum fee shall be $55.
[3] The fee for each standpipe shall be $289.
[4] The fee for each independent pre-engineered system shall
be $116.
[5] The fee for each gas- or oil-fired appliance that is not
connected to the plumbing system shall be $60.
[6] The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $60.
§ 143-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 143-3
1:242
[7] The fee for each incinerator shall be $460.
[8] The fee for each crematorium shall be $460.
[9] For single- and multiple-station smoke or heat detectors
and fire alarm systems in any one- or two-family dwellings,
there shall be a flat fee of $29 per dwelling unit. For
detectors and fire alarm systems in buildings other than
one- or two-family dwellings, the fee shall be charged in
accordance with Subsection B(2)(d)[2] above.
(e) (Reserved)
(f) The fees for certificates and other permits shall be as follows:
[1] The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $150
for a structure of less than 5,000 square feet in area and
less than 30 feet in height or for one- or two-family
residences (Use Group R-3 or R-5 of the building subcode)
and $200 for all other use groups.
[2] The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the
amount of $5 per square foot surface area of the sign,
computed on one side only for double-faced signs. The
minimum fee shall be $55.
[3] The fee for a certificate of occupancy/temporary certificate
of occupancy shall be in the amount of $75. The fee for
renewal of a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be
$40.
[4] The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to
a change of use group shall be $150.
[5] The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall
be $175. The fee for lead abatement clearance work shall
be $50.
[6] The fee for a certificate of approval certifying that work
done under a construction permit has been satisfactorily
completed shall be no fee.
[7] The fee for an application for a variation in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $748 for Class I structures
and $151 for Class II and Class III structures. The fee for
resubmission of an application for a variation shall be $289
for Class I structures and $82 for Class II and Class III
structures.
[8] The fee for a reinspection of any subcode shall be $55.
§ 143-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-3
1:243
§ 143-4. Amendment of fees. [Amended 7-1-1981 by Ord. No.
14-1981]
The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor of the governing body biannually a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act,83 and said
official, at the direction of the Mayor, shall be empowered to amend the
fee schedule herein contained in accordance with the terms of the State
Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 143-5. Waiver of handicap building fees.84 [Added 12-21-1994 by
Ord. No. 28-1994]
§ 143-6. Fire limits; report.
[9] The fee for reinstatement of a suspended or revoked
construction permit shall be 35% of the total sum of the
construction permit. The minimum fee shall be $55.
C. Administrative surcharge. In accordance with N.J.A.C.5:23-4.18.(j), in
addition to the foregoing fees, an administrative surcharge of 30% shall
be added to those subcode areas for which the City has a contract for
inspection with a private on-site inspection agency. [Amended
2-21-2007 by Ord. No. 5-2007]
A. No person shall be charged a construction permit surcharge fee or
enforcing agency fee in the City of Brigantine for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration or improvement designed and undertaken
solely to promote accessibility by the handicapped to an existing public
or private structure or any of the facilities contained therein.
B. Definition. For the purposes of this section, "handicapped person"
means a person who has the total and permanent inability to engage in
any substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable
physical or mental impairment, including blindness, and shall include,
but not be limited to, any resident of this state who is disabled pursuant
to the federal Social Security Act or the federal Railroad Retirement Act
of 1974 or is rated as having a sixty-percent disability or higher
pursuant to any federal law administered by the United States Veterans
Act. For the purposes of this subsection, "blindness" means central
visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye with the use of a
correcting lens. An eye which is accompanied by a limitation in the
fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends
an angle no greater than 20º shall be considered as having a central
visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
83.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
84.Editor's Note: Former § 143-5, Surcharge fee; report, was repealed 4-16-2009 by Ord. No.
7-2009. This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 143-5.1 as § 143-5.
§ 143-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 143-6
1:244
A. The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4:23.85
B. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor or
governing body biannually a report reevaluating the delineation of the
fire limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the
Construction Official, the building subcode official and the fire subcode
official regarding those areas which should be designated as within fire
limits, with the reasons therefor.
85.Editor's Note: A complete description of the fire limits of the City of Brigantine is on file
in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 143-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-6
1:245

ARTICLE II
Use of Rubbish Disposal Facilities During Construction
[Adopted 7-17-1985 by Ord. No. 14-1985]
§ 143-7. (Reserved)86
§ 143-8. (Reserved)87
§ 143-9. (Reserved)88
§ 143-10. Violations and penalties; additional remedies. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992; 1-18-2006 by Ord. No. 3-2006]
A. The penalty for violation of this article shall be a maximum fine of
$2,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, per
violation. Each day said violation exists shall be considered to be a
separate violation.
B. In addition to the penalties provided in this article, the Construction
Official shall be empowered to take such other action as may be
available to him under the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code or
the International Building Code or International Residential Code (IBC
or IRC) or under other such laws or ordinances as may apply.
86.Editor's Note: Former § 143-7, Dumpster required on construction premises, as amended,
was repealed 4-2-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008. See now Ch. 144, Dumpsters.
87.Editor's Note: Former § 143-8, Applicability to all building permits, was repealed 4-2-2008
by Ord. No. 10-2008.
88.Editor's Note: Former § 143-9, Variations from regulations, as amended, was repealed
4-2-2008 by Ord. No. 10-2008.
§ 143-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-10
1:247
Chapter 144
DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 187.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
§ 144-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms, whenever used in
this chapter, shall respectively be deemed to mean:
DUMPSTER — Any container used for the purpose of storing, containing
and/or carting debris and waste.
OFF-SITE DUMPSTER — Any container used for the purpose of storing,
containing and/or carting debris and waste which is located in a public
right-of-way.
PERSON — An individual or individuals or corporation, partnership or
voluntary association.
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT — Any nonmotorized portable storage
container for on-site storage of nonhazardous items, building material and
construction equipment used during active permitted building construction.
The containers must be in good clean condition.[Amended 6-7-2017 by
Ord. No. 20-2017]
§ 144-2. Applicability; permit required; use requirements.
A. Dumpsters and containers required by Chapter 18789 are exempt from
the provisions of this chapter.
B. Dumpster/portable storage units.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or place or be permitted
to use or place any dumpster or portable storage unit within the
City of Brigantine without first obtaining a written permit from the
construction office. A portable storage unit will only be permitted
during active construction work with current construction permits.
Notwithstanding the above current construction permit
requirement, a permit for a portable storage unit may be issued for
a site not under active construction, which permit will be limited to
a term of 30 days, and such term may only be extended in the
89.Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
§ 143-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 144-2
1:248
discretion of the City Manager with good cause being
demonstrated. [Amended 6-7-2017 by Ord. No. 20-2017]
(2) The person to whom a permit is issued for a dumpster shall be
required to ensure that the dumpster is covered by a tarpaulin or
other suitable cover at all times the dumpster is not in use or
unattended.
(3) The dumpster shall be emptied on a frequency necessary so that
waste and debris shall not accumulate on the exterior thereof.
(4) The dumpster or portable storage unit must be located on the
actual premises for which the permit is issued and not in any public
right-of-way or adjacent properties.
(5) A copy of the dumpster and/or portable storage unit permit shall be
maintained on the premises and posted in a conspicuous location.
(6) A dumpster unit permit shall be required as a condition of issuance
of any construction permit. [Amended 6-7-2017 by Ord. No.
20-2017]
C. Off-site dumpster.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or place or be permitted
to use or place any dumpster in any public right-of-way within the
City of Brigantine without first obtaining a written permit from the
construction office.
(2) The off-site dumpster shall have its wheels or skids, as the case may
be, placed on timber material having minimum dimensions of not
less than two inches thick by 12 inches wide by 48 inches long, so
as to provide protection to the surface of the street, highway or
public property upon which the off-site dumpster is to be placed.
(3) The person to whom a permit is issued for a dumpster shall be
required to ensure that the dumpster is covered by a tarpaulin or
other suitable cover at all times the dumpster is not in use or
unattended.
(4) The dumpster shall be emptied on a frequency necessary so that
construction waste and debris shall not accumulate on the exterior
thereof.
(5) Portable storage units are prohibited to be placed in any public
right-of-way.
(6) A copy of the off-site dumpster permit shall be maintained on the
premises and posted in a conspicuous location or affixed to the offsite
dumpster in plain view.
(7) The Construction Official shall have the Police Department review
and approve the proposed location and/or other traffic control
§ 144-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-2
1:249
§ 144-3. Issuance of permits.
devices required, prior to issuance of permit. The Construction
Official may also require review by the Fire Department and Public
Works or Utility Departments, if their facilities or access are
impacted by the proposed placement of the off-site dumpster.
(8) Consistent with N.J.S.A. 27:5A-1, in all cases where a off-site
dumpster is to be placed in a public right-of-way, the off-site
dumpster shall be equipped with and display markers consisting of
all-yellow reflective diamond-shaped panels having a minimum size
of 18 inches by 18 inches. These panels shall be mounted at the
edge of the off-site dumpster at both ends nearest the path of
passing vehicles and facing the direction of oncoming traffic. These
markers shall have a minimum mounting height of three feet from
the bottom of the panels to the surface of the roadway.
(9) No person shall purposely, knowingly, recklessly or negligently
damage any street, highway or public property or allow damage to
be caused to any street, highway or public property by the
placement of an off-site dumpster upon a street, highway or public
property. It shall be no defense to a prosecution for an offense
under this section that a permit for placement of an off-site
dumpster was obtained from the Construction Official or that
timber material had been placed under the wheels or skids of the
off-site dumpster as required by this chapter, it being the
responsibility of the property owner or his/her authorized agent to
provide for further protective measures to the street, highway or
public property if the timber material required by this chapter
proves to be insufficient to adequately protect the street, highway
or public property from damage by reason of the weight of the offsite
dumpster or any other factor or cause.
(10) Notwithstanding the fact that a permit for placement of an off-site
dumpster may have been issued by the Construction Official,
nothing contained in this chapter shall be interpreted as or deemed
as precluding the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief from ordering the
temporary removal of any off-site dumpster that has been placed
upon a public right-of way for reasons of traffic safety or public
safety.
A. All permits required by this chapter shall be in writing and shall be
issued by the Construction Official. The Construction Official shall issue
the permit if it appears that the applicant has the right and the need to
use a dumpster, portable storage unit or off-site dumpster.
B. No permit authorized by this chapter shall be granted except pursuant
to an application, in writing, signed by the person desiring such a
permit or his/her authorized agent. The application must be submitted
on forms provided by the City of Brigantine Construction Official and
shall set forth the location of the proposed dumpster, portable storage
§ 144-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 144-3
1:250
§ 144-4. Permit fees and duration.
§ 144-5. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be a maximum fine of $2,000
or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, per violation.
Each day said violation exists shall be considered to be a separate violation.
Chapter 147
CURFEW
§ 147-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following
definitions:
GUARDIAN — A person, other than a parent, to whom legal custody of the
juvenile has been given by court order or who is acting in the place of the
parent or is responsible for the care and welfare of the juvenile.
JUVENILE — Any individual who is under the age of 18 years.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, bridge,
alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation facility,
vehicle used for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building, structure or area.
unit or off-site dumpster; the nature, extent and probable duration of
the use of said containers and the reason for its use.
C. No permits shall be issued until the fee, hereinafter described, shall be
paid to the City of Brigantine.
A. The fee for dumpsters and portable storage units is $35 for each
dumpster or portable storage unit for a period of 30 days. The permit
may be renewed for additional fifteen-day periods for a fee of $20 per
renewal.
B. The fee for dumpsters required as a condition of a construction permit
shall be $50 each for construction permit costs valued at $250 and
greater, and $25 each for all others. The permit shall be valid for the
duration of the construction permit. The Construction Official may
waive the requirement for a dumpster permit if he deems that the
construction activities are minor in nature and do not require a
dumpster.
C. The fee for off-site dumpsters is $75 for each dumpster for a period of
30 days. The permit may be renewed for additional fifteen-day periods
for a fee of $50 per renewal.
§ 144-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147-2
1:251
§ 147-2. Curfew established.
It shall be unlawful for a juvenile to be on any public street or in a public
place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless accompanied
by said juvenile's parent or guardian or unless engaged in, or traveling to
or from, a business or occupation which the laws of this state authorize a
juvenile to perform.
§ 147-3. Curfew during school hours. [Added 3-2-2005 by Ord. No.
6-200590]
It shall be unlawful for a juvenile of any age under 18 years to be in
any public place during the hours when the juvenile is required to be in
attendance at either a public or nonpublic school unless the juvenile is
accompanied by a parent or guardian or is carrying a written permission
from the juvenile's educational authority allowing the juvenile to be in said
public place or is in said public place as part of an activity or trip sponsored
and authorized by said juvenile's school.
§ 147-4. Responsibility of parents.
If any parent or guardian allows an unaccompanied juvenile to be on a
public street or in a public place in violation of the terms of this chapter,
said parent or guardian may be required to perform community service
together with the juvenile who violates this chapter.
§ 147-5. Exceptions.
It shall not be a violation of this chapter if any juvenile is in a public place
or on a public street during hours which are in violation of this chapter if
said juvenile is in said public place or on said public street while engaged
in an errand involving a medical emergency or attending extracurricular
school activities or activities sponsored by religious or community-based
organizations or other cultural, educational or social events which occur
during the hours of curfew as detailed in this chapter.
§ 147-6. Legislative findings and purpose.
The City of Brigantine finds and declares that children who are left
unsupervised during the overnight hours may be exposed to the most
detrimental influences in society; that the allure of the rampant drug
counter-culture, the potential for involvement in criminal activity and other
potential threats to the physical and mental health and welfare of children
justify governmental action in furtherance of the protection of one of the
most fragile and easily influenced segments of our society. The City of
Brigantine further finds and declares that it is in the best interest of this
municipality and society at large to encourage family unity; to encourage
the wholesome mental and physical development of children, to encourage
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former §§ 147-3 through 147-6 as §§ 147-4
through 147-7, respectively.
§ 147-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 147-6
1:252
the supervision of children by their parents and/or guardians and to
encourage communication between them.
§ 147-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this chapter shall be required to perform up to 90
hours of community service and may be subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
both, in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. If both the juvenile and
the juvenile's parent or guardian violate this chapter, they shall be required
to perform any community service imposed by the Municipal Court Judge
together.
Chapter 150
DEVELOPMENT FEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affordable housing — See Ch. 85. Land use — See Ch. 198.
§ 150-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance with P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32 through 38 and the
Statewide Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1
through 8.7). Fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used for the
sole purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing in accordance
with the Court-approved spending plan.
§ 150-2. Basic requirements.
§ 150-3. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this chapter, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to,
an inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a onehundred-
percent affordable development.
COAH or the COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act which had primary jurisdiction for the
A. This chapter shall not be effective until approved by the Court.
B. The City of Brigantine shall not spend development fees until the Court
has approved a plan for spending such fees (spending plan) in
conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
§ 147-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-3
1:253
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the improvement
of property as authorized by Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel
Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990) and the Fair Housing Act of 1985, N.J.S.A.
52:27d-301 et seq., and regulated by applicable COAH rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property divided
by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in
which the property is situated, as determined in accordance with Sections
1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health, safety
and well-being of residents by producing durable, low-maintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing
infrastructure and community services.
§ 150-4. Residential development fees.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all residential zones, residential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted
below, shall pay a fee of 1.5% of the equalized assessed value for
residential development, provided no increased density is
permitted. Development fees shall also be imposed and collected
when an additional dwelling unit is added to an existing residential
structure; in such cases, the fee shall be calculated based on the
increase in the equalized assessed value of the property due to the
additional dwelling unit.
(2) When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers are required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be
realized. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application,
the base density for the purposes of calculating the bonus
development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance
application. Example: If an approval allows four units to be
constructed on a site that was zoned for two units, the fees could
equal 1.5% of the equalized assessed value on the first two units;
and the specified higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized
assessed value for the two additional units, provided zoning on the
§ 150-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 150-4
1:254
§ 150-5. Nonresidential development fees.
site has not changed during the two-year period preceding the
filing of such a variance application.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential
development.
(1) Affordable housing developments, developments where the
developer is providing for the construction of affordable units
elsewhere in the municipality, and developments where the
developer has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of
affordable units shall be exempt from development fees.
(2) Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan
approval prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee
ordinance shall be exempt from development fees, unless the
developer seeks a substantial change in the approval. Where a site
plan approval does not apply, a zoning and/or building permit shall
be synonymous with preliminary or final site plan approval for this
purpose. The fee percentage shall be vested on the date that the
building permit is issued.
(3) Development fees shall not be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use. For
the demolition of an existing residential structure with a
replacement of a new residential structure, the development fee
shall be calculated on the increase in the equalized assessed value
of the improved structure.
(4) Developments by the City or legally formed nonprofit are exempt
from development fees.
(5) Owner-occupied residential structures demolished and replaced as
a result of a fire, flood, or natural disaster shall be exempt from
paying a development fee.
A. Imposed fees.
(1) Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
(2) Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
§ 150-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-5
1:255
§ 150-6. Collection procedures.
(3) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e., land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
B. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development.
(1) The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the development fee of 2.5%,
unless otherwise exempted below.
(2) The fee of 2.5% shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
(3) Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
(4) A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
(5) If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by Brigantine as a lien against the real property of the owner.
A. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit and to notify the Tax Assessor of the grant of such
approval.
§ 150-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 150-6
1:256
B. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption," to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
C. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
D. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
E. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
F. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
G. Should Brigantine fail to determine or notify the developer of the
amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the request
for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due and
pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set forth
in Subsection b of Section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
H. The developer shall pay 100% of the calculated development fee
amount prior to the municipal issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for the subject property.
I. Appeal of development fees.
(1) A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest-bearing escrow account by Brigantine.
Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made to the tax
court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the
date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts escrowed
shall be credited to the prevailing party.
§ 150-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-6
1:257
§ 150-7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
(2) A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing escrow account
by Brigantine. Appeals from a determination of the Director may be
made to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State
Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days
after the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
A. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer for the purpose of
depositing development fees collected from residential and
nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of units with
extinguished controls.
B. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
(1) Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
(2) Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
(3) Rental income from municipally operated units;
(4) Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
(5) Recapture funds;
(6) Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
(7) Any other funds collected in connection with Brigantine's
affordable housing program.
C. In the event of a failure by the City of Brigantine to comply with trust
fund monitoring and reporting requirements or to submit accurate
monitoring reports; or a failure to comply with the conditions of the
judgment of compliance or a revocation of the judgment of compliance;
or a failure to implement the approved spending plan and to expend
funds within the applicable required time period as set forth in In re Tp.
of Monroe, 442 N.J. Super. 565 (Law Div. 2015) (aff'd 442 N.J. Super.
563); or the expenditure of funds on activities not approved by the
Court; or for other good cause demonstrating the unapproved use(s) of
funds, the Court may authorize the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Local Government Services (LGS), to
direct the manner in which the funds in the Affordable Housing Trust
§ 150-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 150-7
1:258
§ 150-8. Use of funds.
Fund shall be expended, provided that all such funds shall, to the
extent practicable, be utilized for affordable housing programs within
the City of Brigantine, or, if not practicable, then within the county or
the housing region. Any party may bring a motion before the Superior
Court presenting evidence of such condition(s), and the Court may,
after considering the evidence and providing the municipality a
reasonable opportunity to respond and/or to remedy the noncompliant
condition(s), and upon a finding of continuing and deliberate
noncompliance, determine to authorize LGS to direct the expenditure of
funds in the trust fund. The Court may also impose such other remedies
as may be reasonable and appropriate to the circumstances.
D. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by the Court.
A. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by the Court. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for
any activity approved by the Court to address Brigantine's fair share
obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such
activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of
housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability
controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units
and related costs, accessory apartments, market to affordable,
conversion of existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable
units, green building strategies designed to be cost saving and in
accordance with accepted national or state standards, purchase of land
for affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable
housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the
approved spending plan.
B. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Brigantine for past housing
activities.
C. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
(1) Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
§ 150-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-8
1:259
§ 150-9. Monitoring.
Brigantine shall complete and return to the appropriate agency and FSHC
all monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements related to the
collection of development fees from residential and nonresidential
developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls, barrier-free escrow funds,
rental income, repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any
other funds collected in connection with Brigantine's housing program, as
well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan
granted a judgment of compliance and repose by the Court. All monitoring
reports shall be completed on designated forms.
§ 150-10. Ongoing collection of fees.
The ability for Brigantine to impose, collect and expend development fees
shall expire with its judgment of compliance and repose unless Brigantine
has filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with the duly
designated entity, has petitioned for the appropriate action, and has
received approval of its development fee ordinance. If Brigantine fails to
renew its ability to impose and collect development fees prior to the
expiration of its judgment of compliance and repose, it may be subject to
(2) Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income.
(3) Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
D. Brigantine may contract with a private or public entity to administer
any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the
requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:96-18.
E. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees may
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries
and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to
develop or implement a new construction program, a Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the
case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and rental
units, and compliance with monitoring requirements. Legal or other
fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing sites or objecting
to regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the affordable
housing trust fund.
§ 150-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 150-10
1:260
forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund. Any
funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund established pursuant to Section 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-320). Brigantine shall not impose a residential development fee on
a development that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the
expiration of its judgment of compliance and repose, nor shall Brigantine
retroactively impose a development fee on such a development. Brigantine
shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its judgment of
compliance.
Chapter 153
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Noise — See Ch. 216.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
§ 150-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150-10
1:261

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Control of Dogs
[Adopted 5-4-1983 by Ord. No. 6-1983]
§ 153-1. Licensing; registration tag; fees; required information.
[Amended 11-2-1983 by Ord. No. 21-1983]
A. New Jersey Statutes Annotated (hereafter "N.J.S.A.") 4:19-15.1 et seq.
establishes comprehensive regulations for licensing of dogs, kennels,
pet shops, shelters and pounds within municipalities of the State of
New Jersey. Pursuant thereto, any persons who own, keep or harbor a
dog of licensing age within the City of Brigantine shall annually apply
for a dog license from the municipal official appointed hereunder and,
in addition, obtain from said municipal official a metal registration tag
for each such dog. At all times during the term of said license, said
persons shall place upon such dog a collar or harness with the
registration tag securely attached thereto. [Amended 12-28-1992 by
Ord. No. 28-1992]
B. Every person who applies for any such dog license and registration tag,
or any renewals thereof, shall pay a fee to the City of Brigantine in the
amounts set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II,
Fees Schedule, according to the following schedule: [Amended
1-4-1984 by Ord. No. 1983; 12-16-1987 by Ord. No. 24-1987;
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(1) A license fee to the City of Brigantine pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.12.
(2) A registration tag fee due to the New Jersey State Department of
Health pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3.
(3) A fee due to the New Jersey State Department of Health for any dog
of reproductive age which has not had its reproductive capacity
permanently altered through sterilization as part of
implementation of the Animal Population Control Fund pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3b.
(4) A fee due to the New Jersey State Department of Health for deposit
in a pilot clinic fund to be used for operation of a pilot spay-neuter
clinic.
(5) A late charge for failure to obtain any license or pay any fee
required by this article after March 1 of any calendar year.
C. Every person who applies for any dog license and registration tag or
any renewals thereof shall provide such information as is requested by
the City of Brigantine for its annual dog canvass, on forms provided for
such purpose. In addition, every person keeping or having any dog
within the boundaries of the City of Brigantine shall provide such
information, from time to time, as is required by the regulations of the
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1
1:263
§ 153-2. Nuisance; exception. [Amended 5-1-1996 by Ord. No.
10-1996]
§ 153-3. Running at large. [Amended 5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 10-1996]
It shall be unlawful for any dog, whether licensed or not, to run at large
anywhere within the limits of the City of Brigantine. A dog shall be deemed
to be running at large when off the premises of its owner or of the person
keeping or harboring such dog and not on a leash or the like, the overall
length of which, including the hand grip, shall not exceed six feet held by
its owner or other person able to control such dog.
§ 153-4. Restrictions on public beaches, playgrounds, parks and
promenade. [Amended 8-2-1995 by Ord. No. 16-1995; 5-1-1996 by
Ord. No. 10-1996]
New Jersey Health Department, concerning dogs, pursuant to New
Jersey statutes. [Added 12-16-1987 by Ord. No. 24-1987]
D. All such licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof shall expire on
January 31 in the year stated on the license. [Amended 1-4-1984 by
Ord. No. 26-1983]
A. Any person owning or in charge of any dog which defiles, defecates on
or commits any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk,
beach, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where people
congregate or walk or upon any public property whatsoever or upon
any private property without the permission of the owner of said
property shall immediately remove feces deposited by any such dog by
any sanitary method approved by the local enforcement authority.
Material so removed shall be disposed of by the person owning or in
charge of any such dog through a sanitary method as through the use of
pooch scoops, small shovels, etc.
B. The owner or person in charge of such dog shall remove and dispose of
sealed, nonabsorbent, leakproof container, such as a sealed plastic bag;
such material shall not be disposed of in public trash receptacles or
storm drains.
C. Any owner or person in charge of a dog being walked upon any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, beach, passageway, bypath, play area, park or
any place where people congregate must have in their possession their
cleanup device and nonabsorbent, leakproof container.
D. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any dog when used
as a guide for any person who is legally blind.
A. No dogs shall be taken or permitted upon any public beaches between
14th Street North and the southwesternmost portion of the beaches of
the City of Brigantine between May 30 and September 30, inclusive,
and no dog shall be taken or permitted on said beaches between
§ 153-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 153-4
1:264
§ 153-5. Habitual barking.
No person shall harbor or keep any dog within the boundaries of the City of
Brigantine that habitually barks so as to disturb the peace and quiet of the
persons residing in said City.
§ 153-6. Vicious and menacing dogs. [Added 5-1-1996 by Ord. No.
10-199691]
§ 153-7. Enforcement [Amended 11-2-1983 by Ord. No. 21-1983]
October 1 and May 29 each year unless said dog shall be securely
fastened to a leash and accompanied by and under the control of a
person.
B. Dogs are prohibited at all times from all public parks and playgrounds
whether on a leash or not, whether licensed or not.
C. Dogs are prohibited at all times from the promenade upon the seawall
extending from 9th Street North to 15th Street North, whether on a
leash or not, whether licensed or not.
D. Dogs are prohibited on public school grounds.
A. The Brigantine Police Department, Animal Control Officer or any other
appropriate City official may cause a hearing to be held in the Municipal
Court of the City of Brigantine for a determination and declaration as to
whether a dog is potentially dangerous and/or vicious. [Amended
6-4-2008 by Ord. No. 13-2008]
B. No person shall keep or harbor any vicious dog anywhere within the
limits of the City of Brigantine.
A. The City Clerk of the City of Brigantine is hereby appointed as the
municipal official charged with the responsibility to issue dog licenses
and registration tags, to collect the fees established therefor, to provide
for disposition of such fees and to perform all such additional duties as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq. and any regulations of the New
Jersey State Department of Health established thereunder, except those
duties delegated to the municipal official pursuant to Subsection B
hereafter.
B. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Animal Control
Warden, members of the Brigantine Police Department, Brigantine
Public Works Department, Code Enforcement Department and any
other City employees or official designated by the City Manager.
[Amended 5-1-1996 by Ord. No. 10-1996]
91.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former §§ 153-6 and
157-7 as §§ 153-7 and 153-7.1, respectively.
§ 153-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-7.1
1:265
§ 153-7.1. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-16-1987 by Ord.
No. 24-1987; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992; 5-1-1996 by Ord. No.
10-1996]
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1 et seq., any person who violates the
provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, and
may also be required to perform community service.
§ 153-7.1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 153-7.1
1:266
ARTICLE II
Cats
[Adopted 7-3-1991 by Ord. No. 10-1991]
§ 153-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL — For the purposes of this article, and this article only, a dog or
cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey and/or the City of Brigantine to enforce
the provisions of this article.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species, including male, female
or altered members of said species.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth, whichever occurs first.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage or group of cages or
exhibition pen or group of exhibition pens, which are not part of a kennel,
wherein cats for sale are kept and/or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the City of
Brigantine or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this article.
NEUTERED — Rendered permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — Applies to every person having a right of property in a cat and/
or every person who has a cat in his or her keeping, and/or any person who
harbors or maintains a cat or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about
any premises occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, proprietorship,
organization or institution commonly recognized by law as a legal entity.
§ 153-9. Vaccination against rabies.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age or any cat with a
full set of permanent teeth within the City of Brigantine unless such cat
is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions of this section do not apply to
cats held in a cattery or those held by a state or federal licensed
research facility or a veterinary establishment where cats are received
or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical or other treatments or licensed
animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal
§ 153-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-9
1:267
§ 153-10. Licensing.
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization, published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
further provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form prescribed by the State of
New Jersey.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of the
vaccination required in Subsection A herein for a specified period of
time by the Local Board of Health upon presentation of a veterinarian's
certificate stating that because of an infirmity or other physical
condition or regiment of therapy the inoculation of such cat shall be
deemed inadvisable.
A. Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who shall own,
keep or harbor a cat who is required to be licensed by this article shall
annually apply for and procure from the Clerk of the City of Brigantine,
or other official designated by the governing body to license cats in the
City of Brigantine, a license and official registration tag with license
number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept or harbored
and shall place upon such cat a collar or other device with the license
number securely fastened or displayed thereon. Acceptable methods of
displaying said license numbers shall include but not be limited to
breakaway or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves, as defined herein,
are not transferable and shall be used only for the cat for which they
were issued.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any cat which must be
licensed pursuant to this article or of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age which has not been licensed shall make application for a
license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after such acquisition
or within 10 days of the cat reaching the age of seven months or within
10 days of the cat developing a full set of teeth, whichever occurs
sooner. This requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a
vaccinated cat within the City of Brigantine for no longer than 90 days.
C. Cats brought into the City of Brigantine.
(1) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the City of
Brigantine any cat licensed in another state for the current year
and bearing a registration tag or sleeve as defined in this article or
similar thereto and who shall intend to or in fact keep said cat or
permit said cat to be kept within the City of Brigantine for a period
of more than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag or sleeve for such cat.
(2) Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the City of
Brigantine any unlicensed cat and who keeps the same or permits
§ 153-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 153-10
1:268
the same to be kept within the City of Brigantine for a period
of more than 10 days shall immediately apply for a license and
registration tag or sleeve for each such cat.
D. Application; contents; preservation of information. Any application
required to be submitted pursuant to this article shall state the breed,
sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which the license and
registration is being sought and whether said cat is of a longhaired or
shorthaired variety and the name, street address and post office
address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat,
if other than the owner. The information contained on said application
and registration number issued for any particular cat shall be preserved
for a period of three years from the date of the submittal of the
application and/or the date of the issuance of the registration number,
respectively, by the Clerk or other local official designated to license
cats in the City of Brigantine.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the City of Brigantine and shall be numbered serially
and shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the City of
Brigantine thereon.
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certification of
exemption; requirement for license. No official designated by the City
of Brigantine to license cats shall grant any such license and/or official
registration tag or sleeve for any cat unless the owner thereof provides
evidence that the cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated
with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and administered in
accordance with the recommendations of the United States Department
of Agriculture and the United States Department of Human Services or
has been certified as exempt as provided for in this article. Any
evidence of a cat being inoculated with a rabies vaccine shall only be
accepted if said rabies inoculation was administered by a duly licensed
veterinarian or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to perform
said inoculation.
G. License fee schedule. Licenses pursuant to this article shall be issued
after the payment of a fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, for each cat, whether a neutered
cat or unneutered. In addition to these fees, there shall be a late fee as
set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees
Schedule, charged for any cat which is not licensed and/or which does
not receive an official registration tag or sleeve within the time
necessary for the same as detailed in this article. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
H. Fees; renewals; expiration date of license.
(1) Any person applying for a license and registration tag and/or sleeve
shall pay the fee fixed or authorized by this article. The fee for the
renewal of said license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall be
§ 153-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-10
1:269
the same as for the originally issued license and registration tag
and/or sleeve. All licenses, registration tags and/or sleeves and any
renewals thereof shall expire on December 31 in the following year.
Notwithstanding the above, the City will replace free of cost any
lost, stolen or otherwise misplaced registration tag and/or sleeve
once, and once only, for any particular cat.
(2) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in
any licensing year for any cat in the City of Brigantine. Any valid
New Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey
municipality with an ordinance similar to this one shall be accepted
by the City of Brigantine as evidence of compliance with this
article.
I. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a cat upon the request,
either written or verbal, of any health official, police officer, Animal
Control Officer or other authorized person of the City of Brigantine or
County of Atlantic or State of New Jersey.
J. Interfering with persons performing duties under this article. No
person shall hinder, molest or in any way interfere with anyone
authorized or empowered to perform any duty or function pursuant to
this article.
K. Disposition of fees collected.
(1) License fees and other moneys collected or received under the
provisions of this article shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the
City of Brigantine and shall be placed in a special account separate
from any of the other accounts of the City of Brigantine and shall be
used for the following purposes only: for the collecting, keeping
and disposing of cats liable to seizure; for local prevention and
control of rabies; for providing antirabies treatment under the
direction of the Local Board of Health for any person known or
suspected to have been exposed to rabies; and for the general
administering of the provisions of this article.
(2) Any unexpected balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following the year in
which it was accrued and may be used for any of the purposes set
forth in this section. At the end of said third fiscal year following the
year it was accrued and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter,
there shall be transferred from such special account to the general
funds of the City of Brigantine any amount then in such amount
which is in excess of the total amount paid into the special account
during the last two fiscal years next proceeding.
§ 153-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 153-10.1
1:270
§ 153-10.1. Nuisances. [Added 5-19-1999 by Ord. No. 5-1999]
No person who is the owner of or otherwise has custody and control of
any cat or cats within the City of Brigantine will allow the same to become
a nuisance. For the purposes of this section, a cat shall be considered a
nuisance when engaged in any of the following activities: on more than one
occasion within a thirty-day period trespasses onto the property owned by
another after the owner or person with custody or control of said cat has
been advised that the cat is not welcome or permitted on said property;
chews, bites, digs or otherwise effects any flowers, vegetable garden or
other garden areas of a property owned by an individual other than the
owner or person in custody or control of said cat; defecates or urinates on
more than one occasion within a thirty-day period on property other than
the property owned by the owner or person with custody or control over
said cat after the owner or person with custody or control of said cat has
been advised that the cat is not welcome or permitted on said property.
§ 153-11. Violations and penalties.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who violates or who
fails or refuses to comply with this article shall be liable for a penalty of not
more than $1,000 or imprisonment for no more than 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of any Judge hearing a complaint brought pursuant to this article.
§ 153-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-11
1:271

ARTICLE III
Wild Animals
[Adopted 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 3-1997]
§ 153-12. Feeding prohibited.
Feeding of foxes and raccoons is prohibited. The feeding of seagulls,
pigeons and any and all other wild animals within the City of Brigantine is
hereby strictly prohibited if such feeding will cause a nuisance.
§ 153-13. Trapping prohibited.
The trapping of foxes, raccoons, seagulls, pigeons and other wild animals is
hereby strictly prohibited within the City of Brigantine except by the Animal
Control Warden with prior knowledge and approval of the City Manager of
the City of Brigantine.
§ 153-14. Applicability; State Natural Area not effected.
This article shall govern all areas within the City of Brigantine with the
exclusion of the City of Brigantine North End Natural Area which is owned
by the State of New Jersey. Any trapping and/or feeding policies concerning
such area shall be established by the appropriate officials of the State of
New Jersey, and the City will take any and all actions necessary regarding
the same pursuant to a license agreement signed between said City and the
State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 153-15. Approval of actions by state officials.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the appropriate
state officials of the Department of Environmental Protection Division of
Fish, Game and Wildlife shall be allowed to conduct any such trapping and/
or feeding activities in the City of Brigantine of wild animals, such as foxes,
raccoons, seagulls and pigeons, but must first inform the City Council of the
City of Brigantine and receive approval from said Council for the same prior
to conducting any such activities.
§ 153-16. Applicability of Title 23.
New Jersey Statutes Annotated, Title 23, entitled "Fish and Game, Wild
Birds and Animals," shall remain in full force and effect, and if any provision
contained therein or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto are in
conflict with this article, said statutes and regulations shall be given
precedence. Further, any conditions contained in said Title 23 and any
and all regulations promulgated pursuant thereto must be complied with
whether set forth in this article or otherwise.
§ 153-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-17
1:273
§ 153-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article may be subject to a fine of up to $1,000,
imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or community service for up to 90 days
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 153-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 153-17
1:274
ARTICLE IV
Dog Park
[Adopted 6-4-2008 by Ord. No. 13-2008]
§ 153-18. Dog park established.
There is hereby established a dog park within the City of Brigantine at a
location to be established by the City Manager of the City of Brigantine in
consultation with the City Council of the City of Brigantine.
§ 153-19. Hours of operation.
The hours of operation for the City of Brigantine dog park shall be from 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. These hours may be amended by the City Manager based
upon the respective season or for other appropriate reasons.
§ 153-20. Application required.
Any owner of a dog, prior to allowing said dog to enter the dog park in
the City of Brigantine, must complete an application and submit the same
with an appropriate fee to the City of Brigantine. The application shall be
in a form as approved by the City Manager or his designee. An application
must be completed for each and every dog that will enter said dog park.
Applications shall be available in the office of the City Clerk of the City
of Brigantine or at any other location as designated by the City Manager.
Upon completion of said application and the approval of the same, as well
as payment of the appropriate fee as set forth herein, a dog park card shall
be issued for each dog.
§ 153-21. Fee.
Prior to the issuance of any dog park card, a fee as set forth in Chapter 210
of the Code of the City of Brigantine must be paid.
§ 153-22. Compliance required.
Prior to the issuance of any dog park card, an owner must be in full
compliance with all sections of Chapter 153 of the Code of the City of
Brigantine and all appropriate New Jersey statutes. This includes, but is
not limited to, having a current dog license, current rabies vaccination
certificate and the signing and submission of an acceptance of risk, release
and waiver form.
§ 153-23. Acceptance of risk, release and waiver required.
By entering the City of Brigantine dog park, any person agrees to accept the
risk for any actions taken by or to himself or herself or his or her respective
dog. As part of the application process, all dog owners are required to sign
a release and waiver of liability indicating they accept all risk and indemnify
and hold harmless the City of Brigantine, its agents, officers and employees.
All dog owners shall be strictly liable and responsible for any actions of their
§ 153-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-23
1:275
dogs, including any which cause injury to other dogs or persons while in or
about the dog park of the City of Brigantine. The form for the acceptance of
risk, release and waiver shall be as approved by the City Manager.
§ 153-24. Rules and regulations promulgated by City Manager;
enforcement.
§ 153-25. Joint liability.
Both the owner of the dog and the individual who brings a dog to the dog
park, if said person is not the owner of said dog, shall be responsible for
any violations of this article. A summons may be issued to either the person
bringing the dog to the dog park or the owner thereof who completed the
application for a dog park card, or both, in the discretion of the individual
issuing a summons.
§ 153-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any portion of this article may be subject to a fine
of up to $1,250, imprisonment of up to 90 days and/or community service
for up to 90 days in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
A. The City Manager shall promulgate rules and regulations which may be
enforced by any member of the Police Department of the City of
Brigantine, the Department of Public Works of the City of Brigantine or
the City of Brigantine Animal Control Officer. Said rules and regulations
shall include, at a minimum, the following:
(1) Any person who brings a dog to the dog park of the City of
Brigantine is responsible for the behavior of said dog and must
control said dog so it will not cause injuries to other dogs or people.
(2) There shall be no consumption of alcoholic beverages in or about
the dog park of the City of Brigantine.
(3) Each person bringing a dog to the City of Brigantine dog park must
dispose of all fecal matter of said dog in compliance with the Code
of the City of Brigantine.
(4) All persons bringing a dog to the dog park of the City of Brigantine
are responsible for insuring that said dog only enters the
appropriate area based upon the size, weight and breed of said
dog.
B. Rules and regulations shall be posted and may be changed by the City
Manager as appropriate.
§ 153-23 BRIGANTINE CODE § 153-26
1:276
Chapter 159
DRUG-FREE ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 91.
§ 153-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-26
1:277

ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zone Map
[Adopted 8-17-1988 by Ord. No. 18-1988]
§ 159-1. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of P.L. 1988, c. 44 (N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map attached hereto92 and prepared
by Matthew F. Doran, P.E., City Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted
as an official finding and record of the location and areas within the City
of Brigantine of property which is used for school purposes and which is
owned by the Board of Education of the City of Brigantine or a private
or parochial school and the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school
property.
§ 159-2. Map to constitute official finding.
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to § 159-1
of this article shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time, if any, that this article
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones.
§ 159-3. Notification of changes in boundaries.
The Board of Education of the City of Brigantine, the chief administrative
officer in case of such or of parochial schools, is hereby directed and shall
have the continuing obligation to promptly notify the City Administrator
and the Engineer or Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in
the location and boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board and which is used for
school purposes.
§ 159-4. Maps to be kept on file; availability.
The Clerk of the City of Brigantine is hereby directed to receive and to keep
on file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 159-1 of
this article and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any
person, agency or court which may from time to time request such a copy,
along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved
and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a
true copy of such map and of this article shall be provided without cost to
the County Clerk of Atlantic County and to the offices of the Municipal and
County Prosecutors.
92.Editor's Note: The Drug-Free School Zone Map is on file in the City Clerk's office (see
§ 159-4, Maps to be kept on file; availability).
§ 159-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-5
1:279
§ 159-5. Additional findings.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to § 159-1
of this article was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this state and that,
pursuant to state law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
(1) The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality.
(2) The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board.
(3) Such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes.
(4) The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
B. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by a school or school board and was being
used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the effective date
of P.L. 1987, c. 101 (N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7).
C. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 44,93 a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to § 159-1 of this article. The failure of the map
approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property
which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or
leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board, whether
the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or
the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of such
property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised, approved
map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record that such
property is not owned by or leased to a school or school board or that
such property is not used for school purposes.
D. All of the requirements set forth in P.L. 1988, c. 44,94 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a Drug-Free School Zone Map
have been complied with.
93.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-1 et seq.
94.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2C:35-1 et seq.
§ 159-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 159-5
1:280
ARTICLE II
Drug-Free Areas
[Adopted 6-3-1998 by Ord. No. 10-1998]
§ 159-6. Adoption of map.
In accordance with and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, the map attached
hereto and specifically made a part of this article by this reference is
officially adopted by the City Council of the City of Brigantine as a map
showing drug-free areas pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1. Said map was
prepared by Matthew F. Doran, P.E., City Engineer of the City of Brigantine,
pursuant to Project No. 6461. Said map is hereby approved and adopted as
an official finding and record of the location of areas being within 500 feet of
real property comprising a public housing facility, a public park or a public
building, all of such terms as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1.
§ 159-7. Map to constitute official finding.
The map approved and adopted pursuant to § 159-6 of this article shall
continue to constitute an official finding and record as to the location and
boundaries of areas within 500 feet of a public housing facility, a public park
or a public building until such time that this article shall be amended to
reflect any additions or deletions to said location and boundary lines.
§ 159-8. Map to be kept on file; availability.
A copy of this article and the map attached hereto and specifically made
a part herein is to be filed with the Clerk of the City of Brigantine, and
said Clerk is directed to keep on file the original of said article and map
and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person,
agency or court which may request the same. Said Clerk shall also provide a
certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted
herein and kept on file.
§ 159-9. Effect on Drug-Free School Zone Map.
Nothing in this article is intended to in any way repeal Ordinance No.
18-198895 of the City of Brigantine or the Drug-Free School Zone Map which
was adopted pursuant thereto. The map adopted pursuant to this article is
intended only to show property on or within 500 feet of any public housing
facility, a public park or public building.
§ 159-10. Additional findings.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
A. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to this
article was prepared for and is intended to be used as evidence in
95.Editor's Note: See Art. I, Drug-Free School Zone Map, of this chapter.
§ 159-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-10
1:281
prosecutions arising under the criminal statutes of the State of New
Jersey and that pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, such map shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the location and boundary of those
areas on or within 500 feet of any public housing facility, a public park
or public building.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, nothing in this article shall be construed
to preclude the prosecution in any criminal matter from introducing or
relying upon any other evidence or testimony to establish any element
of a required offense; nor shall this article be construed to preclude the
use or admissibility of any map or diagram other than the one which has
been approved pursuant to this article, provided that said map or
diagram is otherwise admissible pursuant to the Rules of Evidence. This
includes evidence of any area on or within 500 feet of real property
comprising a public housing facility, a public park or public building
which is not contained on the map adopted by this article because of the
inadvertent omission of the same or due to changes in the location and
boundaries of such property or the acquiring of such property by the
City of Brigantine.
§ 159-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 159-10
1:282
Chapter 162
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public Safety and Enforcement
Departments — See Ch. 3, Art. X.
§ 159-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-10
1:283

ARTICLE I
Fees
[Adopted 3-3-1999 by Ord. No. 2-1999]
§ 162-1. Title.
This article shall be entitled "Fees for Emergency Medical Services to be
Charged in the City of Brigantine."
§ 162-2. Services provided.
The City of Brigantine, through its Fire Department, shall provide full-time
professional emergency medical services to citizens of, and visitors to, the
City of Brigantine on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis throughout the year
to the extent that said services are available.
§ 162-3. Fee for services. [Amended 1-5-2005 by Ord. No. 38-2004;
10-1-2008 by Ord. No. 27-2008; 3-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2-2011;
9-21-2011 by Ord. No. 22-2011]
A. Except as may be arranged pursuant to a duly adopted emergency
medical service agreement as further set forth in this article, the fee to
be charged by the City of Brigantine for emergency medical services
shall be as follows:
(1) A fee of $650 for each and every incident where the City’s
emergency medical services are utilized for transportation and $14
per loaded mile for basic life support (BLS) mileage.
(2) A fee of $250 for any light rescue where firefighting personnel or
vehicles are utilized. For the purpose of this subsection, light
rescue shall include, but not be limited to, battery/vehicle power
control, fluid mitigation, vehicle stabilization and use of hand tools,
hazard control and other on-scene-related light rescue operations.
(3) A fee of $450 for any medium rescue where firefighting personnel
or vehicles are utilized, including, but not limited to, operations
that include the use of power tools and hydraulic rescue tools to
perform activities such as opening and removing doors to provide
access to victims or other members of the public, as well as
stabilizing vehicles and performing hazard assessment.
(4) A fee of $800 for heavy rescue where firefighting personnel or
vehicles are utilized, including, but not limited to, any operations
that include any technical rescue procedures, such as water and ice
rescue, rope rescue, confined space rescue, high-angle rescue,
trench rescue or structural collapse rescue. This also includes
motor vehicle rescue that requires the use of power tools and
hydraulic tools to perform operations such as partial or full roof
removal, front dashboard displacement, third door access and
separating vehicles from other vehicles or obstacles such as
§ 162-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-3
1:285
§ 162-4. Allocation of fees.
The fee individuals pay to the City of Brigantine for providing emergency
medical services shall be paid by any combination of the following:
§ 162-5. Denial or delay of service.
No individual needing emergency medical services within the jurisdiction
and limits of the City of Brigantine, to the extent that services are available,
shall be denied said services on any basis whatsoever, including and not
limited to residency, ability to pay or any other factor. No person located
within said City's jurisdictional limits shall be denied emergency medical
services to the extent that the same are available.
§ 162-6. Maintenance of records.
Personnel of the Brigantine Fire Department shall maintain accurate
records of all requests for emergency medical services within the City of
Brigantine and any service calls and any services provided in response
thereto. Such records shall be maintained on forms approved by the City
Manager and shall include an authorization for such services by the
individual to whom said services are rendered or verification from a medical
establishment that said services were necessary in instances where the
individual receiving said services is not able to authorize the same. Said
records shall further include certain patient information, including the
general nature of the call, the complete name, mailing address, telephone
number, social security number and location for transport of all individuals
receiving said emergency medical services within the City of Brigantine.
§ 162-7. Time for payment for services.
barriers, telephone poles, street signs, traffic lights, fire hydrants,
buildings and other such items.
B. Any such bill for services shall be sent directly to the individual for
whom said services were provided, and a copy of said bill shall be
forwarded to said individual’s insurance carrier if such individual has
insurance coverage related to said services.
A. Payment by the insurance company for service provided to an individual
who has insurance coverage for the same.
B. Direct payments from persons for whom service has been provided for
any amount which is not covered by insurance.
C. Payments pursuant to any service agreement with any person, agency
or other entity that have entered into an emergency medical service
agreement as further set forth in this article.
A. Persons receiving a bill from the City of Brigantine for emergency
medical services shall be responsible for payment of same in full to the
Tax Collector of the City of Brigantine within 30 days of the date of
§ 162-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 162-7
1:286
§ 162-8. Emergency medical service agreements.
Residents of Brigantine, neighboring municipalities, nonprofit organizations
and other entities are welcome to enter into emergency medical service
agreements with the City of Brigantine in order to receive emergency
medical services as set forth in this article. Such service agreements shall
ensure the availability of emergency medical services to any such entity
willing to pay a preagreed amount of said entity's fair share of the City
of Brigantine's cost of providing such emergency medical services. The
City Council has the absolute discretion to determine whether or not to
enter into such service agreements through the adoption of an appropriate
resolution or the authorization of the appropriate interlocal services
agreement where appropriate. Upon entering into such service agreement
with any entity, said entity shall pay the prearranged price for said services
and shall not be billed on an individual trip basis.
§ 162-9. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
DEPENDENT — Any individual who is the spouse or unmarried child
(natural, adopted or stepchild) under the age of 19 years old of a taxpayer
or year-round resident as defined in this section. "Dependent" shall also
mailing of said bill. Said thirty-day period for payment may be extended
upon proof of submission of said bill to the individual's insurance
carrier, upon which time payment shall be due within 30 days of the
receipt of said bill by said insurance carrier but in no event later than
60 days from the date of said bill.
B. Persons receiving emergency medical services within the City of
Brigantine who have health insurance coverage regarding said services
are required to cooperate fully with the Tax Collector and other City
personnel or agents thereof so that full payment is secured for said
services provided.
C. In the event that any health insurance of a taxpayer or year-round
resident of the City of Brigantine does not fully cover the amount billed
by said City of Brigantine, the City will accept such partial payment to
the extent of said individual's policy limits concerning said services,
including any deductibles and coinsurance requirements as payment in
full for the services provided.
D. In the event that a taxpayer or year-round resident of the City of
Brigantine does not have health insurance coverage regarding said
emergency medical services, payment in full shall be required unless
said individual can submit sufficient proof to the Tax Collector in the
form of an affidavit with attached tax records indicating inability to pay
the full charge. In such circumstance, a minimum payment in an
amount not less then the current customary payment provided by
Medicare for such services shall be accepted as payment in full.
§ 162-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-9
1:287
mean any unmarried child under the age of 19 years for whom the taxpayer
or year round resident has been appointed legal guardian. "Dependent"
shall also mean any individual who resides in the permanent domicile of the
taxpayer or year-round resident and is claimed as a dependent for federal
income tax purposes or who is deemed to be a dependent under the health
insurance policy which provides coverage for emergency medical services
then in effect for said taxpayer or year-round resident.
TAXPAYER — Any individual listed on the deed of any property located
within the municipal boundaries of the City of Brigantine showing an
ownership interest in said property. In the case of a corporation or
partnership, only those individuals retaining a 25% or greater ownership
interest in said corporation or partnership shall be considered a taxpayer.
For the purposes of determining whether a 25% or greater ownership
interest exists, a duly married husband and wife may combine their
ownership interests.
YEAR-ROUND RESIDENT — Any individual residing within the municipal
boundaries of the City of Brigantine for a period of at least six months
and one day prior to the year in which emergency medical services were
provided. Verification of residency shall be based on an affidavit of the
individual to whom emergency medical services were provided or valid
representative thereof and shall include indicia of residency such as a State
of New Jersey driver's license or proof of filing of State of New Jersey
income tax return from a Brigantine address.
§ 162-10. Regulations implemented by City Manager.
The City Manager may implement appropriate written regulations to
further the purpose and intent of this article.
§ 162-11. No waiver of immunity.
Nothing in this article is intended to, or in anyway, waives any immunity
afforded the City of Brigantine, its Fire Department or Police Department.
This specifically includes any immunity contained in Title 59 of the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated or any other immunity provided, whether the
same be statutory or otherwise.
§ 162-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person or other entity who violates this article may be subject to a fine
of up to $1,000 and/or community service for up to 90 days in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 162-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 162-12
1:288
Chapter 165
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and dune protection — See Ch. 101.
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 181.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Sand removal — See Ch. 220, Art. I.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
§ 162-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-12
1:289

ARTICLE I
Commercial Excavations; Regulations
[Adopted 7-15-1970 by Ord. No. 5-1970]
§ 165-1. Excavating for commercial purposes prohibited.
No excavating, digging or mining of sand or gravel or other materials may
be done for commercial purposes in the City of Brigantine.
§ 165-2. Fill material specifications. [Amended 10-1-1986 by Ord.
No. 26-1986]
No fill or other material shall be placed on any lands in the City of
Brigantine unless it is of the quality described in the New Jersey State
Highway Department Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction 1961, Section 3, made a part hereof by reference. The soil-clay
content and the organic content combined shall not exceed 8% by weight of
the soil aggregates. No demolition or used construction materials shall be
placed on any lands in the City of Brigantine, except clean crushed concrete
materials which can be reduced to a size acceptable to and in conformity
with the aforementioned New Jersey State Highway Department Standard
Specification for Road and Bridge Construction, or its current equivalent
as certified by the Construction Official or the City Engineer of the City of
Brigantine.
§ 165-3. Permit required; inspection fee; denial; special conditions.
[Added 10-1-1986 by Ord. No. 26-1986; amended 12-28-1992 by
Ord. No. 28-1992]
No person, owner of property or person in his employ shall place any fill
material on any land in the City of Brigantine, without having given notice
to, and obtained a permit from, the Construction Official of the City of
Brigantine, of the intention to fill. The Construction Official may designate
the use of certain forms and may charge inspection fees, not to exceed the
amount set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees
Schedule, per tax lot intended to be filled, in addition to any other charges
which may be imposed pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code.96 By
reason of the size of tract or the type of fill material proposed to be used,
the Construction Official may deny the application and refer the applicant
to the Board of Commissioners of the City of Brigantine, who may, upon
due consideration of the application, set the terms and conditions under
which the fill of any lands within the City of Brigantine can take place. The
Construction Official of the City of Brigantine may deny any permit based
upon unsatisfactory materials proposed to be used.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-4
1:291
§ 165-4. Appeal; variance.
Where, by reason of exceptional conditions, the strict application of any
regulation enacted under this article would result in difficulties and undue
hardships upon the owner, the owner may appeal to the governing body
relating to such property for a variance so as to relieve such difficulties and
hardships. No relief may be granted or action taken under terms of this
article unless such relief can be granted without substantial detriment to
the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of
this article.
§ 165-5. Definitions and word usage.
§ 165-6. Enforcement. [Amended 10-1-1986 by Ord. No. 26-1986]
This article shall be administered and enforced by the Construction Official,
the Zoning Officer or any other public official who shall be designated by
the Board of Commissioners of the City of Brigantine.
§ 165-7. Violations and penalties; removal by City; lien. [Amended
10-1-1986 by Ord. No. 26-1986]
A. Definitions. Certain words and phrases used in this article are defined
for the purposes hereof as follows:
COMMERCIAL PURPOSES — Refers to the sale or commercial use of
the sand or other product which is excavated, as distinguished from
personal use of the product by the owner of the ground at the place
where the same is excavated.
EXCAVATION — Includes digging or mining and applies to all sand,
gravel or solid or mineral products of the soil.
B. Word usage. Words used in the present tense include the future, and
the singular number includes the plural.
A. Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any section of this
article shall, upon conviction before the Municipal Court of the City of
Brigantine Court having jurisdiction, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,000 or to imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
[Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
B. Any repetition of any violation of this article shall be deemed a new
offense for each day of repetition, and violations on separate parcels of
property may be considered as repetition violations.
C. In addition to any fine or penalty, the City of Brigantine or its
designated officials may order the removal of fill material placed in
violation of this article. Failure to comply with such order shall subject
the violator to additional fines or penalty, and the City of Brigantine may
charge the cost and expense of removal to the property as a lien against
the property for municipal services provided.
§ 165-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 165-7
1:292
ARTICLE II
Street Openings
[Adopted 7-15-1981 by Ord. No. 15-1981]
§ 165-8. Permit required; emergency and hardship requirement.
[Amended 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 6-2019]
A. No person or corporation shall tear up or excavate in any street under
the control of the City of Brigantine without first having obtained and
being in the possession of a valid permit to do so, issued by the City
Engineer's office pursuant to the provisions of this article. Any such
permit may be revoked at any time by the City of Brigantine.
B. No permit shall be issued for any street opening which would disturb
the pavement of any road having been constructed, reconstructed or
overlaid until a period of five years after the completion of said
construction, reconstruction or overlay, except in the event of an
emergency or hardship as described below. The five-year period as
articulated herein shall be calculated from December 31 of the year in
which said road was constructed, reconstructed or overlaid and run five
years thereafter.
C. Emergency opening. In the event that an entity shall be required to
open a street and/or roadway as a result of an emergency, said
emergency opening shall be reviewed by the City Engineer, and if said
City Engineer shall determine that no such emergency existed, then the
entity so opening the street and/or roadway shall have a fine imposed
upon such entity in the amount of $1,000 for the first nonemergency
opening, a $5,000 fine for a second nonemergency opening and a
$10,000 fine for a third nonemergency opening.
D. Hardship condition. In the event in which a property owner has a
hardship condition which requires a street opening permit to be issued
contrary to this section, the City of Brigantine may grant relief if all of
the following conditions are met:
(1) A letter addressed to the City, c/o City Clerk, is received detailing
the hardship and necessity of opening the street in lieu of waiting
the prescribed period of time.
(2) The hardship request shall be reviewed by the City Engineer's
office who shall make a recommendation to City Council on the
legitimacy of the request.
(3) Upon receipt of the City Engineer's recommendation, a public
meeting date will be set for the City to take formal action.
(4) The City shall consider the request at a public meeting and review
any objections received. Approval or denial of the request shall be
through formal adoption of a resolution.
§ 165-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-9
1:293
§ 165-9. Prior notice and plans to be submitted.
All applicants for permits shall give at least 24 hours' notice in writing to the
City Engineer and a sketch drawing or plan signed by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer, showing profiles and all utilities within 25 feet of the
proposed work and specifying the place, kind and approximate size of the
excavation or work and the time required to do the work, except in cases of
emergency, when such a notice shall be given to the City Engineer as soon
as possible.
§ 165-10. Performance guaranty.
§ 165-11. Restoration of excavated area. [Amended 3-20-2019 by
Ord. No. 6-2019]
The applicant to whom such permit is issued shall, within the time limited
in such permit, replace the earth and pavement in the excavation in such
manner as proscribed herein and the same shall be left in as good condition
as it was before the excavation was commenced. Except as otherwise herein
stated, all street work performed shall be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2007, and as amended.
Reference to articles or sections hereinafter refer to said state highway
specifications.
A. All applications shall be accompanied by cash, certified check or, in the
case of a public utility, a bond, in the amount as set forth in Chapter
210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
B. The guaranty shall be returned to the applicant upon approval by the
City Engineer of all work required to be performed.
C. If a permit for an individual house connection is applied for and permit
is approved to be issued to the owner of record of the property, no
guaranty is required. This exemption shall be used only once by any
individual or company.
A. Trenches shall be backfilled in layers not to exceed six inches and a
vibratory tamper must be used. Ninety-five percent compaction shall be
required. Puddling of backfill is strictly prohibited. Should there be a
deficiency, additional backfill material shall be supplied by the
permittee. Whenever the City Engineer shall deem the material
unsatisfactory for backfill, the permittee shall provide acceptable
material for the backfill.
B. Roadways with a concrete base shall be restored using a combination of
concrete and asphalt. The amount of concrete and asphalt to be used at
each such excavation shall be as directed by the City Engineer. (See
detail at end of chapter.)
C. Bituminous concrete street restoration specifications.
§ 165-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 165-11
1:294
(1) Gravel. Gravel shall be installed six inches thick. The gravel shall
consist of compact soil aggregate Type I-5. The use of a recycled
asphalt product (RAP) or recycled concrete product may be
substituted for the soil aggregate as long as it meets the New
Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) requirements for I-5
materials. The City Engineer may, at his discretion, submit samples
of the soil aggregate for a gradation analysis, with the costs of said
analysis borne by the applicant.
(2) Temporary roadway restoration.
(a) Less than 100 square feet.
[1] For openings in asphalt roadways that are less than 100
square feet, the temporary restoration will consist of the
installation of six inches of soil aggregate, Type I-5, to a
level of six inches below the level of adjacent paved
surfaces. A four-inch lift of stabilized base course, Mix I-2,
followed by a two-inch lift of a bituminous concrete cold
patch shall be installed to grade.
[2] These temporary surfaces shall be in place for a period of
not less than 45 days to allow sufficient settlement to
occur. Should settlement continue to occur, the City
Engineer shall determine when the work is acceptable for
final restoration. The permittee shall be responsible for all
maintenance deemed necessary by the City Engineer until
such time as the final restoration is completed.
(b) Greater than 100 square feet.
[1] For openings in asphalt roadways that are greater than
100 square feet, the temporary restoration will consist of
the installation of six inches of soil aggregate, Type I-5, to
a level six inches below the level of the adjacent paved
surfaces. A six-inch lift of stabilized base course, Mix I-2,
shall then be installed to grade.
[2] These temporary surfaces shall be left in place for a period
of not less than 45 days to allow sufficient settlement to
occur. Should settlement continue to occur, the City
Engineer shall determine when the work is acceptable for
final restoration. The permittee shall be responsible for all
maintenance deemed necessary by the City Engineer until
such time as the final restoration is completed.
(3) Final roadway restoration.
(a) Newly paved streets.
[1] The restoration will consist of six-inch dense graded
aggregate base course, and a six-inch bituminous
§ 165-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-11
1:295
stabilized base course, Mix I-2, brought to existing grade,
within the excavated area. A full width, curb to curb,
milling two inches in depth to extend 20 feet beyond the
limit of excavations will be performed after proper
settlement in the trench area. The allowable time for the
settlement shall be 45 days unless otherwise directed by
the City Engineer. The final surface course shall be a twoinch
bituminous concrete surface course, Mix I-5.
[2] Trench restoration may be permitted under special
circumstances and at the option of the City of Brigantine
and City Engineer for openings having a minimum impact
on the longevity and serviceability of the street in
question.
(b) Streets paved between five and eight years prior to proposed
opening.
[1] Any street opening on a street that has been constructed,
reconstructed, or overlaid between five years and eight
years after the completion of said construction,
reconstruction, or overlay will require a half-width paving
from the center line to the curb on the side affected by the
opening. The trench shall be repaved with six inches of
gravel or similar subbase, four-inch stabilized base (HMA
19M64) to the surface. The half width of the street shall
then be milled 1 1/2 inches deep from the center line to the
curbline a distance of 20 feet on either side of the opening
edges. A one- and-one-half-inch surface course
(HMA9.5M64) shall be machine-placed and rolled as per
New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Roads and Bridges-2007, and as
amended.
[2] At the opening crosses over the center line of the street,
the above street repair shall be full-width restoration.
(c) Streets paved over eight years prior to proposed opening.
[1] Where 20% or more of the existing surface width and/or a
distance parallel or longitudinal to the roadway center line
of 25 feet or more has been disturbed, the permittee shall
mill the entire pavement surface from edge to edge or curb
to curb and the full length of the trench plus five feet each
side at a minimum depth of two inches. All milling and
disposal of millings shall be done in accordance with
Division 400 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications. The
permittee shall clean and sweep the milled surface and
apply tack coat in preparation for immediate paving. The
area will then be paved with two inches of HMA 9.5M64
surface course in accordance with Division 400 of the
§ 165-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 165-11
1:296
NJDOT Standard Specifications. The City will require that
the terminal ends of the paving be keyed and cut vertical
to provide a smooth transition to the existing asphalt
surface. Feathering will not be allowed.
[2] Where less than 20% of the existing surface and a distance
parallel or longitudinal to the roadway center line of less
than 25 feet has been disturbed, the permittee shall
sawcut the existing surface course two inches deep at a
location 12 inches beyond the trench surface, and remove
the existing pavement to the same depth. Pavement
removal shall be done by milling or another method as
approved by the City Engineer. The permittee shall clean
and sweep the milled surface and apply tack coat in
preparation for immediate paving. The area will then be
paved with two inches of HMA 9.5M64 surface course in
accordance with Division 40O of the NJDOT Standard
Specifications. The City will require that the terminal ends
of the paving be keyed and cut vertical to provide a smooth
transition to the existing asphalt surface. Feathering will
not be allowed.
(d) Calculating age of street.
[1] The five-year period as articulated herein shall be
calculated from December 31 of the year in which said
road was constructed, reconstructed or overlaid and run
five years thereafter. The end date of this five-year period
is the beginning date of the five-year to eight-year period
articulated herein.
[2] The eight-year period as articulated herein shall be
calculated from December 31 of the year in which said
road was constructed, reconstructed or overlaid and run
eight years thereafter. The end date of this eight-year
period is the end date of the five-year to eight-year period
articulated herein.
(e) No surface water shall be entrapped or ponded on the
resurfaced areas. If any ponding occurs, the permittee will be
responsible for performing whatever remedial action is
required by the City Engineer.
(4) If more than one excavation would be required within a fifty-foot
length, a single trench must be used rather than the individual
excavations. Final restoration will require the entire pavement
surface from edge to edge or curb to curb and the full length of the
trench plus five feet each side at a minimum depth of two inches.
All edges shall be coated with an asphaltic tack coat prior to a twoinch
lift of bituminous concrete surface course, Mix I-5, being
placed to a level even with the existing road grade.
§ 165-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-11
1:297
§ 165-12. Replacement of concrete pavement.
In replacing concrete pavement, the contractor shall remove the temporary
pavement to the depth of the existing pavement and replace with Class B
concrete (state highway specifications). Reinforcing shall be of the same
size and spacing as was removed. All concrete pavement shall be cut with a
concrete saw to a line that is six inches wider than excavated trench and/or
paving.
§ 165-13. Noncompliance; work completed by City.
In any case where the contractor is lax in complying with or fails to comply
with the above regulations, as determined by the City Engineer, the City
may send written notice to the address of the applicant and then may cause
the work to be done and the cost charged to the applicant and the guaranty
be declared in default.
§ 165-14. Inspections.
Over 50 feet of trench or over five individual excavations shall require
an inspector, under the jurisdiction of the City Engineer, to inspect the
work and maintenance of the work to ensure conformance with the above
regulations. The inspector shall be billed at the rate of $20 per hour.
Twenty-four hours' notice to the City Engineer is required so the City
Engineer can provide for the inspector.
(5) In all cases where concrete has to be removed prior to any
excavation, saw cut methods of removal shall be used. The
restoration of the concrete shall be according to the following
specifications:
(a) It shall be Class B with a design strength of 4,000 pounds per
square inch (psi).
(b) It shall have a minimum thickness of not less than four inches
for sidewalk, six inches for driveway aprons and eight inches
for gutter.
(c) It shall have a minimum width of not less than five feet for
sidewalks.
(d) It shall have control joints not more than five feet for sidewalk,
10 feet for curb and gutter and expansion joints and not more
than 20 feet for sidewalk, curb and gutter.
D. By the acceptance of such a permit, the applicant shall be deemed to
have agreed to comply with the terms hereof, and upon his failure to do
so to pay on demand any cost or expense that the City may incur by
reason of any shrinkage or settlement in the excavated area resulting
from such excavation if such shrinkage or settlement shall occur within
three months from the time the surface thereof is restored.
§ 165-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 165-15
1:298
§ 165-15. Connections and installations not to disturb street
surface.
Wherever practical, as determined by the City Engineer, pipes for house
connections and other installations shall be driven or bored under and
across the paved portion of the street without disturbing the surface. This
requirement is mandatory on streets paved within five years of the date of
the application.
§ 165-16. Barricades and warnings for unfinished excavations.
§ 165-17. Prior notification to Engineer and Police Department.
The applicant shall notify the City Engineer and the Brigantine City Police
Department at least 24 hours in advance of the time proposed to start work
on excavations. The Brigantine City Police Department shall be notified of
any work that will have effect on traffic, and Police Department approval of
traffic plans will be required.
§ 165-18. Disposition of fees and guaranties; release.
All fees and guaranties shall be turned over to the Treasurer of the City of
Brigantine and will be held by him until released, in writing, by the City
Engineer.
§ 165-19. Street openings to be guarded; traffic control.
The applicant and the contractor shall keep all street openings guarded at
all times and will provide uniformed traffic control persons, if required, to
ensure the safe passage of traffic and shall open no greater portion of a
street than shall be reasonably necessary.
§ 165-20. City to be saved harmless; liability.
The applicant, as a requirement of receiving a permit, shall save the City of
Brigantine, the City Commissioners and the employees and consultants of
the City of Brigantine harmless from any and all claims of any nature arising
out of the construction and street opening work covered by said permit, and
further, that the City of Brigantine, in issuing said permit, shall not assume
liability on connection therewith.
A. Whenever excavation is to be left unfinished overnight or for any
extended period of time, the contractor shall place barricades
containing his name and address and a telephone number that can be
reached at all times, especially at night and on the weekends.
B. Suitable warning flares and lights must be used on any areas not
completed either temporarily or permanently.
§ 165-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-21
1:299
§ 165-21. Form of guaranties to be approved.
All guaranties provided for in § 165-10 of this article shall be in a form
approved by the City Solicitor of the City of Brigantine.
§ 165-22. Permit fee. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
A nonrefundable fee shall accompany all applications for a permit, including
a portion for the permit and a portion for the engineering review, both as
set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
§ 165-23. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992]
Any person, company or corporation violating any provision of this article,
upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine, shall be
punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days, or both, and each day on which said violation
exists shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 165-21 BRIGANTINE CODE § 165-23
1:300
Chapter 168
FIREARMS
§ 168-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Any handgun, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, automatic or
semiautomatic rifle, or any gun, device or instrument in the nature of a
weapon from which may be fired or ejected any solid projectible ball, slug,
pellet, missile or bullet or any gas, vapor or other noxious thing by means of
a cartridge or shell or the igniting of flammable or explosive substances. It
shall also include, without limitation, any firearm which is in the nature of
an air gun, spring gun or pistol or other weapon of a similar nature in which
the propelling force is a spring, elastic band, carbon dioxide, compression
or other gas or vapor, air or compressed air, or is ignited by compressed air,
and ejecting a bullet, missile or other projectile smaller then 3/8 of an inch
in diameter, with sufficient force to injure a person.
§ 168-2. Prohibition.
No person shall discharge any firearm within the City of Brigantine except
by permission of the Chief of Police for ceremonial firing of salutes.
§ 168-3. Exemptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following individuals if a firearm
is discharged in the performance of their official duties:
A. Members of the Armed Forces of the United States of America or of the
National Guard.
B. Federal law enforcement officers.
C. Members of the State Police and members of the Marine Law
Enforcement Bureau of the Division of State Police.
D. Any employee of a sheriff's department of the State of New Jersey.
E. Any employee of a county prosecutor's office.
F. Any employee of the Attorney General's office or the Division of
Criminal Justice of the Department of Law and Public Safety, or the
State Commission of Investigation or an inspector of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Enforcement Bureau of the Division of State Police.
G. Any state park or state conservation officer.
H. Any employee of a prison or jail or Department of Corrections.
I. Any member of the Brigantine Police Department.
§ 165-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-3
1:301
§ 168-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine not to exceed $1,500, imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to
exceed 90 days and community service for a period not to exceed 90 days,
or any combination thereof in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
Chapter 169
(RESERVED)
Chapter 170
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 123. Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
§ 170-1. Statutory authority.
The City of Brigantine specifically adopts this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A.
17:36-9 et seq.
§ 170-2. Payment of taxes, assessments and liens required.
This chapter shall specifically prohibit the payment to any claimant under a
fire insurance policy of any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damages to real
property located within the City of Brigantine until such time as anticipated
demolition costs and all taxes and assessments and all other municipal
liens or charges due and payable, appearing on the official certificate of
search, and/or all taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or
charges due and payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall
have been paid either by the owner of the real property in question or the
insurance company providing fire insurance for the same.
§ 170-3. Notification of state.
A copy of this chapter shall be sent to the State Commissioner of Insurance.
J. Any juvenile corrections officer employed by the Juvenile Justice
Commission.
K. A designated employee or agent for a nuclear power plant under the
license of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
L. Any person using legally authorized force for the protection of persons
or property as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:3-1 et seq.
§ 168-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 170-3
1:302
Chapter 175
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 87.
Brush, weeds and other debris — See Ch. 115.
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 123.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
§ 175-1. Local enforcement provided. [Amended 10-21-1987 by Ord.
No. 18-1987]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),97
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the City of
Brigantine.
§ 175-2. Local enforcement agency.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention, which is
hereby created in the City of Brigantine Fire Department.
§ 175-3. Duty of local enforcement agency.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act98
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the City of Brigantine,
other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.99
§ 175-4. life hazard uses.
The local enforcement agency established by § 175-2 of this chapter shall
carry out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 175-5. Organization. [Amended 9-18-1985 by Ord. No. 29-1985]
The local enforcement agency established by § 175-2 of this chapter shall
be a part of the City of Brigantine Fire Department and shall be under the
direct supervision and control of the Fire Official.
§ 175-6. Fire Official; additional inspectors and staff.
97.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
98.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
99.Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:18.
§ 170-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-6
1:303
§ 175-7. Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,101 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the County of Atlantic.
§ 175-8. Fees; exemption; collection; effect on other fees; smoke
detector inspection fees.
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The local enforcement agency shall be
under the direct supervision of the Fire Official, who shall be a member
of the Brigantine Fire Department, in charge of fire prevention and
appointed by the Board of Commissioners. In the City of Brigantine, the
individual appointed as Fire Official may also be the Fire Subcode
Official appointed pursuant to the New Jersey State Uniform
Construction Code Act (P.L. 1975, c. 217).100 Nothing in this chapter is
intended to alter or affect the position and responsibilities of the Fire
Subcode Official, whose duties and responsibilities are mandated by the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, or to merge the functions of
the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Brigantine Fire Department with
the Construction Code Department, except where state law and
regulation have mandated such merger or overlap of jurisdiction and
duties. [Amended 9-18-1985 by Ord. No. 29-1985]
B. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of one year and
shall be reappointed annually on a calendar-year basis. [Amended
9-18-1985 by Ord. No. 29-1985]
C. Inspectors and employees. Such additional inspectors and other
employees as are found to be necessary to carry out the functions of the
local enforcing agency shall be appointed by the City Council.
[Amended 9-1-1999 by Ord. No. 11-1999]
D. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and other employees
of the enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by the City Council
for inefficiency or misconduct. Any person to be so removed shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing authority or a
designated hearing officer. [Amended 9-18-1985 by Ord. No.
29-1985; 9-1-1999 by Ord. No. 11-1999]
A. The permit fees established by the Uniform Fire Code for activities
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7 are as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule. Said permit fees shall be the same
as set forth in the appropriate sections of the Uniform Fire Code.
[Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992; 9-1-1999 by Ord. No.
11-1999; 12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 30-2006]
100. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
101. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 27D-208, respectively.
§ 175-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 175-8
1:304
§ 175-9. Additional required inspections. [Amended 9-18-1985 by
Ord. No. 29-1985; 10-21-1987 by Ord. No. 18-1987]
In addition to the inspections, permits and fees required pursuant to the
Uniform Fire Safety Act, the Uniform Fire Code and any other regulations of
the Department of Community Affairs, the following additional inspections
shall be required:
§ 175-10. Technical amendments. [Added 9-1-1999 by Ord. No.
11-1999]
B. Exemption from permit fees. All churches, schools, municipal buildings
and charitable institutions shall be exempt from the payment of any
permit fee. [Amended 9-1-1999 by Ord. No. 11-1999]
C. Collection of fees. All permit fees as set forth in Subsection A shall be
payable to the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the City of Brigantine.
[Amended 10-21-1987 by Ord. No. 18-1987]
D. Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or replace necessary fees
due and payable to the Construction Inspection Department of the City
of Brigantine for inspections, reviews or services performed by the
Uniform Construction Code Enforcement Department or the Fire
Subcode Official or inspectors thereof. [Amended 9-18-1985 by Ord.
No. 29-1985; 10-21-1987 by Ord. No. 18-1987]
E. Smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm compliance inspection
fees. Any fees charged for smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
compliance inspection shall be as set forth in the Uniform Fire Code.
The charge for any smoke detector or carbon monoxide alarm
compliance reinspection shall be an additional amount which shall be
equal to the amount charged for the original smoke detector or carbon
monoxide alarm compliance inspection, respectively. [Added 9-1-1999
by Ord. No. 11-1999; amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 30-2006]
A. Additional categories of regulated uses and structures:
(1) Hotels or motels not classified as Type A or B life hazards.
(2) Piers and amusement arcades not classified as life hazards.
(3) Any eating and drinking establishment not classified as Type A, B
or C life hazards.
B. Any and all business establishments not classified as life-hazard uses by
the Uniform Fire Safety Act shall be classified as a non-life-hazard use.
There shall be an annual registration required, and the payment of said
registration fee shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees in Chapter
210 of the Code of the City of Brigantine. [Added 12-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 30-2006]
§ 175-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-10
1:305
A. Fire zones. There is hereby established by this section of this chapter
fire zones within the City of Brigantine as follows:
(1) Krystal Beach, 39th Street and Ocean Avenue: 39 1/2 alley from
Ocean Avenue, north end of paved area, curb to curb.
(2) Steak 38 or any other business establishment located at 3700
Brigantine Boulevard: 37th Street from rear of building, 75 feet
toward Brigantine Boulevard, west side of street only. [Amended
12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 30-2006]
(3) The business establishment located at the Lighthouse Circle in the
former place of the Circle Tavern: Bayshore Avenue, east from
Lighthouse Circle to parking lot driveway. [Amended 12-20-2006
by Ord. No. 30-2006]
(4) Sanderlings Condominiums, 300 block, 44th Street: from north
corner of building to street end, west side of street only.
(5) Boardwalk On The Bay, 32nd Street and Bayshore Avenue: from
driveway east on Bayshore Avenue to property line.
(6) LaSammana Motel, 15th Street and Brigantine Avenue: from
Brigantine Avenue south on 15th Street to driveway.
(7) Celebrities Resorts or any other business establishment located at
15th Street and Ocean Avenue: from Ocean Avenue to bulkhead,
curb to curb. [Amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 30-2006]
(8) Celebrity Resorts. The front entrance way of the 14th Street South
side of the building, the boundaries shall be as follows: beginning
at the center line of a concrete stair located on the 14th Street
South side of the building serving as the main entrance to the
property and extending easterly for 26 feet from said concrete
center line; extending westerly for 35 feet from said concrete
center line and extending northerly from the base of said concrete
stair for 28 feet. [Added 10-20-2010 by Ord. No. 20-2010]
§ 175-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 175-10
1:306
Chapter 178
(RESERVED)
Chapter 181
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and dune protection — See Ch. 101.
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Excavations — See Ch. 165.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Sewers — See Ch. 252.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 258.
Water — See Ch. 290.
§ 175-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-10
1:307

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 181-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Brigantine of
Atlantic County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 181-2. Findings of fact.
§ 181-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Brigantine are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 181-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-3
1:309
§ 181-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 181-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-4
1:310
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 181-5. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ADVISORY BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (ABFE) — The elevation shown on
a community's Advisory Flood Hazard Map that indicates the advisory
stillwater elevation plus wave effect (ABFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting
from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (AFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to flooding from the one-percent annual chance
event depicted on the Advisory Flood Hazard Map.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD AREA MAP — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Administration has delineated the areas
of advisory flood hazards applicable to the community.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS), including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For zones
§ 181-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-5
1:311
VE and V1-30, the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus
wave effect (BFE = SWEL ÷ wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a
one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA — The effective Flood Insurance
Risk Maps or most recent Advisory Flood Hazard Area Maps FEMA has
provided.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA ELEVATION — Depicted on the
effective FIRM or FIS, or an Advisory Flood Hazard Area Map or Advisory
FIS.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL A ZONE — The portion of the special flood hazard area (SFHA)
starting from a Velocity (V) Zone and extending up to the landward limit
of the moderate wave action delineation. Where no V Zone is mapped, the
Coastal A Zone is the portion between the open coast and the landward limit
of the moderate wave action delineation. Coastal A Zones may be subject to
wave effects, velocity flows, erosion, scour, or a combination of these forces.
Construction and development in Coastal A Zones is to be regulated the
same as V Zones/coastal high hazard areas.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor or, in the case of a building in a Coastal High-Hazard Area or Coastal
A Zone, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
§ 181-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-5
1:312
the elevated floor elevated above the base flood elevation, plus freeboard,
by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the
flow of the water, and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base
flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with
openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
In Areas of Coastal High Hazard and Coastal A Zones, "elevated buildings"
also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated
building" even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway
walls.
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such federal, state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 181-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-5
1:313
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA) — Inland limit of the area
affected by waves greater than 1.5 feet during the base flood. Base flood
conditions between the V Zone and the LiMWA will be similar to, but less
severe than, those in the V Zone.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 181-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-5
1:314
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of sand
in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 181-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-5
1:315
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally aboveground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a tenyear
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market valve of the
structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. "Substantial
improvement" also means "cumulative substantial improvement." This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of
the actual repair work performed or repetitive loss. The term does not,
however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR § 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 181-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-5
1:316
ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 181-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the City of Brigantine, Atlantic County, New Jersey.
§ 181-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 181-8. Violations and penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Brigantine from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Brigantine, Community
No. 345286, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study,
Atlantic County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 28,
2018.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map, City of Brigantine, New Jersey, Atlantic
County" as shown on Index and Panel(s) 34001C0334F,
34001C0341F, 34001C0342F, 34001C0343F, 34001C0344F,
34001C0353F, 34001C0354F, 34001C0361F, 34001C0362F,
34001C0363F, 34001C0456F, 34001C0457F whose effective date is
August 28, 2018.
(3) Best available flood hazard data. These documents shall take
precedence over effective panels and FIS in construction and
development regulations only. Where the effective mapping or
advisory base flood elevation conflict or overlap, whichever
imposes the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at Brigantine City Hall, 1417 West Brigantine Avenue,
Brigantine, New Jersey.
§ 181-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-9
1:317
§ 181-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 181-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 181-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of
Brigantine, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 181-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-11
1:318
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 181-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 181-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include, but not be limited to, plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
§ 181-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 181-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 181-17B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard and
Coastal A Zone area to determine if the proposed development
alters sand dunes or other natural coastal protections so as to
increase potential flood damage.
§ 181-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-14
1:319
(4) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with § 181-18B(4).
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 181-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 181-17A, Specific standards,
Residential construction, and § 181-17B, Specific standards,
Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 181-12C.
(3) In coastal high hazard and Coastal A Zone areas, certification shall
be obtained from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the provisions of § 181-18B(1) and B(2)(a) and (b) are met.
(4) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control and the Land
Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
§ 181-14 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-14
1:320
§ 181-15. Variance procedure.
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 181-17A, Specific standards, Residential construction, § 181-17B,
Specific standards, Nonresidential construction, and § 181-17C,
specific standards, Manufactured homes.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in § 181-15.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The City Council of the City of Brigantine shall hear and decide
appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) The City Council of the City of Brigantine shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the City Council of the City of
Brigantine, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the City Council of the City of
Brigantine shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
§ 181-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-15
1:321
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 181-15A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the City Council of the City of Brigantine may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
in § 181-15A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon:
§ 181-15 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-15
1:322
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 181-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(5) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 181-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-15
1:323

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 181-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and
certified by a New Jersey licensed design professional and located
above the required freeboard so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
§ 181-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-16
1:325
§ 181-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 181-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard or in § 181-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements having fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or must meet or
exceed the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior walls of
each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(2) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other covering
or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit
of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) For Coastal A Zone construction, see § 181-18, Coastal high hazard
area and Coastal A Zone.
§ 181-16 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-17
1:326
(2) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an AE-9 Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities (including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the
base flood elevation or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1,
or the best available flood hazard data elevation, whichever is more
restrictive, plus three feet;
(3) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone (other than the AE-9 Zone)
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities (including all electrical, heating, ventilating, airconditioning
and other service equipment) and sanitary facilities,
elevated at or above the base flood elevation, or as required by
ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, or the best available flood hazard data
elevation, plus two feet;
(4) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in a Shaded X zone shall comply with the
requirements of the AE-9 Zone noted above;
(5) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with all attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
two feet above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified) or at or above the best available flood
elevation data plus two feet, whichever is more restrictive, and
require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
(for Coastal A Zone construction see § 181-18, Coastal high hazard area
and Coastal A Zone) shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities as well as all
electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service
equipment:
(1) Either:
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus two feet or
the best available flood hazard data elevation plus two feet or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's
DFIRM to elevate above the depth number specified in feet
plus two feet above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
§ 181-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-17
1:327
feet if no depth number is specified) or at or above the best
available flood hazard data elevation data plus two feet,
whichever is more restrictive, and require adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from proposed structures;
(2) Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus two
feet, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, or at or
above the best available flood elevation data plus two feet,
whichever is more restrictive, the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 181-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 181-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage;
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is elevated to or above the base flood elevation or
the best available flood hazard data elevation plus two feet or
as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(e) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent
strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade
and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral
movement.
§ 181-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-18
1:328
§ 181-18. Coastal high hazard area and Coastal A Zone.
Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) and Coastal A Zones are located
within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 181-7. These areas
have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal
surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall
apply:
A. Location of structures.
(1) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
(2) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
B. Construction methods.
(1) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation plus two feet or as required by
the ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 4-1, or the best available flood
hazard data, whichever is more restrictive;
(b) All electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning, mechanical
equipment and other equipment servicing the building is
elevated two feet above the base flood elevation or the best
available flood hazard data elevation, whichever is more
restrictive; and
(c) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided or in § 181-18B(4).
(2) Structural support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a one percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year mean
recurrence interval).
(c) Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings within
Zones V1-30, VE, V, and Coastal A on the community's DFIRM.
(3) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
§ 181-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-18
1:329
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of § 181-18B(1) and
B(2)(a) and (b).
(4) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood latticework or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood latticework or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation, provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or state codes) may be
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions.
[1] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
[2] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable state or local building standards.
[3] If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall
be used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage and not for human habitation and shall not exceed
300 square feet.
[4] Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must
be submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building
Subcode Official for approval.
(5) Sand dunes. Man-made alteration of sand dunes within Coastal A
Zones, VE and V Zones on the community's DFIRM which would
increase potential flood damage is prohibited.
§ 181-18 BRIGANTINE CODE § 181-18
1:330
ARTICLE VI
Severability
§ 181-19. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 181-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-19
1:331

ARTICLE VII
Enactment
§ 181-20. Effective date.
This chapter shall be effective on August 27, 2018, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by the City of Brigantine, Atlantic
County, New Jersey.
§ 181-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-20
1:333
Chapter 184
FOWL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 153.
§ 184-1. Keeping of fowl prohibited.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall have or keep in his, their
or its possession any live chickens, pigeons, turkeys, pheasants, quail or
roosters within the City of Brigantine.
§ 184-2. Devices for housing of fowl prohibited.
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall maintain, construct or use
within the City of Brigantine or otherwise have a house, coop, wire cage
or other said device for the keeping of said chickens, pigeons, turkeys,
pheasants, quail and roosters.
§ 184-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm, corporation or other entity violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not more than $1,000, jail time of not more than 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
Chapter 185
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 181-20 BRIGANTINE CODE § 184-3
1:334
ARTICLE I
Instant Raffle Games
[Adopted 3-5-1997 by Ord. No. 6-1997]
§ 185-1. Games allowed.
The City of Brigantine hereby specifically allows instant raffle games within
said City limits.
§ 185-2. License.
Any and all organizations who wish to conduct said instant raffle games
must apply for and receive a license from the City of Brigantine. Said license
shall be in addition to any and all licenses which must be received by said
organizations from the State of New Jersey.
§ 185-3. License fee.
The fee for said license shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fee Schedule. Said fee shall be in addition to any and
all fees charged by and payable to the State of New Jersey.
§ 185-4. Applications.
The application to apply for an instant raffle license shall be as prepared
and on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 185-5. Separate licenses.
An instant raffle license must be obtained to conduct any instant raffle
game, and said license is required in addition to any and all license received
to conduct raffles and/or bingo.
§ 185-6. Compliance with law.
Any organization receiving an instant raffle license must comply with all
statutes, regulations, rules and ordinances of the State of New Jersey,
County of Atlantic and City of Brigantine, including but not limited to
N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1.
§ 185-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-6
1:335
Chapter 186
GARAGE SALES
§ 186-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALES — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"attic sale," "rummage sale," "yard sale," "tag sale" or "flea market sale"
or any similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised
by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the
sale.[Amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 24-2000]
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder and which is
owned by the licensee or consigned to him.
OCCUPANT — The owner or lessee of the premises.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 186-2. License required. [Amended 8-2-1995 by Ord. No. 12-1995]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the City
of Brigantine without first filing with the City Clerk the information
hereinafter specified and obtaining from such City Clerk a license to do so,
to be known as a "garage sale license," for which the City Clerk shall charge
a license fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II,
Fee Schedule.
§ 186-3. Issuance of license; display on premises.
§ 186-4. Information to be filed.
The information to be filed with the City Clerk, pursuant to this chapter,
shall be as follows:
A. A license to conduct a garage sale shall be issued to any one person no
more than two times within a calendar year, and no such license shall
be issued for more than three consecutive calendar days, and further,
the same location will not be used more than two times within the
calendar year.
B. Each license issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed
on the premises and visible from the street upon which the garage sale
is conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.
A. The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
§ 185-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 186-4
1:336
§ 186-5. Alternate dates.
In the event of inclement weather, any person issued a license for a
particular date or dates pursuant to this chapter shall be permitted to utilize
said license on an alternate date. Such alternate dates must be supplied to
the City Clerk at least seven days prior thereto.
§ 186-6. Conduct of sale. [Amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 24-2000]
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of
the premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum
on the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such persons
shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises, nor permit
vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area
of such premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any
member of the Police or Fire Departments of the City of Brigantine in order
to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. All licensed premises shall
at all times be subject to such reasonable rules as may be made from time to
time by the Board of Commissioners and shall be subject to inspection at all
times by the Building Inspector, Chief of Police and Fire Chief or any of their
agents or any other duly authorized representative of the City of Brigantine.
Likewise, no person or entity, who has been issued a license to conduct a
garage sale, will allow the placement or location of any items to be sold in
the street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way in the City of Brigantine.
Any items located at any garage sale shall be solely on the property of the
person or persons holding said garage sale and shall not in any way block
or interrupt the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
§ 186-7. Hours of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. only.
§ 186-8. Signs.
No signs for advertising or directing customers are to be posted on any
place other than the premises of the applicant. The sign is not to exceed
two feet by two feet in size and cannot be placed on the premises earlier
B. The name of the owner or lessee of the property on which said sale is to
be conducted.
C. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. The number of days of the sale and the dates on which such sale is to be
conducted.
E. The date and nature of any past sale.
F. A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
§ 186-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-8
1:337
than one week prior to the sale and must be removed immediately upon
termination of the sale.
§ 186-9. Prohibited sales.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale mattresses, bedsprings,
cots, lounges and sofas in any garage sale authorized under this chapter
without first complying with the appropriate section of N.J.S.A. 26:10-1
through 26:10-18, with respect to the labeling, sterilizing and disinfecting
of said mattresses, bedsprings, cots, lounges and sofas.
§ 186-10. Certain persons and sales excepted.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 186-11. Enforcement. [Amended 10-4-2000 by Ord. No. 24-2000]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector or the Inspection
Division of the Brigantine Fire Department. It shall be the duty of said
Building Inspector or Fire Inspection Division to investigate any violations
of this Chapter coming to its attention, whether by complaint or arising
from personal knowledge; and, if a violation is found to exist, a summons
may be issued to require any violating party to appear in the local municipal
court pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of
the Police Department of the City of Brigantine to bring to the attention
of the Building Inspector or the Inspection Division of the Brigantine Fire
Department for further investigation any violations of this chapter of which
the Police Department becomes aware of during the course of its normal
duties.
A. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the City of Brigantine or under
the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof or any other
sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor, and which sale
would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise
prohibited in the ordinances.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any bona fide charitable, educational, cultural or governmental
institution or organization; provided, however, that the burden of
establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on the
organization or institution claiming such exemption.
§ 186-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 186-12
1:338
§ 186-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, association or corporation conducting any such sale or similar
activity without being properly licensed therefor or who shall violate any of
the other terms and regulations of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each violation. Each day that
such sale shall continue without being duly licensed shall be considered a
separate violation.
Chapter 187
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Brush, weeds and other debris — See Ch. 115.
Use of rubbish disposal facilities during
construction — See Ch. 143, Art. II.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Recycling — See Ch. 242.
§ 186-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 186-12
1:339

ARTICLE I
Collection and Prohibitions
[Adopted 7-17-1985 by Ord. No. 13-1985]
§ 187-1. Applicability.
Municipal residential trash collection, pursuant to the terms and conditions
of this chapter, shall be provided by the City of Brigantine to all singlefamily,
two-family, three-family and four-family detached or attached
dwellings. Municipal residential trash collection services shall not be
provided to any other structure, dwelling or use. It is the intention of
this chapter to not provide municipal residential trash collection service
to public eating or drinking establishments, retail stores, institutions,
commercial uses, industrial uses, construction activities, multifamily or
multiunit dwellings having condominium forms of ownership, hotels, motels
and apartment houses in excess of four dwelling units. In the event of
dispute as to the availability of service, the Board of Commissioners of
the City shall have jurisdiction to interpret this chapter. Normal residential
trash collection service is intended to collect household waste. Bulk trash
collection service is intended to remove larger items from residential
properties.
§ 187-2. Responsibilities of residents not provided with collection
services.
Where municipal residential trash collection services are not provided to
premises or uses identified in this chapter, it shall be the responsibility of
the owners or occupants of such structures or persons or entities carrying
on such uses to arrange for the timely commercial pickup of all such
accumulated trash or rubbish on a regular basis, with a frequency not
less than the frequency for municipal residential trash collection services
established by the City of Brigantine. The accumulation of trash, rubbish
or other waste within the boundaries of the City of Brigantine is hereby
prohibited. Wherever trash and waste accumulates on premises not
provided with services pursuant to this chapter, the owners or persons
responsible for such premises shall provide sufficient service to prevent
accumulations which are injurious to public health and welfare.
§ 187-3. Frequency of trash collection.
Municipal residential trash collection services shall be provided by the City
of Brigantine on not less than a weekly basis for normal trash collection
service. Bulk pickup service shall be provided on a schedule and in the
manner established by the Department of Public Works.
§ 187-4. Contract for services.
The City of Brigantine may contract, pursuant to the rules and provisions
of the Local Public Contracts Law,102 with a commercial refuse contractor
or trash hauler to provide all or any portion of municipal residential trash
§ 187-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-4
1:341
collection services. The entry into any municipal residential trash collection
service contract shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the State
of New Jersey, the County of Atlantic and the City of Brigantine or any
other agency having jurisdiction over the award of contracts or collection,
handling and processing of rubbish and trash. The City of Brigantine shall
have the authority to contract for all or any portion of municipal residential
rubbish collection, as it determines to be necessary, and to accomplish
any portion of municipal rubbish and trash collection as appears necessary
through the direct use of City resources. The terms and conditions of any
contract for municipal residential rubbish collection shall be negotiated,
and such contracts shall be approved by resolution or ordinance of the
Board or Commissioners, according to law.
§ 187-5. Garbage receptacle specifications; placement at curbside.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of each premises
provided with municipal residential trash collection services to furnish
and maintain a sufficient number of suitable metal, plastic or other
covered, leakproof receptacles, each having a capacity not greater than
60 pounds loaded weight, in which shall be kept all ashes, trash,
rubbish and garbage for removal.
B. Wherever possible, taking into account actual building setbacks from
the property line, such receptacles shall be placed at a distance not
greater than 10 feet from the property line of the premises, except on
the date of residential collection, as designated by the City of
Brigantine for the particular premises. On the date of municipal
residential trash collection, the owner or occupant of the premises shall
place the containers provided for in this chapter at the curb not earlier
than 4:00 p.m. on the date prior to scheduled municipal trash
collection. The containers shall be placed on the curb in such a manner
so as to not block free passage of pedestrians along the sidewalk areas.
Following trash collection, all empty containers shall be removed to the
storage area on the premises not later than 12:00 noon on the day
following scheduled municipal trash collection.
C. It shall further be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of the
premises receiving municipal residential trash collection to keep such
containers which are provided in a clean and sanitary condition so as
not to constitute a hazard to the public health. Further, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or occupant of the premises receiving
municipal residential trash collection services to keep the area of trash
collection and receptacle storage in a clean and sanitary manner.
D. Any owner or occupant of any premises in the City of Brigantine,
whether residential or commercial, who disposes trash into or has trash
collected from a dumpster shall surround such dumpster in a wooden or
other such enclosure and shall maintain such enclosure area in a clean
and sanitary manner. Such wooden or other such enclosure shall be
102. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 187-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 187-5
1:342
§ 187-6. Prohibited garbage receptacles.
Containers other than those described in the preceding § 187-5 of this
chapter shall not be utilized by the owner or occupant of any premises.
On an occasional basis, it may be necessary for the owner or occupant
to dispose of wooden or cardboard containers. Such shall not be used for
the regular accumulation of trash. The municipality reserves the right to
dispose of the same when they are placed at the curbside for municipal
residential trash collection. Plastic bags, paper bags or other similar
containers shall not be used for the placement of rubbish or trash at
curbside unless contained within a wooden or cardboard container, sealed
and closed so as to prevent the breakage or splitting of the same or the
entry into such container by wandering animals or birds. In the event that
an owner or occupant of any premises utilizes containers other than those
provided for in this chapter, such property owner or occupant shall be held
responsible for litter caused as a result thereof and will be responsible for
cleaning up the area and, upon failure to do so, shall become subject to the
fines and penalties provided for in this chapter.
§ 187-7. City transfer station.
At the time of adoption of this chapter, the City of Brigantine owns and
operates a transfer station. No person or entity may deposit any item or
rubbish or refuse in such transfer station without the specific permission of
the Department of Public Works or other responsible official of the City of
Brigantine.
§ 187-8. Bulk item pickup.
The City of Brigantine will provide residential bulk-item pickup on a
frequency to be established by the Department of Public Works.
Construction, commercial or industrial waste will not be picked up in this
manner. The City may refuse to pick up and dispose of items that are
deemed hazardous or injurious to public health. Where such items are
designed and constructed to conceal said dumpster and shall be
maintained in a clean and safe condition. Nothing contained in this
section, however, shall allow any property owner or occupant to place
such an enclosure for a dumpster within the front yard setback on any
particular property or otherwise place said wooden enclosure in a place
or manner within any sight triangle which may be deemed a hazard
to traffic or safety. Any chain link fence enclosure must have plastic
or other type slats which will conceal the dumpster enclosed therein.
[Added 2-16-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994; amended 11-2-1994 by
Ord. No. 25-1994]
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no dumpster which is used
on a construction site for construction debris shall be required to be
enclosed as hereinbefore mentioned. [Added 2-16-1994 by Ord. No.
3-1994]
§ 187-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-8
1:343
refused, it shall be the responsibility of the resident or person responsible
for the accumulation of such waste to dispose of the same, according to law.
§ 187-9. Shrubs, grass, branches and similar vegetation. [Amended
7-21-1993 by Ord. No. 18-1993]
§ 187-10. Collection of defective and illegal waste containers.
After 10 days' written notice has been given to the responsible party, either
owner or occupant, by the Health Department Official or his duly authorized
agent to dispose of defective or illegal waste containers, the condemned
containers may be collected as rubbish by the City of Brigantine or its
contractor.
§ 187-11. Accumulation of waste prohibited.
The accumulation of waste, trash, rubbish, refuse, commercial or industrial
waste or by-product on any premises in the City of Brigantine or the failure
of the person or entity responsible for such premises to provide for regular
A. For the purpose of this section, yard waste shall be defined as grass,
leaves, clean wood and brush uncontaminated with other waste
material which is acceptable for processing at the Atlantic County
Utilities Authority's composting site. [Amended 1-19-2005 by Ord.
No. 1-2005]
B. Yard waste must be separated from other refuse and shall not be
included with household garbage. Yard waste will be collected once
each week from April 15 through October 15 via curbside collection.
C. Yard waste shall be placed in biodegradable paper bags or rigid
reusable trash containers. Yard waste in plastic bags shall not be
permitted and shall not be collected as part of any weekly collection.
For the purpose of this section, biodegradable bags shall be paper bags
which are designed and manufactured to decompose by natural
biological process. Yard waste placed in plastic bags will not be
collected by the Atlantic County Utilities Authority or the City of
Brigantine. The biodegradable bags, when filled, shall weigh less then
50 pounds. The bags shall be placed at the curb to be collected by a
separate truck on or near the resident's property. The bags shall be
placed at said property for ready access by collection crews and must
not be placed in or near standing or runoff water or so as to inhibit
stormwater drainage. The bags shall not contain any branches, trash or
other nonbiodegradable material. [Amended 1-19-2005 by Ord. No.
1-2005]
D. Twigs and branches up to two inches in diameter may be tied, with
cotton twine or cord, in bundles no greater than four feet in length.
E. Branches two inches or greater in diameter are not considered yard
waste and must be included with household garbage.
§ 187-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 187-11
1:344
and clean waste storage and removal shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.
§ 187-12. Scattering of garbage prohibited.
No person shall overturn, spill, scatter, root through or pull apart any
garbage or refuse set out for collection, nor shall any person remove
anything from any receptacle, bundle, garbage or refuse set out for
collection in such a manner as shall cause the provisions of this chapter to
be violated.
§ 187-13. Enforcement.
The primary official of the City of Brigantine responsible for enforcing this
chapter is the Health Department Official, who should be notified by those
citizens who believe that a violation of the terms of this chapter may exist.
Any responsible official of the City of Brigantine, including those normally
designated to exercise the police power on behalf of the City of Brigantine,
including but not limited to employees and agents of the Police Department,
Fire Department, Board of Health, Zoning Department, Construction Code
Department or any other enforcement agency of the City of Brigantine, is
authorized and empowered to exercise the powers necessary to enforce
the provisions of this chapter. Officials responsible for enforcement of the
terms and conditions of this chapter are entitled to exercise their discretion
in determining the existence of any violation or in determining whether
to seek any combination of fines and penalties provided for violation of
this chapter should be imposed or to use other means of enforcement,
including persuasion or issuance of warnings. Nothing shall prevent a
citizen, homeowner or other interested person from acting as a complaining
witness in the Municipal Court of Brigantine or such other court having
jurisdiction to enforce this chapter.
§ 187-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of up to but not more than $1,000
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. Failure of
any employee or agent of the City of Brigantine or any person acting on
its behalf to give any prior notice to such violator shall not be construed
as evidence of waiver of the City of Brigantine's right to enforce the terms
and conditions of this chapter. A separate offense shall be deemed to have
been committed on each day during or on which a violation of the terms and
conditions of this chapter occurs and continues.
§ 187-15. Emergency situations.
Whenever the City of Brigantine finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, the public
officer of the City of Brigantine charged with enforcement of the terms and
§ 187-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-15
1:345
conditions of this chapter may, without notice or hearing, issue an order
requiring that such action be taken as is determined to be necessary. The
statutes and other provisions of this chapter shall be applied to meet the
emergency, and such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply immediately. In the event that
action must be taken by the municipality on an emergency basis, charges
and costs for the action so required shall be charged to the premises owner
and considered as a lien on the property.
§ 187-15 BRIGANTINE CODE § 187-15
1:346
ARTICLE II
Reimbursement of Multifamily Dwellings
[Adopted 1-7-2004 by Ord. No. 26-2003]
§ 187-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure or complex of
buildings or structures in which five or more dwelling units are rented or
leased or offered for rent or lease for residential purposes except hotels,
motels or other guesthouses serving transient or seasonal guests, as those
terms are defined pursuant to Subsection J of Section III of the hotel and
multiple dwelling law.
TOTAL COST OF SERVICES or COST OF SERVICES — The cost that would
be incurred by a municipality in providing solid waste collection services
to a multifamily dwelling in the same manner as the municipality provides
those services, curbside, to other residents of the municipality.
§ 187-17. Reimbursement agreement.
A. In lieu of providing the services set forth in this article, the City of
Brigantine shall require that the multifamily dwelling enter into a
written agreement with the City of Brigantine for annual
reimbursement.
B. The amount to be reimbursed to the multifamily dwelling shall be used
by the multifamily dwelling solely to pay for the service of collection of
solid waste, and that amount shall be the actual documented cost to the
multifamily dwelling of providing that service, but in no event shall it
exceed the amount which the City of Brigantine would have expended
on that service if it were provided directly by the municipality to the
multifamily dwelling.
C. The agreement entered into pursuant to this article shall require an
accounting by the multifamily dwelling of the use of the money paid
over to said multifamily dwelling by the City of Brigantine and for the
refunding to the City of Brigantine of any payments in excess of the
amounts actually expended during the calendar year to provide for the
services covered by the agreement.
D. The City of Brigantine shall be specifically indemnified and held
harmless by the multifamily dwelling and any and all residents thereof
from any lawsuit of any nature by virtue of the collection of solid waste
by any third party.
E. The City of Brigantine shall only be responsible to pay to the
multifamily dwelling the percentage for each calendar year as set forth
in this article.
§ 187-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-18
1:347
§ 187-18. Reimbursement.
The City of Brigantine shall reimburse the multifamily dwelling for the
actual cost to the multifamily dwelling of providing solid waste collection
services, but in no event shall said amount be more than what the
municipality would have expended on the solid waste collection services
if provided by the City of Brigantine directly to the multifamily dwelling
and calculated as if the dwelling units were located along public roads and
streets and the solid waste collection service was provided curbside.
§ 187-19. Multifamily dwellings must recycle.
In order to be eligible for the reimbursement for solid waste collection
services, a multifamily dwelling shall be required to comply with all
recycling requirements applicable to all other residential properties within
the City of Brigantine. The designated representative of the multifamily
dwelling must certify each year to the City Manager of the City of
Brigantine or his designee that said recycling requirements have been met,
or the City of Brigantine shall not be required to provide reimbursement. If,
through independent investigation by the City of Brigantine or any officers,
employee or agents thereof, it is discovered that despite said certification
the recycling which is required by this article is not occurring, then the
same shall be reported to the certified Public Works Manager within the
City of Brigantine. If the certified Public Works Manager employed by the
municipality determines that a multifamily dwelling is not in compliance
with the municipal recycling requirements, then the City of Brigantine
may terminate the solid waste and recyclable collection services to the
multifamily dwelling, or reduce its reimbursement payments by an amount
equal to the landfill or disposal costs that would be saved if the recyclables
were separated from the other solid waste. No solid waste collection shall
be terminated or reimbursed amount shall be reduced pursuant to this
section of this article unless the designated representative of the
multifamily dwelling has been sent written notice of noncompliance and
been given 30 days' written notice of the proposed reimbursement amount
reduction. During those 30 days, the designated representative shall have
the opportunity to bring the multifamily dwelling into compliance with the
municipal recycling requirements and have that compliance certified by a
certified Public Works Manager employed by the City of Brigantine.
§ 187-20. Designated representative.
A multifamily development shall designate a representative for the purpose
of signing and implementing an agreement with the City of Brigantine
pursuant to this article. Said designated representative must be the
landlord or, if a corporation or other business entity is the landlord, must
be a stockholder, partner or other owner of said business entity which is
authorized by the appropriate resolution of said business entity to serve
as the designated representative for the purpose of this article. Any such
resolution of a corporate entity must be forwarded to the City of Brigantine
prior to any reimbursement pursuant to this article. The individual
§ 187-18 BRIGANTINE CODE § 187-20
1:348
designated by the City of Brigantine to effectuate the contents of this article
shall be the City Manager of the City of Brigantine or his designee.
§ 187-21. Reimbursement procedures.
§ 187-22. Proof and audit of expenditures.
The City of Brigantine shall be provided with required data to support and
justify eligibility for reimbursement of expenses incurred by the multifamily
dwelling. In no event shall the multifamily dwelling receive more than the
figure determined by the City of Brigantine based on the amount actually
expended by the City of Brigantine for such services during the fiscal year.
The multifamily dwelling shall furnish proof of payment for the services for
which they seek reimbursement, on an annual basis.
§ 187-23. Phase-in schedule.
The City of Brigantine shall reimburse the designated representative of
the multifamily dwelling for a portion of the costs of providing solid waste
collection services as follows:
Year Percent of Reimbursement
(for the total cost of services)
2002 20%
2003 40%
2004 60%
2005 80%
2006 and beyond 100%
A. The City of Brigantine shall reimburse the multifamily dwelling for solid
waste collection services by issuing a check pursuant to the phase-in
section of this article to the designated representative of the
multifamily dwelling prior to June 1 of the subsequent year to
reimburse said multifamily dwelling for services provided the previous
calendar year. The amount of the reimbursement check shall be
calculated in accordance with the formula established by the City
Manager of the City of Brigantine or his designee. Prior to any
reimbursement, it shall be the multifamily dwelling's responsibility to
provide to the City of Brigantine a certification regarding the recycling
requirements as set forth in this article and an itemized invoice marked
"paid," showing the amounts spent by said multifamily dwelling for
solid waste collection services for the year for which reimbursement is
sought.
§ 187-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 187-23
1:349
Chapter 190
GOLF COURSE, MINIATURE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 91.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 153.
Recreational facilities — See Ch. 241.
§ 190-1. Hours and days of operation.
The hours of operation and days of operation will be as determined by the
City Manager.
§ 190-2. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall be in effect at all hours during
the operation of the Brigantine miniature golf course, and any individual
violating said rules may be asked to leave the Brigantine miniature golf
course and will also be subject to being issued a summons for violating this
chapter:
A. There shall be no consumption of alcoholic beverages at said miniature
golf course.
B. No pets of any nature shall be allowed at said miniature golf course,
including any dogs, cats, birds or other pets or animals of any kind. This
subsection shall not apply to guide dogs or other animals used in
assisting the physically or mentally challenged.
C. Proper attire is required at said miniature golf course, and no
undressing or disrobing in any manner shall be allowed.
D. There shall be no throwing of any items, including balls, frisbees or
other such items, and there shall be no throwing of the golf balls issued
by said facility.
E. Only appropriate golf balls and golf clubs as issued at said facility may
be used at said facility.
F. The hawking, peddling or sale of any goods, articles, wares or other
merchandise or distributing of pamphlets or flyers at said facility shall
be prohibited.
G. Patrons who act in a noisy or boisterous manner and continue to so act
after being asked to stop will be considered in violation of this chapter
and may be asked to leave the premises and also are subject to being
issued a summons for being in violation of this chapter, whether or not
they have completed their round of miniature golf.
§ 187-23 BRIGANTINE CODE § 190-2
1:350
§ 190-3. Fee.
The fee for both adults and children shall be $4 per player. However,
if any group or organization schedules a group event consisting of 10
or more players at least 48 hours in advance, then the cost per player
for such group or event shall be $3 per player. The City of Brigantine
reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to schedule, or not schedule, such
groups or organizations depending upon the availability of playing time and
anticipated number of players at the facility at any time.
§ 190-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be convicted of a first offense of a violation of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100 and community
service of not more then 30 days, or both, in the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge. Any person convicted of second or subsequent violation of this
chapter within a twenty-four-month period shall be subject to a fine up to
$500 and community service of up to 90 days, or both, in the discretion of
the Municipal Court Judge.
H. The payment of a fee shall be for one round of miniature golf, and no
player can complete said round and then continue to play additional
holes at said facility.
I. No player may stand, jump on, hit or otherwise damage or deface any of
the decorative features at the miniature golf course.
J. Players are prohibited from hitting the ball excessively hard or hitting
the ball towards any other player.
K. No person shall be permitted to deface, place graffiti upon, mark or
otherwise damage any portion of the miniature golf course.
L. No person shall use indecent, obscene or offensive language or
gestures while at said miniature golf course facility.
M. If any person or group is playing at a pace of play that is causing
considerable delay by other person(s) or groups of players, said
person(s) or group may be asked by the attendant to skip a hole or holes
so that the pace of play will not be substantially delayed for other
players using the facility.
N. No person may throw the clubs issued by the facility or swing the clubs
in any manner other then for striking the ball or practicing to strike the
ball prior to hitting the same.
§ 190-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-4
1:351
Chapter 198
LAND USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and dune protection — See Ch. 101.
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Bulkheads — See Ch. 127.
Certificate of land use compliance — See Ch.
134.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Excavations — See Ch. 165.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 181.
Mercantile businesses - See Ch. 210.
Noise — See Ch. 216.
Parking lots — See Ch. 234.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Sewers — See Ch. 252.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 284.
Water — See Ch. 290.
§ 190-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 190-4
1:352
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 198-1. Title.
This chapter may be referred to as the "Municipal Land Use Ordinance of
the City of Brigantine."
§ 198-2. Purpose and intent.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to:
A. Guide the use and development of all the lands of the City of Brigantine
in the appropriate manner that will promote the health, safety and
welfare of the general public.
B. Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters.
C. Provide adequate light, air and open space.
D. Ensure that the residential development of the City of Brigantine does
not conflict with the growth, development and general welfare of the
neighboring municipalities, Atlantic County and the State of New Jersey
as a whole.
E. Promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and
concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of the citizens of
Brigantine, their families, neighborhoods and social communities.
F. Encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditures of public funds by
the coordination of public development with land use policies.
G. Provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for residential,
recreational and commercial uses to meet the needs of the citizens of
the City of Brigantine.
H. Encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will
promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging the location of those
facilities and routes which will result in congestion and degrade the
quality of existing residential, commercial and recreational
development in the City.
I. Promote a desirable and pleasing visual environment through creative
development techniques and architectural consideration, including
establishing a nautical or coastal architectural theme in business
districts.
J. Promote the conservation of open space in the form of the existing dune
and beach systems along the Atlantic Ocean at least in part by
maintaining and enforcing the development restriction line.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-2
1:353
§ 198-2.1. Relation to Master Plan.
The City of Brigantine adopted a Master Plan103 in November, 2001. The
intent and purpose of the 2002 amendments to the Brigantine Municipal
Land Use Ordinance is to implement the goals and objectives as set forth
in said Master Plan. One of the major amendments includes the elimination
of duplexes as a permitted use from all zones within the City. This is a
continuation of 1996 amendments to the City Land Use Ordinance104 which
K. Preserve the water's-edge environment along the back bays while
recognizing the residential, commercial and recreational opportunities
within this environment.
L. Encourage the coordination of the development review process with the
capital improvements program to reduce the financial impact to both
the private and public sectors while achieving more efficient land use.
M. Encourage the development and use of innovative stormwater
management techniques to control surface water runoff, prevent
flooding and reduce soil erosion and sedimentation.
N. Encourage the development of the City of Brigantine as a stable singlefamily
residential community by adopting land use policies that
maintain and preserve existing single-family neighborhoods by
discouraging speculative multifamily investment and discouraging the
subdivision of existing large residential properties into smaller lots,
permitting duplexes as a conditional use within the City and
encouraging the development of traditional hotels.
O. Promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources.
P. Prevent suburban sprawl and degradation of the coastal environment
by limiting and restricting inappropriate land uses within the City of
Brigantine while encouraging the concentration and expansion of retail
and commercial uses in designated districts.
Q. To continue to encourage tourism, ecotourism and economic
development on the island by allowing bed-and-breakfast inns as a
conditional use in certain areas and establishing the uninhabited
section of the north end of the island as an environmental education
area.
R. Expand and improve recreational uses and facilities including location
and establishment of a municipal youth center, bike path and support of
ongoing recreational facilities and programs such as the Brigantine
C.E.R., Brigantine Rowing Club, recreation fields, parks and indoor
recreation facilities.
103. Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the City offices.
104. Editor's Note: A copy of the 1996 Land Use Ordinance, adopted 6-5-1996, and which was
superseded by this chapter, is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-2.1
1:354
eliminated triplexes and quadraplexes as allowed uses. Duplexes shall now
be a conditional use. This change clearly and specifically implements the
goal and objective contained on page 9 of the Master Plan. This change
is part of an overall development plan within the City as established by
the Master Plan. This, as well as other goals of the Master Plan and
corresponding amendments to this Land Use Ordinance, will foster the
purposes of zoning within the City including lessening environmental
impact, creating more air, light and open space, promoting public health,
safety and welfare and promoting appropriate population densities. Other
sections of the Master Plan recommend the continuation and improvement
of programs and policies already in effect within the City including
environmental measures such as the continued enforcement of no
development past the development restriction line, improving recreational
programs and facilities, protecting sensitive beach and back bay areas,
flood protection, economic development and tourism, transportation and
scenic resources.
§ 198-3. Approvals required prior to development.
A. No development shall be permitted to occur within the City of
Brigantine unless preceding such development there shall have been an
application for development filed, reviewed and approved in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable
codes, rules, regulations and laws of the City of Brigantine, County of
Atlantic or State of New Jersey. When such approval has been granted
subject to conditions or required specific performance, failure to meet
such conditions or perform as specified shall cause said approval to
become null and void.
B. All applications for projects shall first be submitted to the City of
Brigantine Zoning Officer for a ruling as to whether or not said project
is to be heard by the Planning Board or to issue a zoning permit to
projects that require no action by said Board.
C. Site plan approval. Every development which includes any principal
structure other than a one- or two-family dwelling located on an
individual lot shall, prior to the issuance of a building permit, first be
granted approval for an application for site plan approval by the Zoning
Officer or Planning Board. (NOTE: All residential use developments of
three or more dwelling units and other uses of 10,000 square feet or
more, whether requiring variances or not, shall be reviewed for site
plan approval by the Planning Board.)
D. Subdivision approval. Every development which includes subdivision or
consolidation shall have received approval of an application for
subdivision prior to issuance of any building permit or the
commencement of any site improvements.
E. Application for variance. A variance application and approval shall be
required for every development which includes any feature not in
§ 198-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-3
1:355
conformity with this chapter or which lacks any required improvement
or feature of this chapter.
F. Simultaneous applications. Application for development approval
should contain all approvals which may be required for the approval of
the project under consideration. An applicant shall be required to show
good cause why all applications for development are not submitted to
the Board simultaneously. In the event that an applicant receives
permission to apply for less than all approvals which may be required,
the applicant shall be deemed to have accepted the jurisdiction of the
Board to modify or impose conditions upon the construction of
improvements or grant of permission to carry out the development
sought by the earlier application. This subsection shall not apply to
separate applications for preliminary and final approval. In submitting
any application for variances, the Board shall require that each
application for variance be separately stated upon the application, and
supporting reasons for such application shall be stated in the
application documents. Applicants seeking variances for single-family
and duplex dwellings shall provide, in addition to all other
requirements, architectural elevations and preliminary floor plans.
G. Zoning permits. A zoning permit is required as a condition precedent to
the commencement of a use or the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or a
building. All zoning permits shall be signed by the Zoning Official of the
City of Brigantine. No building permit will be issued unless a zoning
permit approving use and location has first been obtained. When a
variance has been granted the zoning permit shall have a copy of the
approval granting said variance attached thereto and maintained on
file. Such copy of the approval shall be supplied by the applicant when
obtaining such zoning permit. No certificate of occupancy shall issue
prior to the applicant obtaining a zoning permit.
§ 198-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-3
1:356
ARTICLE II
Planning Board
§ 198-4. Creation; appointments; officers; bylaws; powers and
duties.
§ 198-5. (Reserved)
§ 198-6. Adoption of rules and regulations; compliance with state
law.
§ 198-7. Experts and staff.
The Council of the City of Brigantine shall fix the compensation of the
attorney for the Planning Board and all other experts, staff personnel and
other services as it may deem necessary. The Planning Board will be solely
A. Creation of the Planning Board. There is hereby established, pursuant
to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), a Planning
Board consisting of nine members and four alternate members.
B. Appointments and terms. Appointments and terms of the members of
the Board shall be in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
C. Officers of the Board. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and a
Vice Chairman from its Class IV members and shall also select a
Secretary. An alternate member shall not serve as the Chairman or Vice
Chairman of the Planning Board.
D. Adoption of bylaws. The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws
governing its procedural operation, but said bylaws shall not be
contrary to this chapter or the Municipal Land Use Law.
E. Powers and duties. It shall also have the powers and duties enumerated
in the Municipal Land Use Law and perform such other advisory duties
as are assigned to it by ordinance or resolution of the City of Brigantine
for the aid and assistance of the same or its officials, agencies or the
general public.
A. Adoption of rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt such
rules, regulations and application materials as may be necessary to put
this chapter into effect and achieve the expressed intent and purpose of
the same.
B. Compliance with the Municipal Land Use Law105 . All provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law relating to meetings, minutes, fees, hearings,
notice requirements for hearings and furnishing lists of property
owners and decisions shall be complied with by the Planning Board.
105. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40-55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-7
1:357
responsible for choosing its own attorney. The Board shall not exceed the
budgeted amount appropriated by the City of Brigantine for its use.
§ 198-8. Conflict of interest.
It is the duty, individually and collectively, of members of the Planning Board
to ascertain that each member is free of financial or personal interest in
matters subject to the jurisdiction of the Board. In the event that a potential
conflict of interest may occur, it is the responsibility of the member to notify
the Board Attorney and act according to his written directions.
§ 198-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-8
1:358
ARTICLE III
Development Application Review and Approval Procedures
§ 198-9. Application procedure.
A. Forms. All applications for development shall be made upon forms
provided and filed with the Zoning Office and any appeals of a decision
of the Zoning Officer shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board to
which application is being made.
B. Time of application. All applications to the Board shall be filed not fewer
than 20 days prior to the meeting at which initial consideration of the
application is requested.
C. Completeness of applications. No application shall be acted upon unless
and until it is complete in every aspect, including the specified plans,
maps, applications, certifications and fees. Completeness shall be
determined by the review of the Secretary of the Board according to the
criteria of § 198-10, Submission of application; required documents.
The Planning Board shall designate a secretary, committee of Board
members or Board professional staff member to review applications for
completeness, according to bylaws adopted by the Board concerning
completeness. In the event that an applicant does not believe it
necessary to meet the established criteria for completeness, the
applicant may request, in writing, or in an appearance before the full
Board, that one or more of the submission requirements be waived.
Upon receipt of such request, the Secretary shall schedule a hearing on
the issue of completeness only, before the Board having jurisdiction.
After such request and appearance before the Board, the Board shall
act to grant or deny the request within 45 days after the request of the
completeness hearing. Granting of a request for waiver does not
prevent the respective Board from requiring the information necessary
if, during the review of the application, such information is deemed to
be necessary. However, the application cannot be deemed incomplete at
a later time, and the Board must act within the time provided by law to
render a full decision on the merits. Nothing herein shall be construed
as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove in the application
process that the applicant is entitled to approval of the application. The
Planning Board or any Committee thereof may subsequently require
correction of any information found to be in error and submission of
additional information not specified in this chapter or any revisions in
the accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application have been met.
D. Placement on the agenda. The Secretary shall place each completed
application on the Board's agenda. In the event that the Secretary shall
withhold the application from the agenda, the Secretary shall notify
both the Board and the applicant of any deficiency which renders the
application incomplete. The applicant shall be notified within 45 days of
§ 198-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-9
1:359
filing of either the scheduled date of the Board hearing or the
determination that the application is incomplete.
E. Public hearings. The Planning Board shall hold public hearings on each
application for development in accordance with the Municipal Land Use
Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10). Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10, the Board
holding the hearing shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by a certified shorthand stenographer or mechanical or
electronic means equivalent to those used in the municipal courts of
this state. The cost of providing transcripts of the hearing shall be
borne solely by the applicant or other interested person requesting a
transcript of the proceedings. All transcripts shall be prepared by a
certified shorthand reporter who is authorized by law to perform such
functions. The Board holding such hearings shall provide, in its bylaws,
for the production of transcripts by a certified shorthand reporter and
may release a copy of the record of the hearing to any person, other
than the official reporter designated by the applicant. Any interested
party requesting a transcript shall, upon payment of the cost of
preparation of the transcript, receive a copy. Nothing herein shall
require the Board to release the original recording of any such hearing.
F. Additional data required.
(1) If the application is determined by the Secretary or such other
person or body designated by the Board to be incomplete, the
applicant shall be notified within 45 days of the initial filing date of
the deficiency and the data required to bring the application to
completeness.
(2) An application deemed to be incomplete shall not be considered to
be placed upon the Board's agenda, nor officially received by the
municipality or Board having jurisdiction. An amended application
shall be submitted in the same manner as the original application.
G. Application number. Each application for development shall be
assigned a file number by the Secretary upon submittal by the
applicant. Each Board shall have a separate numbering system.
H. Resolution of the Board; findings of fact and conclusions. The Board
having jurisdiction over the application shall include findings of fact
and conclusion based thereon in each decision on any application for
development and shall reduce the decision to writing. The Board shall
provide the findings and conclusions through a memorializing
resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than 45 days after the
date of the meeting at which the Board voted to grant or deny approval.
Only the members of the Board who voted for the action taken may vote
on memorializing the resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is presented
for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt a resolution. The vote on any
such resolution shall be deemed to be a memorializing of the action of
the Board having jurisdiction and not to be an action of the Board;
§ 198-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-9
1:360
§ 198-10. Submission of application; required documents.
The following documents shall be required for an application for
development to be declared complete for review. If the application is to the
Zoning Officer, three copies or sets of the application forms, plans, maps
and all supplemental data which comprise the main body of the application
shall accompany the initial submission. If the application is to be submitted
to the Planning Board, a minimum of 15 copies or sets of the application
form (Subsection A) plan(s) and map(s) (Subsection B) and supplemental
data (Subsection C), which comprise the main body of the application, shall
accompany the initial submission. Other documents or items required in
this section shall be furnished in singular form.
however, the date of the granting or denial of approval shall constitute
the date of the decision for the purposes of mailings, filings and
publications required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10. If the Board fails to adopt
a resolution as specified, any interested party may so apply to the
Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the Board
to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time.
I. Additional Board hearings. The Board having jurisdiction pursuant to
this chapter may adopt, according to its bylaws, rules and regulations
concerning multiple hearings on applications for development. The
decision of the Board to require a work session or preliminary hearing
shall be binding upon the applicant. All actions of the Board shall be
completed in accordance with the schedule established by the
Municipal Land Use Law106 and this chapter.
A. Application form. A completed application for development shall
include the specified form or forms with each and every item on the
form filled in or noted as "none" or "not applicable," when appropriate.
B. Maps and plans. One or more plans or maps showing the full details of
the existing site conditions and proposed development as required in
§ 198-11, Subdivision plat details, and § 198-12, Site plan details,
according to the type of application being submitted, shall be
submitted.
C. Supplemental data. Data submitted in written or graphic form deemed
necessary either by the applicant or the Board in order to augment the
application for development to explain the full particulars and
operating characteristics of the proposed development shall be
submitted.
D. Tax certificate. A certification of taxes paid shall be furnished by the
applicant.
E. Proof of public notification. If required by the form and type of
application, the applicant shall prepare and furnish proof of publication,
106. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-10
1:361
§ 198-11. Subdivision plat details.
Application and review procedures for subdivision approval shall be in
accord with§ 198-10, Submission of application; required documents, of
this chapter. The following details shall be required with any subdivision
application:
legal advertisement, public notifications (property owners within 200
feet), etc., as specified in the Municipal Land Use Law. (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12).
F. Applicants seeking variances for single-family and duplex dwellings
shall provide architectural elevations and preliminary floor plans.
G. Any information required on any checklist applicable to the application;
said checklists are attached to this chapter as an appendix thereto.107
H. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that the applicant is
entitled to approval of the application. The Planning Board or any
committee thereof may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error and submission of additional
information not specified in this chapter or any revisions in the
accompanying documents as are reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for the
approval of the application have been met.
A. Minor subdivision plat application. The minor subdivision plat shall be
prepared to scale to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet
and include the information listed below. The scale of the minor
subdivision plat shall be not less than 50 feet to the inch except where
otherwise directed by the Planning Board.
(1) A key map showing the location of the property in relation to all
properties adjoining the tract and existing streets which border the
tract, including street names.
(2) The name of the owners of the property being subdivided.
(3) The name of the prospective subdivider, if different than the owner.
(4) The Tax Map lot and block numbers of the tract and adjoining
properties, including the names, addresses and locations of all
buildings and structures of the property owners within 200 feet of
the entire property being subdivided.
(5) A schedule indicating the acreage of the total tract, zoning district
and minimum requirements for each lot in that district as
compared to each proposed lot, setback and yard information for
the district.
107. Editor's Note: Said checklists are on file in the City offices.
§ 198-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-11
1:362
(6) The existing conditions of the property being subdivided, including
a map of property prepared and certified by a New Jersey licensed
professional land surveyor.
(7) All subdivision applications, whether major or minor, shall include a
legal description and plot the development restriction line on the
plot submitted. No development shall be permitted oceanward of
the development restriction line.
B. Sketch plat application, major subdivision. The sketch plat shall be
prepared to scale to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet
and include the information listed below. The scale of the sketch map
shall be not less than 100 feet to the inch except where otherwise
directed by the Planning Board.
(1) A key map showing the location of the property in relation to the
entire tract and in relation to all properties adjoining the tract and
existing streets which intersect or border the tract, including street
names.
(2) The names of the owners of the property being subdivided.
(3) The name of the prospective developer, if different than the owner.
(4) The Tax Map lot and block numbers of the tract and adjoining
properties, including the names, addresses and locations of all
buildings and structures of the property owners within 200 feet of
the entire property being subdivided.
(5) The location of all adjoining streets, noting improvements,
dedication and dimensions.
(6) Proposed connections to sanitary sewer and water supply systems
with an estimate of increase in capacities required.
(7) Proposed stormwater management plan showing the collection and
discharge of surface water drainage, including improvements and
connections to the existing system.
(8) The location of environmentally sensitive areas either on or
adjoining the tract being subdivided, including coastal waterways,
wetlands and beach and dune systems.
(9) The location, configuration and dimension of the proposed lots,
streets and public use areas.
(10) Topographic information in sufficient detail to determine the
natural slope of the tract.
(11) Proof that streets in the subdivision are of sufficient width and
suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate prospective
traffic and to provide access for firefighters and emergency
equipment.
§ 198-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-11
1:363
C. Preliminary subdivision plat applications, major subdivision. The
preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet. The following information
shall be shown on standard size sheets:
(1) A key map showing the location of the property in relation to the
entire tract and in relation to all properties adjoining the tract and
existing streets which intersect or border the tract, including street
names.
(2) The names and addresses of the owners of the property.
(3) The name and address of the prospective developer, if different
than the owner.
(4) The name, address, license number and signature of the
professional responsible for the preparation of the plat.
(5) The Tax Map lot and block numbers of the tract and adjoining
properties.
(6) The project name, date of preparation, graphic scale and reference
meridian.
(7) The location of environmentally sensitive areas either on or
adjoining the tract being subdivided, including coastal waterways,
wetlands and beach and dune systems.
(8) The acreage of tract to be subdivided to the nearest tenth of an
acre.
(9) A zoning schedule or statement that the proposed subdivision is in
compliance with the requirements of the applicable zoning district.
Each lot shall be drawn to scale showing size, configuration, area,
frontage, depth and setbacks.
(10) Existing one-foot interval contours based on National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) as determined and certified by a New
Jersey licensed professional land surveyor.
(11) Existing conditions of the property being subdivided, including a
map of property prepared and certified by a New Jersey licensed
professional land surveyor.
(12) Preliminary grading and drainage plan showing the locations of all
existing and proposed drainage pipes, swales, channels, retentionrecharge
basins and other items pertinent to drainage, including
the proposed grading contours at one-foot intervals. In addition,
the drainage plan shall show the following:
(a) Drainage area plan outlining the approximate areas
contributing to each inlet.
§ 198-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-11
1:364
(b) Pipe sizes and type, invert elevations, grades and direction of
flow.
(c) Profiles and cross sections.
(d) Direction and flow of all surface waters.
(e) Drainage calculations prepared in accordance with § 198-72,
Stormwater management.
(13) Preliminary center-line profiles showing proposed drainage flow,
all existing and proposed finished roadway grades, pipe sizes,
types, inverts and connections.
(14) Preliminary utility plan showing both proposed and existing
locations of sanitary sewers, water systems and natural gas,
electric, telephone and cable systems in relation to the proposed lot
layout and street system.
(15) Proof that streets in the subdivision are of sufficient width and of
suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate prospective
traffic and provide access for firefighting and emergency
equipment.
(16) Steps to insure the protection and conservation of soil from erosion
by wind or water or from excavation or grading.
D. Final subdivision plat application, major subdivision (applies to
Planning Board and Zoning Board). The final plat shall be clearly and
legibly drawn or reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals
50 feet in compliance with the Map Filing Law of the State of New
Jersey (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). The following information shall be
shown on standard size sheets:
(1) All information submitted for preliminary review as revised,
corrected or modified during prior public hearings.
(2) The following certifications shall be on the plan for execution by the
Board Secretary, Municipal Engineer and Tax Assessor's office:
Approved by resolution of the Planning Board of
the City of Brigantine on _______________________
_________________________________________________
Planning Board
Chairman
Date
_________________________________________________
Planning Board
Secretary
Date
§ 198-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-11
1:365
I hereby certify that I have carefully examined this plat and find it
in conformance with the New Jersey Map Filing Law and the
ordinances and requirements of the City of Brigantine applicable
thereto.
_________________________________________________
Municipal Engineer Date
Certificate of taxes paid
_________________________________________________
Tax Assessor Date
(3) The following certifications shall be included on the final plat for
execution by the owner and surveyor of record:
I hereby certify that I am the record holder of title to the lands
delineated on the plat and consent to the filing thereof.
_________________________________________________
Owner Date
I hereby certify that this map and survey have been made under
my supervision and comply with provisions of the New Jersey
Map Filing Law.
I do further certify that the monuments as designated and shown
herein have been set or will be set as shown.
_________________________________________________
Surveyor License No. Date
E. Final subdivision documentation, major subdivision. Final approval of
any subdivision shall require the following documentation to be
furnished to the Board and its experts for their review and acceptance:
(1) Proof of taxes paid as of the quarter within which final approval is
given.
(2) An engineer's cost estimate, showing a breakdown of costs for all
on site and off-site improvements required to construct the
development as well as site improvements such as lighting,
landscaping, recreational facilities, streets and utilities.
(3) A maintenance guaranty and/or performance bond for those
improvements as specified in § 198-14, Required improvements, in
the form and amount, approved, in writing, by the City Engineer
and City Manager. Said guaranties and/or bonds shall be placed on
file in the City Manager's office.
(4) Inspection fees as required by the City Engineer's office and
specified in the design engineer's cost estimate. Said fees shall be
posted with the City Manager's office.
§ 198-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-11
1:366
§ 198-12. Site plan details.
Application and review procedures for site plan approval shall be in accord
with § 198-10, Submission of application; required documents, of this
chapter. The following details shall be required with any site plan
application:
(5) In the case of a subdivision proposing a homeowners' association,
documentation regarding the operating methods and procedures
shall be submitted for the Board's review.
(6) Proof of all required applications to other agencies having
jurisdiction having been made by the applicant.
(7) Additional documentation that is required by the Planning Board as
a condition of approval.
A. Minor site plan application. The minor site plan shall be prepared to
scale to enable the entire project to be shown on one sheet and shall
include the information listed below. The scale of the minor site plan
shall be not less than 50 feet to the inch except where otherwise
directed by the Planning Board.
(1) A key map showing the location of the property in relation to all
properties adjoining the tract and existing streets which border the
tract, including street names.
(2) The names of the owners of the property to be developed.
(3) The name of the prospective developer if different than the owners.
(4) The Tax Map lot and block numbers of the tract and adjoining
properties, including the names and addresses of the property
owners within 200 feet of the entire property being subdivided.
(5) A schedule indicating the acreage of the total tract, zoning district
and minimum setback, yard and coverage requirements applicable
to the project.
(6) Existing conditions of the property being developed, including a
map of property prepared and certified by a New Jersey licensed
professional land surveyor.
(7) Plan of proposed site improvements, including parking areas,
landscaping, utility connections, lighting, sign information and
noise control in accordance with existing municipal ordinances.
(8) Architectural floor plan(s) showing building configuration and
layout.
B. Preliminary site plan application, major. The site plat shall be prepared
to scale to enable the entire site to be shown on one sheet and shall
include the information listed below. The scale of the site map shall be
§ 198-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-12
1:367
not less than 50 feet to the inch except where otherwise directed by the
Planning Board.
(1) A key map showing the location of the property in relation to the
entire tract and in relation to all properties adjoining the tract and
existing streets which intersect or border the tract, including street
names.
(2) The names of the owners of the property to be developed.
(3) The name of the prospective developer, if different than the owner.
(4) The name, address and license number of the professional
responsible for the preparation of the plat.
(5) The Tax Map lot and block numbers of the tract and adjoining
properties, including the names and addresses of the property
owners within 200 feet of the entire property being developed.
(6) The project name, date of preparation, graphic scale and reference
meridian.
(7) The location of all adjoining streets, noting improvements,
dedication and dimensions.
(8) Proposed connections to sanitary sewer and water supply systems,
with an estimate of increase in capacities required.
(9) The location of environmentally sensitive areas either on or
adjoining the tract being subdivided, including coastal waterways,
wetlands and beach and dune systems.
(10) The location, configuration, use, design and height of each building
or structure proposed for construction.
(11) Existing topographic information showing one-foot contour
intervals based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as
determined and certified by a professional land surveyor licensed
to practice in the State of New Jersey.
(12) A schedule indicating the acreage of the total tract, zoning district
and minimum setback, yard and coverage requirements applicable
to the project; if residential, quantities and data for the following:
the total number and type of dwelling units, site coverage, density,
open space, parking and recreational area breakdown, description
of nonresidential use areas proposed (area, use, building type, etc.)
and ownership structure; if commercial, quantitative data for the
following: gross leasable area, use area breakdown, off-street
parking schedule, open space, buffering and screening areas.
(13) The location of existing buildings and structures on adjoining
properties, indicating configuration, use, height and distance from
the property line of the area to be developed.
§ 198-12 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-12
1:368
(14) The locations and dimensions of driveways and aisles for off-street
parking and loading areas, including parking space arrangement,
capacity and type.
(15) A grading and drainage plan showing the locations of all existing
and proposed drainage pipes, swales, channels, retention-recharge
basins and other items pertinent to drainage, including the
proposed grading contours at one-foot intervals. In addition, the
drainage plan shall show the following:
(a) Drainage area plan outlining the approximate areas
contributing to each inlet.
(b) Pipe sizes and types, invert elevations, grades and direction of
flow.
(c) Profiles and cross sections.
(d) Direction and flow of all surface waters.
(e) Drainage calculations prepared in accordance with § 198-72,
Stormwater management.
(16) The center-line profiles of any proposed streets, driveways or
aisles, showing drainage flow; all existing and proposed finished
grades of all streets, driveways, aisles, parking and loading areas;
and pipe sizes, types, inverts and connections.
(17) A utility plan showing both proposed and existing locations of
sanitary sewers, water systems and natural gas, electric, telephone
and cable systems in relation to the proposed buildings, structures
and circulation systems in the development.
(18) A profile of the proposed sanitary sewer system, if not shown with
the street center-line profiles.
(19) A landscaping plan showing the amount, size, and location of each
species being utilized, including material list and planting
specifications.
(20) A lighting plan showing location, type and quantity of each fixture
being utilized. The plan shall include either a detail of the
individual fixture or manufacturer's specification indicating pattern
of illumination, footcandles generated and energy consumption.
(21) A signing plan showing the location, type, area, and height of each
sign proposed. Specialized graphics and intended sign content
shall be clearly presented.
(22) Architectural plans showing front, side, rear elevations and floor
plans in sufficient detail to allow the Board to fully evaluate the
proposed buildings.
§ 198-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-12
1:369
(23) Supplemental data submitted in written or graphic form deemed
necessary either by the applicant or the Board in order to augment
the site plan to explain the full particulars and operating
characteristics of the proposed development.
(24) Proof that streets are sufficient width and suitable grade and
suitably located to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide
access for firefighting and emergency equipment.
C. Final site plan application. The final site plan shall be clearly and legibly
drawn or reproduced at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet.
The following information shall be shown on standard size sheets:
(1) All information submitted for preliminary review as revised,
corrected or modified during prior public hearings.
(2) In the case of a residential or commercial site plan proposing
condominium ownership or a homeowners' association,
documentation regarding the operating methods and procedures
shall be submitted for the Board's review.
(3) An engineer's cost estimate showing a breakdown of costs for all
off-site improvements required to construct the development, as
well as site improvements such as lighting, landscaping,
recreational facilities, internal streets and utilities. The items to be
included in this estimate shall be mutually determined by the Board
and its experts.
(4) The following certifications shall be on the plan for execution by the
Board Chairman, Board Secretary and Municipal Engineer:
Approved by resolution of the Planning Board of the City of
Brigantine on________________________
_________________________________________________
Planning Board Chairman Date
_________________________________________________
Planning Board Secretary Date
I have reviewed this site plan and find it to be in conformance
with the Municipal Land Use Ordinance of the City of Brigantine
as well as meeting the conditions and requirements imposed by
the Planning Board.
_________________________________________________
Municipal Engineer Date
D. Final site plan documentation. Final approval of any site plan shall
require the following documentation to be furnished to the Board and
its experts for their review and acceptance:
(1) Proof of taxes paid to the current quarter within which final
approval is given.
§ 198-12 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-12
1:370
§ 198-13. Review procedures.
Upon an application coming before the Board, the Board shall first
determine that the application is complete. If incomplete, the Board shall
proceed in accord with § 198-9F, Additional data required. If complete, the
Board shall consider the matter in accord with the following subsections:
(2) A maintenance guaranty and/or performance bond for those
improvements as specified in § 198-14, Required improvements, in
the form and amount, approved, in writing, by the City Engineer
and City Manager. Said guaranties and/or bonds shall be placed on
file in the City Manager's office.
(3) Inspection fees as required by the City Engineer's office and
specified in the design engineer's cost estimate. Said fees shall be
posted within the City Manager's office.
(4) Additional documentation that is required by the Planning Board as
a condition of approval.
A. Application for minor subdivision approval shall be made to the
Planning Board. Application for minor subdivisions as defined in this
chapter shall not be subject to public hearing. Approval or denial of a
minor subdivision shall occur within 45 days from the date this
application is declared to be complete, or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision
shall expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval, unless
within such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the
provisions of the Map Filing Law108 or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the Atlantic
County Clerk, the Brigantine City Tax Assessor and the Brigantine City
Engineer, in accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-47). Copies filed with the Tax Assessor must show proof of filing
with the County Clerk.
B. Application for minor site plan approval. Applications for minor site
plans as defined in this chapter shall not be subject to a public hearing.
Approval or denial of a minor site plan shall occur within 45 days from
the date this application is declared to be complete, or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Approval of a
minor site plan shall expire one year from the date of Planning Board
approval, unless a building permit has been issued within that time.
C. Application for preliminary major subdivision approval. Preliminary
applications for major subdivisions shall be subject to a public hearing
after notice properly given by the applicant as provided by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12, and preliminary approval shall be granted or denied within
95 days from the date an application is determined to be complete, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
108. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 198-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-13
1:371
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
preliminary approval of the subdivision plat, and a certificate from the
Secretary as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued
on request of the applicant.
(1) In the event that preliminary approval of a subdivision is denied
because of failure to comply with municipal development
regulations, a notation to that effect, together with the signature of
the Planning Board, shall be placed on the plat, and reasons for the
denial shall be stated in the denial resolution.
(2) Preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall be granted by
resolution which shall set forth any conditions that must be met,
including required performance guaranties, and plat changes that
must be made prior to final approval. A notation indicating
preliminary approval shall be placed on each plat, said notation to
clearly state that preliminary approval does not authorize
recording.
(3) Preliminary approval of a subdivision plat shall confer upon the
developer all rights set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49).
D. Application for preliminary site plan approval. Preliminary applications
for major site plans shall be subject to a public hearing after notice
properly given by the applicant as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12, and
preliminary approval shall be granted or denied within 95 days from the
date an application is determined to be complete, or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant. Otherwise, the Planning
Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval of the site
plan, and a certificate from the Secretary as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
(1) In the event that preliminary approval of a site plan is denied
because of failure to comply with municipal development
regulations, a notation to that effect, together with the signature of
the Planning Board, shall be placed on the plan, and reasons for the
denial shall be stated in the denial resolution.
(2) Preliminary approval of a major site plan shall be granted by
resolution which shall set forth any conditions that must be met,
including required performance guaranties, and plan changes that
must be made prior to final approval. A notation indicating
preliminary approval shall be placed on each plan, said notation to
clearly state that preliminary approval does not authorize issuance
of a building permit.
(3) Preliminary approval of a site plan shall confer upon the developer
all rights set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49).
E. Final approval of site plans and major subdivisions.
§ 198-13 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-13
1:372
(1) Final approval of a major subdivision or site plan shall be granted
only after all requirements and conditions imposed at the time of
preliminary approval have been complied with.
(2) An application for final approval shall be granted or denied within
45 days from the date it is determined to be complete or within
such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted
final approval, and a certificate of the Planning Board Secretary as
to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant.
(3) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless, within such period, the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the County Clerk. The
Planning Board, for good cause shown, may extend the period for
recording for an additional period, not to exceed 190 days from the
signing of the plat.
(4) Final approval of a major site plan shall expire one year from the
date of Planning Board approval, unless a building permit has been
issued within that time.
(5) Final approval of a major subdivision or site plan shall confer upon
the developer all rights set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-52.
F. Application for variance. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise ancillary powers before the granting of a variance, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the application within 95
days after submission by the developer of a complete application as
provided in § 198-9 of this chapter or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application, and a certificate of the Secretary as to the failure of the
Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant.
G. Application for informal review. A developer may request an informal
review or preapplication conference of either a site plan or subdivision
application from the Planning Board to be scheduled for a regular
meeting. This request shall be processed in the same manner as a
formal application with the following exceptions:
(1) No determination of completeness will be made; however, the
applicant should meet the minimum detail requirements for a
sketch plat or plan.
(2) The Planning Board and its experts shall not be bound by any
comment, suggestion or review of informal application.
(3) No formal action or decision shall be made by the Planning Board.
§ 198-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-13
1:373
§ 198-14. Required improvements.
Prior to the granting of final approval of an application for development
and the issuance of signed plans for development, the developer, applicant,
owner or his agent shall have installed or shall have furnished a
performance guaranty in the form required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, in an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation of the improvements
listed below. When posting a performance guaranty, written approval of the
design engineer's cost estimate shall be given by the City Engineer to the
Board prior to acceptance and execution of the final plans. The required
improvements shall be as follows:
H. Application for informal review; change of use. When a change of use
is requested in any commercial zone and no variances are required, an
informal review process shall occur by a committee comprised of
Planning Board members (not to exceed 50% of the full Board
membership) and Planning Board professionals, as selected by the
Board. The application for informal review for change of use shall be as
set forth in the appendix attached to this chapter.109 Whenever said
proposed use is a less intense use than the current use at the property,
said proposed use shall be allowed without the necessity of a formal
Board hearing or notice.
A. Streets. All streets shall be improved to the standards as specified in
Article X, Design of Streets, including curbs, gutters and sidewalks
along both sides of the street.
B. Public utilities. Sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drainage systems
and other utilities shall be installed as approved by the City Engineer on
the final plan.
C. Off-street parking areas. Off-street parking areas, loading and
unloading areas and driveways shall be constructed in accordance with
the final plan as approved by the City Engineer.
D. Street lighting. Street lighting shall be installed at locations required by
The City of Brigantine and shall be of the type supplied by the local
public utility company to provide proper and safe illumination of streets
and public spaces.
E. Landscaping. Landscaping elements as proposed and approved shall be
installed, in the appropriate season, in accordance with Article XII,
Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
F. Street signs. Street signs of the type and design approved by the Board
having jurisdiction shall be installed at all street intersections.
G. Property monuments. Monuments of the size and shape specified in the
Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) shall be placed in
accordance with said statute.
109. Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-13 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-14
1:374
§ 198-15. Appeals, applications and additional powers.
H. Noise control. A noise control plan shall be prepared in accordance with
the existing ordinances in the City of Brigantine.110
I. Engineering inspection fees. The amount of construction inspection
fees for the required site improvements listed in the performance
guaranty shall be determined by the City Engineer. These fees shall be
specified, in writing, posted with, either in cash or its equivalent, the
City Manager.
A. Appeals from the decision of the Zoning Officer. Appeals to the
Brigantine Planning Board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by
an officer, department, board or bureau of the City of Brigantine
affected by any decision of the Zoning Officer. Each appeal shall be
taken within the twenty-day period prescribed by the Municipal Land
Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72) by filing a notice of appeal with the Board
Secretary and a copy with the officer from whom the appeal was taken,
together with six copies of said notice with the Zoning Officer. Said
notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for said appeal. The Zoning
Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. If said
appeal is filed, by any person or entity other then the original applicant,
notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, must be given to the
original applicant within 10 days of filing of such appeal.
B. (Reserved)
C. Power to stay action. An appeal stays all proceedings in the furtherance
of the action in respect of which the decision appealed from was made,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason
of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by an order of the Superior Court of New Jersey
upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due
cause shown.
D. Power to reverse or modify decisions. In exercising the abovementioned
powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from, and make such other requirement, decision or determination as
ought to be made, and, to that end, have all the powers of the Zoning
Officer from whom the appeal was taken.
E. (Reserved)
F. (Reserved)
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Noise.
§ 198-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-15
1:375
§ 198-16. (Reserved)
§ 198-17. Fees; reimbursement of experts; general requirements.
G. Time for decision.
(1) The Board shall render its decision not later than 120 days after the
date:
(a) An appeal is taken from the decision of a Zoning Officer; or
(b) The submission of a complete application for development to
the Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72b.
(2) Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the
applicant.
A. The fees as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II,
Fees Schedule, shall be paid by the applicant and shall accompany each
application for development and/or request for certificate or permit.
B. Reimbursement of Board experts.
(1) The costs of the professional services of the Planning Board's
experts, including but not limited to the Municipal Engineer, City
Planner and Board Solicitor, required to review the application for
development are included in the fee schedule found in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule. The applicant
shall be billed by the Secretary of the Board or the City Clerk for
the services of the Board Solicitor, according to the invoice
submitted by the expert, and according to the following fee
schedule:
(a) City Engineer.
[1] The fees for the professional services of the City Engineer
to review the applicant's plans and submitted materials in
connection with an application for development before the
Planning Board are as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
[2] When a subdivision is submitted, a lot shall be considered
as a unit. When a combination of site plan and subdivision
is submitted, the fee shall be based on the greater number
of units, either lots or units. Commercial site plans shall
require a review fee as set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
(b) City Planner.
§ 198-15 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-17
1:376
[1] Fees for services provided by the City Planner are as set
forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II,
Fees Schedule.
[2] When a subdivision is submitted, a lot shall be considered
as a unit. When a combination site plan and subdivision is
submitted, the fee shall be based on the greater number of
units, either lots or units. Commercial site plans shall
require a review fee as set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
(2) No payment shall be made directly to the Board experts. All
payments shall be made payable to the escrow account established
by the respective Board. Payment shall be released upon the
written authorization of both the Chairman and Secretary of the
Board having jurisdiction.
(3) The City Engineer's inspection fees for all improvements that must
conform to municipal requirements shall be based on 5% of the
construction cost used for the performance bond. This inspection
fee shall be paid as described in Subsection B(2).
C. General requirements.
(1) The applicant shall be deemed by the submission of the application
for development to have agreed to pay all reasonable costs
incurred for the professional review of the application.
(2) All fees and review costs shall be paid in full to the City of
Brigantine at the time the application is filed. No application for
development shall be deemed complete, scheduled for hearing or
heard by the Board until the established fees are submitted.
(3) The applicant will be responsible for the preparation, composition
and publication of all legal notices and advertisements required by
this chapter, except for the notice of final decisions which will be
prepared for publication by the Board Secretary. The applicant
shall be assessed a fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, for the notice of final
decision.
(4) In the event that the applicant requires a record of the proceedings
transcribed by a certified shorthand reporter, in addition to the
normal electronic recording procedures furnished by the Board,
then he shall be directly responsible for those costs incurred.
Payments shall be made directly to the reporting service.
(5) Inspection fees must be paid in full prior to the issuance of the
notice of final decision.
§ 198-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-18
1:377
§ 198-18. Zone districts enumerated.
For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Brigantine is divided into the
following zoning districts:
§ 198-19. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of all zone districts shall be on a certified map attached
to and made a part of this chapter and known as the "Zoning Map of the
City of Brigantine," as may be amended. Said map and all notations and
references thereon are hereby incorporated into and declared to be a part
of this chapter.111
§ 198-20. Determination of boundary lines.
Where uncertainty exists as to any of the zone district boundaries as shown
on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Residential Zone Districts:
R-1 Residential, One-Family
R-2 Residential, One-Family
R-2A Residential, One-Family
R-3 Residential, One-Family
R-3B Residential, One-Family
R-4 Residential, One-Family, Hotel/Motel
R-5 Residential, Townhouse
R-6 Residential, One-Family, Townhouse
R-7 Residential, One-Family, Hotel/Motel, Townhouse
R-8 Residential, One-Family, Marina
B. Business Zone Districts:
B-1 General Business
B-1A Central Business
B-2 Marine Residential
B-3 Shopping Center
B-6 North End Business
C. Conservation Zone Districts:
C-1 Conservation - Beach, Dunes and Wetlands
C-2 Conservation - Golf Course/Country Club
111. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-18 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-20
1:378
§ 198-21. Extension of districts upon vacation of public ways.
Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action
of the governing body, the zoning district shall be automatically extended to
the center line of the vacated public way, and all areas in question shall be
subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended district.
§ 198-22. Undersized lots of record.
A. Street center lines. Zone district boundary lines are intended to follow
the center lines of streets or lot lines as they exist on the Tax Map or
plats of record at the time of passage of this chapter, unless such zone
district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning
Map.
B. Property lines. Where such boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and
where they approximately follow lot lines and where they do not scale
more than 20 feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to
be such boundaries unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. Scaled dimensions. In unsubdivided land and where a zone boundary
divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated
by dimensions shown on the map, shall be determined by the use of the
scale appearing thereon.
D. Water's edge location.
(1) With regard to the zone district boundary lines of the zones
bordering the Atlantic Ocean, the southern or waterward boundary
of the district shall be coincident with the mean high-water line of
the Atlantic Ocean as determined at the time of the adoption of this
chapter.
(2) With regard to the zone district boundary lines of the zones
bordering St. George's Thorofare, Bonita Tideway, Bonita Cove,
Obe's Thorofare, Steelman's Bay, Wading Thorofare or any other
body of water within the City limits, the northern or waterward
boundary of the district shall be coincident with either mean highwater
line of the specific waterway or the exterior pierhead or
bulkhead lines as established by the State of New Jersey or exterior
line of a tidelands grant, lease or license as issued by the Tidelands
Resource Council or its predecessor.
E. Developments within the development restriction line. The
development restriction line as shown on the Zoning Map of the City of
Brigantine and defined herein shall be adhered to whenever and
wherever an application for development is made to the Planning
Board.
A. Criteria of use.
§ 198-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-22
1:379
§ 198-23. Height restrictions; exceptions.
(1) Any unimproved noncontiguous undersized lots located in a
residential zone district may be utilized for single-family
development only. To be so used, the minimum area requirements
for such a lot shall be 3,600 square feet and 40 feet of lot frontage.
The use of lots having less than 40 feet of frontage is subject to the
review and approval of the Planning Board. Any unimproved,
undersized lot of record shall merge with a contiguous lot owned by
the same person or entity and shall not be allowed to be developed
as an independent separate lot.
(2) Unimproved, noncontiguous undersized lots may be utilized as
stated herein provided that all other regulations prescribed for the
zone by this chapter are complied with, and subject to the
provisions of Subsection B.
B. Overall exception of existing noncontiguous undersized unimproved
lots. Any noncontiguous, undersized unimproved lots which are not of
the required minimum area or width may be used in the zone in which
they are located, as set forth in the filed map, if such lots were included
in a subdivision plat which was either duly approved under the
Municipal Planning Act of 1953 prior to the effective date of this
chapter but subsequent to January 1, 1954, or which subdivision was
granted tentative approval under said Act prior to the effective date of
this chapter and granted final approval after the effective date of this
chapter but within three years from the date of such tentative approval,
and provided further that the final subdivision plat, in either instance,
shall have been duly recorded in the Atlantic County Clerk's office
within the time required by law.
A. Structures excepted from height restrictions.
(1) The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to spires,
belfries, cupolas and domes for church construction, not used for
human occupancy and not a residential structure.
(2) Further exceptions, include chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water
tanks, similar features and necessary mechanical appurtenances
usually carried above the roof level. Such features, however, shall
be erected only to such height as is necessary to accomplish the
purpose they are to serve, and not to exceed four feet above the
allowed height.
(3) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to prevent the
erection above the building height limit of a parapet wall or cornice
for ornament (and without windows) extending above such height
limit not more than thirty (30) inches.
B. Required increases in yard setbacks. Public and quasi-public buildings,
schools, churches and other similar permitted uses shall increase the
§ 198-22 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-23
1:380
§ 198-24. Continuance of nonconforming uses and structures.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the lawful use of the land
or buildings existing at the date of the adoption of this chapter may be
continued, although such use or building does not conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in which such land and
buildings is located; provided, however, that:
§ 198-25. Abandonment of nonconforming uses.
§ 198-26. Restoration of nonconforming uses.
front, rear and side yards by one foot for each foot by which such
buildings exceed the height limit herein established for such zone in
which it is located.
C. Maximum height restriction. In no case shall any building have a height
greater than 35 feet unless explicitly permitted in the schedules of this
chapter.
A. No nonconforming lot shall be further reduced in size.
B. A nonconforming use or building shall not be expanded enlarged,
extended or increased in any fashion which would increase or extend
such nonconformity without receiving a variance from the Board.
C. There shall be an exception to the above limitation on expansion of
nonconforming uses for duplexes in zones that, prior to this subsection,
permitted said duplex. An expansion of 20% of the square footage of the
duplex, up to 300 square feet per unit, shall be permitted. This square
footage is noncumulative and is designed to allow a modernization of
many of the older duplex units within the City. This section does not
permit the expansion of nonconforming townhouse units or other
multifamily dwelling units. No additional bedrooms are permitted to be
added as part of the structure's expansion and the 300 square feet or
20% will be considered a maximum expansion for the life of the
structure. [Added 7-16-2008 by Ord. No. 16-2008]
A. Criteria for abandonment. A nonconforming use shall be adjudged
abandoned pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55-1 et
seq.), as amended.
B. Conformity required. A nonconforming use that has been abandoned
shall not thereafter be reinstated, and the structure shall not be
reoccupied, except in conformance with this chapter and the Municipal
Land Use Law.
A. Any nonconforming use or structure existing at the time of the passage
of this chapter may be continued upon the lot or in the structure so
occupied and any such structure may be restored or repaired in the
event of partial destruction thereof.
§ 198-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-26
1:381
§ 198-27. Reversion of nonconforming uses.
No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back into a nonconforming use.
§ 198-28. District boundary line changes.
Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer
an area from one district to another district of a different classification,
the provisions of this section shall also apply to any nonconforming uses
existing therein or created thereby.
§ 198-29. Extension of use area.
An approved use on a property located in a B-1 Zone may be extended into
a R-4, R-3 or R-2 Zone, provided that the following criteria shall be met:
B. Upon total destruction of any such nonconforming use or structure on a
parcel, such nonconforming use or structures shall cease and all
applicable regulations as set forth in this chapter shall apply
concerning any new proposed use or structure on such parcel. (See
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)
C. The initial determination as to whether a preexisting nonconforming
use or structure is partially or totally destroyed shall be made by the
Zoning Officer. The landowner shall have the right to appeal any such
determination to the Planning Board within the City of Brigantine.
[Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
D. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any wall, floor or roof declared unsafe by
the Building Inspector.
A. Maximum depth of extension. An extended use area shall not extend
into the other zone by a depth of more than 50 feet as measured from
the zone boundary.
B. Encroachment by a building. No principal building shall be permitted to
extend into the extension of the use area. Accessory buildings shall be
permitted to extend no more than 50% of the depth of property within
the adjoining zone area.
C. Restriction of use. That remaining portion of the extended use area of
the property in the adjoining zone shall be used only for parking, openair
recreation, landscaping and other open-air uses related to the
principal use.
D. Contiguous lands. The extended area shall be contiguous to the
property of the principal use.
§ 198-26 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-29
1:382
§ 198-30. Development on lands delineated by development
restriction line.
§ 198-31. Construction on oceanfront and bayfront property.
E. Buffer strips. Extended use areas shall be screened and separated from
the properties in the less restrictive zone in accordance with Article XII,
Landscaping Buffers and Open Space Design.
F. Public nuisance. The Planning Board shall determine if there is
adequate control, shielding or buffering of light, noise and glare
emanating from the extended use area.
A. No application for development shall be accepted by the Planning
Board where any portion of the proposed development, or any of the
proposed improvements are designed to lie within, on or over, or
encroach in any manner upon the lands delineated by the development
restriction line, unless prior permission for such application has been
given, in the form of a resolution, by the City Council of the City of
Brigantine. Any such application will be subject to a public hearing.
Development on the ocean side of the dune restriction line is strictly
prohibited and should be permitted only in extraordinary
circumstances.
B. Nothing in this section shall prevent the Planning Board from imposing
as a condition to any approval sought the requirement that beach
access structures be developed in conformity with § 198-58 of this
chapter. If, in the judgment of the Board, such structures should
originate from dedicated City street ends or lie upon publicly owned
property, then approval of the application may be conditioned upon the
grant of approval for the beach access structures by the Brigantine City
Council.
A. Foundation piling shall be required in the oceanfront area as defined in
Brigantine City ordinances. All accessory structures in the oceanfront
area shall be constructed on pile foundations.
B. All bayfront lots and parcels (waterfront and wetlands) shall be
bulkheaded in compliance with Brigantine ordinances.112
C. No zoning permit shall issue and no construction shall occur on a lot
with an existing bulkhead, unless said bulkhead meets the standards
set forth in the ordinance requiring maintenance of bulkheads within
the City of Brigantine.
D. All bayfront lots and parcels (waterfront and wetlands) shall be
bulkheaded prior to construction of any building or structure on said
lots or parcels.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Bulkheads.
§ 198-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-32
1:383
§ 198-32. Approved projects of record.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or
designated use of a building for which a building permit has been issued
and the construction of which shall have been diligently pursued within 12
months of the date of such permit.
§ 198-32 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-32
1:384
ARTICLE IV
Word Usage and Definitions
§ 198-33. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, all words used in the present tense include
the future tense. All words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and all words in the singular number include the plural number,
unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The word
"shall" is mandatory. The word "used" includes "designed, intended or
arranged to be used." A "person" includes a corporation, a partnership
and an incorporated association of persons such as a club, or any other
type of business entity. A "building" includes a "structure"; a "building" or
"structure" includes any part thereof.
§ 198-34. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or structure, the
use which is incidental to that of the principal building or structure and
is located on the same lot. Any container or portion thereof which was
or could have been used for transportation of goods or merchandise shall
be prohibited and not allowed as an accessory building or structure. The
maximum floor area for an accessory building or structure shall not exceed
432 square feet (18 feet by 24 feet). Building height for accessory structures
shall be measured from the average center line grade in front of the subject
property. Accessory structures smaller than 120 square feet shall be set
back a minimum of three feet from all side and rear property lines and shall
be no higher than 12 feet. Accessory structures from 120 square feet to 432
square feet shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all side and rear
property lines and shall be limited to 15 feet in height. Accessory structures
on corner lots shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the front lot line
and shall have a minimum distance of five feet to the principle structure on
the property.[Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
ACCESSORY USE — A use of land or of a building or portion thereof
customarily incidental to and subordinate to the principal use of the land or
building and located on the same lot with the principal use.
ACCRETION —
ADDITION — An extension or increase in floor area or height of a building
or structure.
NATURAL ACCRETION — The buildup of land, solely by action of the
forces of nature on a beach by deposition of waterborne or airborne
material.
A.
ARTIFICIAL ACCRETION — A similar buildup of land by reason of an
act of man, such as the accretion formed by a groin, breakwater or
beachfill, deposited by mechanical means.
B.
§ 198-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:385
ADJOINING LOT OR LAND — A lot or parcel of land which shares all or part
of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land.
AIR CONDITIONER — A mechanical unit used for cooling of a residential
or commercial structure. Air conditioners shall be allowed within all zones
and may be placed at any location on a lot except for front yards as long as
same are in conformity with all other regulations as set forth in this chapter,
including but not limited to setback requirements, and also must comply
with the Uniform Commercial Code, BOCA Code and Mechanical Codes.
AISLE — The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces.
ALLEY — A service way providing a secondary means of access to the
abutting property and not intended for general circulation.
ALTERATION OF A BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A change in the
supporting members of a building or structure, an addition, diminution or
conversion of a building or a part thereof, or removal of a building from one
location to another.
AMUSEMENT CENTER — Any business that provides as its primary
business the use of coin-operated amusement machines and devices
operated by the means of the insertion of a coin, token or similar object
for the purpose of amusement or skill.[Added 12-19-2007 by Ord. No.
25-2007]
AMUSEMENT FACILITY — An outdoor area or structure, open to the public,
which contains amusement game devices and other entertainment devices.
AMUSEMENT GAME DEVICE — A coin-operated machine or device which,
whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, shall be ready for play by the
insertion of a coin or token and may be operated by the public for use as a
game, entertainment or amusement. It shall include devices such as pinball
machines and any device which utilizes a video tube to reproduce symbolic
figures and lines intended to be representative of real games or activities.
APARTMENT UNIT — One or more rooms with private bath, sleeping
facilities and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained
dwelling unit in a building containing more than one dwelling unit.
APPLICANT — A person submitting an application for development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by this chapter for the approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned residential development, conditional
use, zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to
§ 198-10, Submission of application; required documents.
APPROVED PLAN — A plan which has been granted final approval by the
appropriate approving authority.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Brigantine Planning Board, or Zoning
Officer, as charged with the review and approval of plans and applications
under the terms of this chapter, or other County or state department or
agency when applicable.
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:386
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top story and the roof
rafters.
AUTOMOBILE BODY AND REPAIR SHOPS — Any building, premises and
land in which or upon which a business, service or industry involving
the maintenance, servicing, repair or painting of vehicles is conducted or
rendered.
AUTOMOBILE SALES FACILITY — The use of any building, land area or
other premises for the display and sale of new or used motor vehicles and
including any warranty repair work and other repair service conducted as
an accessory use.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any building, land area or other
premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail
dispensing or sale of vehicular fuels, and including as an accessory use the
sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar accessories.
BACKSHORE — That zone of the beach lying between the foreshore and
dune area and normally acted upon by waves only during severe storms,
especially when combined with exceptionally high waters.
BAR — An establishment used primarily for the sale or dispensing of liquor
by the drink to the general public and where food or packaged liquors may
be served or sold as an accessory use.
BARRIER-FREE DESIGN — The design of facilities to eliminate physical
obstacles and barriers that inhibit the mobility of the physically impaired.
BARRIER ISLAND — A land form consisting of single or multiple elongated
sand ridges, dunes, vegetated zones and marsh terraces rising above mean
sea level, running generally parallel to the coast, but separated from it by
lagoons or inlets.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Refer to BOCA Construction Code.
BEACH — The zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from
the low-water line to the place where there is a marked change in the
material of physiographical form, i.e., dune or bulkhead. The beach includes
both the foreshore and backshore.
BEACH ACCESS PLAN — An augmented version of the Dune and Shore
Management Plan delineating existing vehicular and pedestrian accessways
to be either maintained or closed or restored. This plan also delineates dune
fields to be restored or reconstructed due to elevation, location, vegetative
condition or absence of dune formation.
BEDROOM — A private room planned and intended for sleeping, which
has a minimum area of 70 square feet, separated from other rooms and
accessible to a bathroom without crossing another bedroom.
BERM — A nearly horizontal part of the beach, or backshore formed by the
accretion of material from wave action.
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:387
BREAKAWAY WALLS — Any wall, whether solid or lattice, and whether
constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable
building materials which are not part of the structural support of the
building and so designed to breakaway, under abnormally high tides or
wave action, without damage to the structural integrity of the building on
which the walls are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by
floodwaters. (See Construction Code for better guidelines).
BUFFER STRIP — Landscaped area used to visually separate one use from
another or to shield or block noise, lights or other nuisances, being free
from heating, air-conditioning and ventilating equipment.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to from a construction adapted to
permanent temporary or continuous occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A subordinate structure on the same lot as the
principal building or use occupied or devoted to a use incidental to the
principal use.
BUILDING, AREA — The total of the areas of outside dimensions on a
horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal building and all
accessory buildings; exclusive of unroofed porches and decks, patios and
steps attached or connected to the building.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The total building area expressed as a percentage
of the total lot area.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the base federal flood
elevation (FIRM Maps) as adopted by the City of Brigantine for various
flood zones (A8=10.0 etc.) as measured from two feet above the federal
flood elevation to the top of the highest part of the roof, regardless of the
roof structural configuration. All roof structures on the third story of any
building shall have a minimum 6/12 roof pitch or slope. This means that for
every six inches of vertical rise a minimum of 12 inches of horizontal run
shall be provided.[Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
BUILDING PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING SETBACK — Refer to "setback."
BULKHEAD — A retaining wall, or other structure which has received all
prior permits and approvals constructed along a body of water for the
purpose of stabilizing the existing water’s edge or state approved wetlands
line and behind which fill is placed.[Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No.
25-2007]
CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY — A cable television company as defined in
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-3.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A government acquisition of real property or
major construction project.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM — A proposed timetable or schedule
of all future capital improvements to be carried out during a specific period
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:388
and listed in order of priority, together with cost estimates and the
anticipated means of financing each project.
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT — An establishment which by the design of
physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures permits or
encourages the purchase of prepared ready-to-eat foods intended primarily
to be consumed off the premises, and where the consumption of food in
automobiles is not permitted or not encouraged.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by the Construction
Official allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that
the owner of the structure or use has certified that the structure has
been constructed in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and
ordinances.
CHANGE OF USE — Any use which substantially differs from the previous
use of building or land; refers to zoning uses only.
CHURCH — A building or structure which, by design and construction, is
primarily intended for the conducting of organized religious services and
accessory uses associated therewith.
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for the
movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such means as
streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways, pipes and conduits
and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, stations,
warehouses and other storage building or transshipment points.
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — The area of Brigantine Island subject
to high-velocity waters and hurricane wave wash designated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) as Zones V1-V30.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district only
upon showing that such use, in a specified location, will comply with all
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as
specified in this chapter and authorized by the Planning Board.
CONDOMINIUM — A form of ownership whereby a building, or group of
buildings, containing units which are owned individually, and the structure,
common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional,
undivided basis. NOTE: If change of ownership of a building or structure
to condominium ownership effectively changes the use of said building or
structure, all necessary approvals must be obtained from the Board prior to
such change of ownership/use.
CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATION — The community association which
administers and maintains the common property and common elements of
the condominium.
CONSERVATION AREA — Zone districts designated by the City of
Brigantine which, by their physical nature, are of basic and vital importance
to the preservation and protection of the environment of Brigantine Island
and require special review and consideration for the development thereof.
CONTIGUOUS LOT — Refer to "adjoining lot or land."
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:389
COUNTRY CLUB — A land area and buildings containing recreational
facilities, clubhouse, golf course and usual accessory uses open only to
members and their guests for a membership fee.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — The Official Master Plan for the physical
development of Atlantic County.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DECK — A roofless, permeable structure, that is not a porch, projecting
from the front, side or rear wall of a building. No decks which in any
way extend from or attach to a peaked roof shall be permitted in any
zone.[Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
DENSITY — The total number of permitted dwelling units or housing
structures per gross area of land to be developed.
DEVELOPABLE LAND — Lands situate in the residential, commercial and
conservation zoning districts, excluding lands designated as either
tidelands or wetlands by the State of New Jersey and/or the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any
land included in a proposed development, including the holder of an option
or contract to purchase, or other persons having enforceable proprietary
interests in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction,conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure; any mining,
excavation, landfill or any use or change in the use of any building or other
structure, or land or extension of use of land.
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any development not a minor development.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — Any development involving three or fewer lots
or involving a land area of less than 10,000 square feet and not requiring
the extension of any new streets or infrastructure or other municipal
services.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Means a zoning ordinance, subdivision
ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other municipal
regulation of the use and development of land or amendment thereto
adopted and filed pursuant to this Act.
DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTION LINE — An artificial boundary delineating
the various districts and area contained within the Dune Management
Districts and the developed community. This line shows the extreme limit
of allowable development fronting the Atlantic Ocean prior to intrusion into
existing dune areas and beaches.
DISCHARGE — The volume of water flowing past a given point per unit of
time and measured in cubic feet per second.
DRAINAGE — Surface water runoff or the removal of surface water or of
groundwater from land by drains, grading or other means which include
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:390
runoff controls to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after
construction or development and includes inducing water recharge into
the ground where practical to lessen nonpoint pollution and the means
necessary for water supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of
flooding.
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Pipes, swales, natural features and man-made
improvements designed to carry drainage.
DREDGING — An excavation method for deepening coastal waters by
removing solids from the bottom.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A building or portion thereof where food and/
or beverages are sold in a form ready for consumption and where all or a
significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed to take
place outside the confines of the building, often in an automobile on the site.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling or other structure.
DRUGSTORE — A retail trade establishment where the primary business is
the filling of medical prescriptions and the sale of drugs, medical devices
and supplies and nonprescription medicines but where nonmedical
products are sold as well.
DUNE —
Systems or formations of drifting windblown material, usually sand,
which are upland of the beach and oriented roughly parallel to the
shoreline. These formations may be natural or of human origin and are
usually stabilized with natural vegetation. The term "dune" includes all
areas between the inland limits of the beach and the dune development
restriction line.
A.
Dunes include the following subcategories:
FORE DUNE or PRIMARY DUNES — The front dunes immediately
behind the backshore of the beach.
(1)
PRIMARY BACK DUNES, SECONDARY AND TERTIARY DUNES —
The backslope of the fore dune, extending from the dune ridges
immediately landward of the fore dune to the dune development
restriction line.
(2)
MIGRATING DUNES — Dunes which have changed location
through the course of time.
(3)
ARTIFICIAL DUNES — Accumulations of sediment in dune form
which have been built by any nonnatural process such as
bulldozing or sandfencing.
(4)
STABILIZED DUNES — Dunes maintained in a fixed location by
artificial means.
(5)
B.
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:391
DUNE AREA — The area actually or normally occupied by dunes; for
purposes of this chapter, it shall be construed to include the beach and dune
area between the ocean and the development restriction line.
DUNE CREST — The point or line where the dune's highest elevation is
located.
DUNE LINE — A row of dunes, which may blend in with a berm or berms,
which blend in with each other, run roughly parallel to the ocean and
serve as a protective barrier against coastal storms. Refer to "development
restriction line."
DUNE MAINTENANCE DISTRICT — An artificial area delineating dune
fields containing two or more dune ridges and having a greater width than
400 feet. The dune surface is stabilized by natural vegetation.
DUNE, NATURAL — A dune created by natural forces or one that has
developed the contours, vegetation, root systems, etc., characteristics of
dunes so created.
DUNE, RECONSTRUCTION DISTRICT — An artificial area delineating a
discontinuous dune field or beach area without dunes, poorly developed,
unstable and less than 75 feet in width.
DUNE, RESTORATION DISTRICT — An artificial area delineating a dune
field containing one or more dune ridges which may be discontinuous
between the beach and upland structures and having a width of less than
300 feet.
DUPLEX — Refer to "dwelling, two-family."
DWELLING — A structure or portion thereof which is used exclusively for
human habitation.
DWELLING, ATTACHED — A one-family dwelling attached to one or more
one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A one-family dwelling which is not attached to
any other dwelling by any means.
DWELLING, GARDEN APARTMENT — A multifamily dwelling containing
five or more one-family apartment units in a single building of two to three
stories.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling containing more than two onefamily
dwelling units, including all dwellings which are attached or
detached, or defined as garden apartments, quadraplexes, townhouses,
triplexes or two-family dwellings.
DWELLING, QUADRAPLEX — Four attached one-family dwellings in one
structure in which each unit has two open-space exposures and shares one
or two walls or floors with adjoining unit or units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling which is designed
for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space
or yards and which is not attached to any other building by any means.
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:392
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least
three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the
outside, no unit is located over another unit and each unit is separated from
any other unit by one or more common fire-resistant walls.
DWELLING, TRIPLEX — A dwelling containing three dwelling units, each of
which has direct access to the outside or to a common hall.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A structure on a single lot containing two
independent dwelling units. If the Zoning Officer or Construction Official
makes a determination that a dwelling is a two-family dwelling (duplex), the
burden is on the applicant, occupant or owner to prove otherwise and obtain
all necessary variances, permits, and other approvals.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit consisting of not more
than one habitable room equipped for sleeping, together with kitchen or
kitchenette and sanitary facilities.
EROSION — The wearing away of land by the action of natural forces. On a
beach, the carrying away of beach materials by wave action, tidal currents,
littoral currents or by deflation.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance of underground, surface or overhead electrical, gas, water
and sewerage transmission and collection systems and the equipment and
appurtenances necessary for such systems to furnish an adequate level of
public service.
EXISTING USE — The use of a lot or structure at the time of the enactment
of this chapter.
FAMILY — One or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit whose relationship is of a permanent and
distinctly domestic nature.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment whose principal business is
the sale of prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a
ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant or off
the premises.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land, not including
retaining walls or bulkheads.
FINAL APPROVAL — The last official action of the Brigantine Planning
Board taken on a development plan which has been given preliminary
approval, after all conditions and requirements have been met and the
required improvements have been installed or guaranties properly posted
for their installation, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such
guaranties.
FLOATING HOME — Refer to "houseboat."
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:393
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Lands located in the floodplain as established
by the Federal Insurance Administration subject to one-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year.
FLOOD HAZARD DESIGN ELEVATION — The highest elevation, expressed
in feet above mean sea level, of the level of floodwaters which delineates
the flood hazard area.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
hazards and the risk-premium zones applicable to the City of Brigantine.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report in which the Federal
Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the Flood
Hazard Boundary Floodway Map, or the water surface of the base flood.
FORESHORE — The part of the shore lying between the crest of the
seaward berm and ordinary low-water mark and that is typically traversed
by the uprush and backrush of the waves.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION — A group of people formally organized for a
common interest, usually cultural, religious or entertainment, with regular
meetings and formal written membership requirements.
FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street.
FRONT LOT LINE — Refer to "lot line, front."
FRONT YARD — Refer to "yard, front."
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith
before burial or cremation.
GARAGE — Deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used or intended
to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles. All garages shall have a
flat, shed, or peaked roof. No detached garage shall be used for residential
purposes or living quarters.
GARAGE, COMMUNITY — A garage used exclusively for the parking and
storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents of nearby or
attached dwelling units and their guests, which is not operated as a
commercial enterprise and is not available to the general public, and which
is owned, leased or cooperatively operated by such residents.
GARAGE, PRIVATE CUSTOMER AND EMPLOYEE — A structure which is
a nonretail commercial establishment, building or use and is primarily for
the parking and storage of vehicles operated by the customers, visitors and
employees of such building and which is not available to the general public.
GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A structure which is accessory to
a residential building and which is used for the parking and storage of
vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof, and which is not
a separate commercial enterprise available to the general public. No
detached garage shall be used for residential purposes or living purposes.
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:394
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building, or portion thereof, other than a private
customer and employee garage or private residential garage, used primarily
for the parking and storage of vehicles and available to the general public.
GARDEN APARTMENT — Refer to "dwelling, garden apartment."
GENERAL PUBLIC — Any and all individuals without any prior
qualifications.
GLARE — The effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance,
discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility.
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land for playing golf, improved with trees,
greens, fairways and hazards and which may include clubhouses and
shelters.
GRADE — The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface.
GRADE, FINISHED — The final elevation of the ground surface after
development.
GRADE, NATURAL — The elevation of the ground surface in its natural
state, before man-made alterations.
GRADING — Any stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling of earth or land,
including the land in its cut or filled condition.
GROIN — A shore protection device built (usually perpendicular to the
shoreline) to trap littoral drift or reduce erosion of the shore. A "groin field
or system" is a series of groins acting together to protect a section of beach.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area for which the tenant pays
rent and which is designed for the tenant's occupancy and exclusive use.
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room in a dwelling unit other than a kitchen,
bathroom, closet, pantry, hallway, storage space or garage recreation room.
HOME OCCUPATION — An activity carried out for gain by a resident,
conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit and subject to
the same limitations as designated in § 198-122.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — A community association, other than a
condominium association, which is organized in a development in which
individual owners share common interests in open space or facilities.
HOME PROFESSIONAL SERVICE — The home office of a recognized
traditional profession, such as medical doctor, minister, architect,
professional engineer, planner or attorney and subject to the same
limitations as designated in § 198-122. A home professional service shall be
an activity carried out by a resident conducted as an accessory use in the
resident's dwelling.
HOTEL — A facility offering transient guest lodging accommodations to
the general public and providing additional services such as restaurants,
meeting rooms and recreational facilities. A hotel does not provide for direct
access to the guest rooms except through the main lobby and through a
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:395
common system of halls, stairs and accesses. A hotel must also have a main
desk and central area for pickup and dropoff of luggage and patrons.
HOTEL EFFICIENCY ROOM — Refer to "motel efficiency room."
HOTEL ROOM — Refer to "motel room."
HOTEL SUITE UNIT — Refer to "motel suite unit."
HOUSEBOAT — A boat designed and utilized primarily as a dwelling unit
as opposed to traditional marine uses such as commercial and sport fishing,
water sports and navigational activities.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material which reduces and prevents
absorption of stormwater into previously undeveloped land. Block or brick
pavers shall be considered impervious under this chapter.[Amended
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
INTERTIDAL AREA — The land area between high and low tide, also called
a "beach."
ISOLATED LOT — An undeveloped substandard lot in separated ownership
from surrounding property.
JETTY — A structure extending into a body of water and designed to prevent
shoaling of a channel by littoral materials and to direct and confine a stream
or tidal flow.
LANDSCAPING — The addition of trees, plant and other natural and
decorative features to land.
LAUNDROMAT — An establishment providing washing and drying
machines on the premises for rental use to the general public for family
laundering purposes.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth used for the loading or
unloading of commercial vehicles.
LODGE — The place where members of a local chapter of an association
hold their meetings and the local chapter itself.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat,
subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the limit of the lot lines of a
lot, excluding any street rights-of-way or lands beyond the bulkhead.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting upon two or more streets
at their intersection.
LOT COVERAGE — Refer to "site coverage."
LOT DEPTH — The mean distance measured from the front lot line to the
rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured at the street
right-of-way line.
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:396
LOT FRONTAGE, CORNER LOT — On corner lots with a curve or an arc
separating the two frontages, the lot frontage shall be measured along
each street line to an extension of intersecting street lines. (Point of
intersection)[Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
LOT FRONTAGE, PRIMARY — The primary lot frontage on a corner lot
shall be the smaller of the two frontages or in the case of equal frontages,
that frontage that exists along the more heavily traveled street.[Added
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot which divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or any other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-of-way.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line or, in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lot, a line 10
feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance
from the front lot line. On bayfront lots, the bulkhead will be considered the
rear lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than the front and rear lot line.
LOT, MINIMUM AREA — The smallest lot area established by this chapter
on which a use or structure may be located in a particular district.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot
measured at right angles to its depth along a straight line parallel to the
front lot at the minimum required building setback line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be required by the
City of Brigantine to assure that necessary improvements will function as
required for specific period of time.
MARINA, COMMERCIAL — A facility for storing, servicing, fueling,
berthing and securing of pleasure boats and which may include eating and
retail facilities for owners, crews and guests.[Amended 12-19-2007 by
Ord. No. 25-2007]
MARINA, PRIVATE CLUB/YACHT CLUB — A private facility for storing,
launching, rental and berthing of boats and which may include a clubhouse,
bar and recreational facilities.
MARINE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — A facility for the storing and berthing
of pleasure boats restricted to the use of the owner or lessor of the dwelling
adjoining the facility as the principal use.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals
for the development of the municipality as set forth in and adopted pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MEAN HIGH-WATER LINE — The line formed by the intersection of the
tidal plain of mean high tide with the shore.
MEAN SEA LEVEL — Includes the term "sea level" and refers to the 1929
sea level datum as established by the United States Coast and Geodetic
Survey.
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:397
MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT (MUD) — The development of a tract of land
or building or structure with two or more different uses such as, but not
limited to, residential, office, retail, public or entertainment, in a compact
urban form.
MOTEL — An establishment providing transient guest accommodations
containing five (5) or more rooms with at least 25% of all rooms having
direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the
main lobby of the principal building and having a main desk and lobby.
MOTEL EFFICIENCY ROOM OR UNIT — A habitable living facility made
available for transient guest accommodations consisting of not more than
one complete sleeping room with attached bath and with a kitchen or eating
facility installed.
MOTEL ROOM — A habitable living facility made available for transient
guest accommodations consisting of not more than one sleeping room with
attached bath and without kitchen facilities.
MOTEL SUITE UNIT — A habitable living facility available for transient
guests accommodations with facilities or amenities in addition to a sleeping
room and bath facilities such additional facilities consisting of living room
or lounge area, kitchen and eating facilities. The access to said unit shall be
through one access door only; if other rooms of the suite have direct access
to hallways, they will be counted as separate motel units.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Brigantine as governed by the City
government and its duly appointed representatives.
NATURAL VEGETATION — Indigenous or native vegetation, including such
plants as beach grass (Ammophilia brevigulata), dusty miller (Artemisia
stelleriana), hudsonia (Hudsonia tomentosa), sea rocket (Cakile endentula),
seaside goldenrod (Solidago sempervirens), bayberry (Myrica pennsylvania)
or beach plum (Prunus maritima), which normally grow or may be planted
on the slopes of dunes or behind them.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area and/or dimensions of or location
which fails to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign which is nonconforming because it
does not conform to all standards of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A structure or building
which fails to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which fails to conform to the
present requirements of the zoning district.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building used primarily for conducting the affairs
of a business, profession, service or government. A factory or other such
industrial use is not an office building.
OFF-SITE TRADESMAN — Members of the building trades or lawn
maintenance professions who operate a business which includes
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:398
bookkeeping and the receipt of mail from the residential home of said offsite
tradesman.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Land within or related to a development, not
individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and
intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the
development and may include such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate.
OPEN SPACE RATIO — Total area of open space divided by the total site
area in which the open space is located.
OWNER — An individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest to seek development of
land.
PARKING AREA — Any public or private land area designed and used for
parking motor vehicles, including parking lots, garages, private driveways
and legally designated areas of public streets.
PARKING LOT — An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and
improved, for temporary storage of motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — A space for the parking of a motor vehicle within a
public or private parking area.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET — A temporary storage area for a motor
vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle and which is not located
on a dedicated street right-of-way.
PARTY WALL — A common shared wall between two separate structures,
buildings or dwelling units.
PATIOS — Patios or decks 12 inches above grade shall be considered part of
the principle building and shall meet all setback requirements thereof. Up
to six-foot wide landing as part of the steps less than 12 inches above grade
is permitted within setback.[Added 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Security, submitted to the City of
Brigantine pursuant to N.J.A.S. 40:55D-53, in favor of the City of Brigantine,
alone, in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation of the
improvements as are deemed necessary by an application for development.
The performance guaranty must be in the form acceptable to the Municipal
Attorney and/or Engineer and should consist of either a performance bond
issued by a bonding entity or agency or an approved letter of credit, which
is not limited as to scope or time of execution thereon.
PERMITTED USE — Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:399
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that permits full or partial absorption
of stormwater into previously unimproved land.
PIERHEAD LINE — A line established by the State of New Jersey beyond
which no structure may extend into tidal waters.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size, as specified by ordinance, to be planned, developed,
operated and maintained as a single entity containing one or more
structures to accommodate commercial or office uses, or both, and
appurtenant common areas and other uses incidental to the predominant
use as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum contiguous size,
as specified by ordinance, to be planned and developed as a single entity
containing one or more residential clusters or planned unit residential
developments and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial or
industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential
uses as shall be specified.
PLANNING BOARD — The duly designated body appointed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
PLAT FINAL — The final map of all or a portion of a subdivision or site plan
which is presented to the proper review authority for final approval.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — A preliminary map indicating the proposed layout
of the subdivision or site plan which is submitted to the proper review
authority for consideration and preliminary approval.
PORCH — An open area usually roofed which may be screened, which is
attached to, and has direct access to and from a building.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. prior to final approval after specific elements of a
development plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and the
applicant.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of any lot.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession such as a medical doctor, minister, architect, professional
engineer, planner or attorney.
PUBLIC AREAS — Parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities and open
space, including the beach and dune system, schools and other institutional
buildings and structures, all of which are available to the general public.
RECREATION FACILITY — A place designed and equipped for the conduct
of sports, leisure-time activities and other customary and usual recreational
activities.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per gross acre of
residential land area including streets, easements and open space portions
of a development.
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:400
RESTAURANT — An establishment where food and drink is prepared for
and offered and sold to the general public which food and drink is consumed
primarily within the principal building.[Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No.
25-2007]
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility at which, or in which, food
or drink is offered or prepared for retail sale or for service with or without
charge on or off the premises or elsewhere.
RETAIL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Establishments providing services,
as opposed to products, to the general public.
RETAIL TRADE ESTABLISHMENT — Establishment engaged in selling
goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household
consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
RETAINING WALL — A structure constructed at or along a substantial
change in grade to maintain the difference of elevation on either side.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The lines forming the boundaries of any strip
of land dedicated and intended to be occupied by a street, electric
transmission line, water main, sanitary or stormwater sewers or other
similar uses.
RIPARIAN LANDS — Lands now or formerly flowed by tidal waters either
owned, controlled or under the jurisdiction of the State of New Jersey as
mapped by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
ROOF, FLAT — A roof that is not pitched. A roof shall be considered to
be flat unless it has a minimum pitch or slope of 3/12, that is for every
three inches of vertical increase, there is 12 inches of horizontal change. A
roof with less pitch or slope than that will be considered a flat roof.[Added
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
SAND FENCE — A form of barricade established in a line or pattern
along the backshore or within the dune field for the express purpose of
accumulating sand to aid the formation of dunes. The sand fence shall be a
picket-type, i.e. a commercial type of lightweight wooden fencing, four feet
in height, held together by wire and secured by posts. Alternate forms of
barricades may be utilized only with the approval of the City Engineer.
SEASONAL DWELLING — A dwelling unit that lacks one or more of the
basic amenities or utilities required for all-year or all-weather occupancy.
SEASONAL STRUCTURE — A temporary covering erected over a
recreational amenity such as swimming pool or tennis court, for the purpose
of extending its use to cold-weather months or inclement conditions.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING — Multifamily housing specifically designed
for the elderly.
SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing services for
individuals, business or government establishments and other
organizations, including hotels and other lodging places, establishments
providing personal, business, repair and amusement services, health, legal,
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:401
engineering, and other professional services, educational institutions,
membership organizations and other miscellaneous services.
SERVICE STATION — See "automobile service station."
SETBACK — The distance between the street right-of-way line or property
line and a principal wall of the structure. Steps, porches, chimneys, bay
windows, etc., are not permitted in the setback area unless permitted by
other sections of this chapter.
SETBACK LINE — The line that is the required minimum distance from the
street right-of-way line or any other lot line that establishes the area within
which the principal structure must be erected or placed.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments planned,
constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee
parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from
customer access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the
elements.
SIDE YARD — See "yard, side."
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular shaped portion of land established at
street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted or allowed
to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of
motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or
attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business,
product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
SIGN, ADDRESS — A sign identifying the house number and/or name of the
occupant of a dwelling unit.
SIGN, ANIMATED OR MOVING — Any sign or part of a sign which changes
physical position by any movement or rotation or which gives the visual
impression of such movement or rotation.
SIGN, AREA — The entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface
and any framing, trim or molding, but not including the supporting
structure.
SIGN, AWNING, CANOPY OR MARQUEE — A sign that is mounted or
painted on, or attached to, an awning, canopy or marquee that is otherwise
permitted by ordinance.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located.
SIGN, BULLETIN BOARD — A sign which identifies an institution or
organization on the premises of which it is located and which contains the
name of the institution or organization, the names of individuals connected
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:402
with it and general announcements of events or activities occurring at the
institution or similar messages.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted, or to a commodity or service sold, offered or
manufactured or to an entertainment offered on the premises where the
sign is located.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary sign erected on the premises on
which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction,
indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects,
general contractor or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters,
sponsors and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with
respect to the structure or project.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — Signs limited to directional messages, principally
for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as "one-way", "entrance" and "exit."
SIGN, FLASHING — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which
exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means
whatsoever.
SIGN, FREESTANDING — Any nonmovable sign not affixed to a building.
SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL — A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and
in discharge of any governmental functions or required by law, ordinance or
other government regulation.
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or
supported by the ground independent of any other structure.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark or
other identifying symbol; address; or any combination of the name, symbol
and address of a building, business, development or establishment on the
premises where it is located.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting
either by lights in the sign or directed towards the sign.
SIGN, OFFICE — A sign identifying any office building or funeral home.
SIGN, ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL — A sign commonly associated with,
and not limited to, information and directions necessary or convenient
for visitors coming on the property, including signs marking entrances
and exits, parking areas, circulation direction, rest rooms and pickup and
delivery areas.
SIGN, PLACE — A sign identifying a community, residential development,
institutional or historic facility.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues in connection with any national, state or local election.
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building,
structure or the ground.
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:403
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from such
building.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the
premises, or a portion of the premises, on which the sign is located.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is
wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the
point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel,
gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas, fabric, plywood or other light material and designed or intended to
be displayed for a short period of time.
SIGN, WALL — A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or
structure in such manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure
for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and which does not project
more than 12 inches from such building or structure.
SIGN, WARNING — Signs limited to messages of warning, danger or
caution.
SITE COVERAGE — The portion of the site or lot that is covered by
buildings, structures or impervious surfaces, including, but not limited to,
driveways, parking areas, sidewalks and patios. Decks above the grade,
permitting the passage of stormwater runoff, building overhangs, eaves or
projections, shall not be included in the determination of site coverage.
SITE, PLAN, MAJOR — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan or
any site plan requiring variances.
SITE, PLAN, MINOR — The development plan for three or fewer dwelling
units or for one or more lots with an area of 10,000 square feet or less on
which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the development as
specified in§ 198-12, Site plan details, and with no variances being sought.
SLOPE, LEEWARD — The face or surface of the dune or berm going from
its crest or plateau away from the ocean.
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN — A plan that
indicates the necessary land treatment measures which will effectively
minimize soil erosion and sedimentation prepared in accordance with
regulations of the Cape-Atlantic Soil Conservation District.
SOLID WASTE — Unwanted or discarded material, including garbage, with
insufficient liquid content to be free flowing.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A program providing for the
collection, storage and disposal of solid waste, including recycling and
recovery.
SPECIAL AREA — An artificial area either overlaying or adjoining Dune
Management Districts delineating properties, either in public or private
ownership, warranting special consideration in either future development
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:404
or assessment. No development application shall be made for development
of privately owned property designated as, or claimed to be a special area,
without an application being first made to the City Council for a permit to
develop the same area.
SPECIALTY FOOD STORE — A retail trade establishment specializing in a
special type or class of foods such as an appetizer store, bakery, butcher,
delicatessen, fish, gourmet and similar foods.
STORAGE SHED — Accessory building used for items associated with
normal household use but not for storage of unusually dangerous or
flammable materials.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the upper surface of
a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above.
STREET — Any vehicular way which is:
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which collects traffic from local streets
and connects minor and major arterial streets.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street with a single common ingress and egress
and with a turnaround at the end.
STREET, DEAD-END — A street with a single common ingress and egress.
STREET, IMPROVED — A street constructed to the specifications of this
chapter and dedicated and accepted for public use by the City of Brigantine.
Streets existing and in public use prior to the enactment of this chapter
shall be considered improved subject to the review of the City Engineer.
STREET, INTERNAL ACCESS — A local street designed to provide access to
limited areas of a multifamily project.
STREET LINE — Refer to "right-of-way lines."
STREET, LOCAL — A street designed to provide vehicular access to abutting
properties and to discourage through traffic.
STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL — A street with access control, channelized
intersections and restricted parking, and which collects and distributes
traffic to and from minor arterials.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — A street running parallel to a major
arterial street limited to serving abutting properties.
A. An existing state, county or municipal roadway;
B. Shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law;
C. Approved by other official action; or
Shown on a plat duly filed and recorded with the Atlantic County Clerk
prior to the appointment of the Brigantine Planning Board and grant
to such Board of the power to review such plats; and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
include shoulders, gutters, curbs, parking areas and other areas within
such street line.
D.
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:405
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL — A street with signals at important
intersections and stop signs on the side streets, and which collects and
distributes traffic to and from collector streets.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in either the supporting
members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams and girders,
or in the dimensions or configurations of the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for use,
occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of the land or water.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, tracts or parcels of land for sale, development or lease. The
following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this
chapter if no new streets are created:
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR —
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any extension, repair, reconstruction or
other improvement of a property, the cost of which exceeds or is equal to
50% of the market value of the property before the improvement is started,
A. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure.
B.
Conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument.
C.
Contains not more than three lots fronting on an improved street with
adequate drainage.
A.
Includes no lands which were part of a minor subdivision approved
and filed within three years immediately preceding the subdivision
application.
B.
C. Does not require the construction or improvement of any street.
Does not require the extension of any municipal facilities or off-tract
improvements.
D.
Does not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the
parcel or of adjoining property.
E.
Does not conflict with any provision of the Master Plan, Official Map or
this chapter.113
F.
G. Does not involve a planned unit development.
113. Editor's Note: Said plan and map are on file in the City offices.
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:406
or if the property has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
SUPERMARKET — A retail trade establishment primarily selling food as
well as other convenience and household goods.
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, permanently constructed or
portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the
surrounding land, or an above-surface pool having a depth of more than 30
inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming.
THEATER — A building or portion thereof devoted to showing motion
pictures or for dramatic, musical or live performances.
TOWNHOUSE — Refer to "dwelling unit, townhouse."
UNIT, DWELLING — Refer to "dwelling unit."
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
USE, SPECIFIC DEFINITIONS — The following specific definitions of "use"
are contained elsewhere in this section: "accessory use," "conditional use,"
"existing use," institutional use," "permitted use" and "principal use."
VARIANCE — A departure from the strict interpretation and literal
requirements of this chapter, as granted by the Planning Board in
accordance with the Municipal Land Use Law (40:55D-1 et seq).
WETLANDS — Areas where the substrate is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances, do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions which are under the
jurisdiction of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to the Coastal Wetlands Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 through 9A-10).
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION — A machine that converts the kinetic
energy in the wind into a usable form. The wind energy conversion systems
(WECS) shall consist of the following elements:
YARD — An open space that lies between the principal or accessory
building(s) and the nearest lot line designated to be unobstructed and
A. A structural surface area for capturing the wind.
A shaft, gear, belt or coupling assembly for the conversion or the
rotational power of the attached surface area to an electrically or
mechanically usable form.
B.
A generator or alternator to convert the rotational energy into electrical
energy (for systems designed for producing electrical power).
C.
A type of tower or other structure upon which the above elements of
the WECS are mounted.
D.
§ 198-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-34
1:407
unoccupied from the ground upward except as may be specifically provided
in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A space extending the full width of the lot between any
building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building
at the closest point to the rear lot line.
YARD, SECONDARY FRONT — Applicable only to corner lots, a yard
abutting a street on said corner lot and does not meet the definition of
a primary front yard. The secondary front yard shall be that yard that
is along the longest of the two front lot lines or, in the case of lot lines
having the same length, the street that is considered to have less traffic
intensity.[Added 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
YARD, SIDE — A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the principal building and the side lot line measured perpendicular
from the side lot line to the closest point of the principal building.
YARD, REAR — A space extending across the full width of the lot between
the principal building and the rear lot line and measured perpendicular to
the building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person or entity designated by
the City of Brigantine and empowered to act pursuant to § 198-128, Zoning
Officer, of this chapter.
ZONING MAP — The map adopted by the City of Brigantine and included as
part of this chapter, delineating the boundaries of each zone district. 114
ZONING PERMIT — Document which is required by ordinance as a
condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installment of a
structure or building; and acknowledges that such use, structure or building
complies with the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Ordinance or a
variance therefrom duly authorized by the Board.
114. Editor's Note: Said map is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-34 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-34
1:408
ARTICLE V
Residential Zone Regulations
§ 198-35. Intent.
It is the intent of this article governing residential use to implement the
recommendations of the November 2001 Master Plan as set forth therein
and in §§ 198-2 and 198-2.1.
§ 198-36. Residential use matrix.
The following matrix and schedule provides a summary of the permitted
uses, accessory uses and conditional uses in residential districts throughout
the City of Brigantine. Uses not specifically set forth in this section are
considered prohibited and shall not be permitted in any residential district
unless otherwise set forth in this chapter, with the exception of municipal
uses, municipal facilities, and municipal recreational facilities which are
permitted to be placed by the Brigantine City Council in any zone.
Residential Use Matrix
Zone District
R-1 R-2 R-2A R-3 R-3B R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7 R-8
Permitted Uses
One-family
dwelling
P P P P P P N/A P P P
Threefamily
dwelling
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Four-family
dwelling
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Garden
apartment
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Townhouses N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A P P P N/A
Hotel/motel N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A P N/A N/A P N/A
Marinas N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A P
Accessory Uses
Garages,
private
residential
P P P P P P P P P P
Storage
sheds
P P P P P P P P P P
Fences P P P P P P P P P P
Signs P P P P P P P P P P
Public
utility
P P P P P P P P P P
§ 198-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-36
1:409
Residential Use Matrix
Zone District
R-1 R-2 R-2A R-3 R-3B R-4 R-5 R-6 R-7 R-8
Conditional Uses
Churches P P P P P P P P P P
Recreational
facilities
P P P P P P P P P P
Hospital P P P P P P P P P P
Public
utility
installation
P P P P P P P P P P
Parking lots N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Retail
service
establishments
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Restaurant/
bar
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Lodges N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Two-family
dwelling
N/A N/A N/A C C C N/A C N/A C
NOTES:
P = Permitted
N/A = Not permitted
C = Conditional
All uses not listed above are prohibited uses in the respective zones. The
prohibitions contained in this section are not all inclusive. Each use must
comply with any and all requirements as set forth in other sections of this
Municipal Land Use Ordinance and in the Municipal Land Use Law of the
State of New Jersey.115
§ 198-37. Two-family dwellings as conditional uses.
A. Two-family dwellings shall be permitted as conditional uses in the
following zones and must be granted conditional use approval from the
Planning Board of the City of Brigantine.
(1) R-3.
(2) R-3B.
(3) R-4.
115. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-36 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-37
1:410
§ 198-38. Schedule of Bulk Requirements.
(4) R-6.
(5) R-8.
(6) B-2.
B. The following conditions shall be applicable to all two-family dwellings
except as modified by § 198-37C below:
(1) Minimum lot frontage: 60 feet.
(2) Minimum lot depth: 90 feet.
(3) Minimum front yard depth: 20 feet.
(4) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(5) One side yard setback: 10 feet.
(6) Second side yard setback: 5 feet.
(7) Minimum lot area: 5,400 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(9) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(10) Maximum site coverage: 60%.
(11) All side yard and rear yard setbacks for accessory buildings: 3 feet.
(12) Maximum height of accessory buildings: 15 feet.
(13) Conformity with all other applicable requirements of this chapter
and the Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey116
including but not limited to all parking requirements.
(14) In its evaluation and review , The Planning Board shall consider the
impact of the use and structure upon the established character of
the surrounding neighborhood.
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the conditions set forth
above shall apply to two-family dwellings in the R-6 Zone with the
following modifications:
(1) Minimum lot area: 6,000 feet.
(2) Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
A. The Schedule of Bulk Requirements for the R-1 Residential District is as
follows: [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
116. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-38
1:411
R-1 Residential Zone Regulations Schedule Of Bulk
Requirements
Use Requirement
One-Family Dwellings
Minimum lot area (square feet) 6,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 60
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 20
Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 20
One side yard setback (feet) 10
Second side setback (feet) 5
Maximum height (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage 40%
Minimum site coverage 60%
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
Accessory structures with floor
area smaller than 120 square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
3
Maximum height (feet) 12
Accessory structures with floor
area of 120 square feet to 432
square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
5
Maximum height (feet) 15
Accessory structures on corner lots
shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the front line and shall
have a minimum distance of 5 feet
to the principal structure on the
property
NOTES:
(1) There shall be a minimum of 15 feet between buildings on
adjoining lots. Any applicant for a building permit shall submit a
survey or other documentation showing the home/building on
contiguous lots are at least 15 feet away from the proposed home/
building on the applicant's lot.
§ 198-38 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-38
1:412
§ 198-39. R-2 and R-2A Schedule of Bulk Requirements [Amended
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
(2) All dwellings in the R-1 District shall comply with all additional
requirements contained in this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law of the State of New Jersey,117 including any and all parking
requirements.
(3) With the exception of duplexes and bed-and-breakfast
establishments, conditional uses permitted in the R-1 Zone or any
residential zone will have the same bulk requirements as those set
forth for conditional uses in the B-1 Zone.
(4) For any single-family or duplex use in this zone there shall be no
more than three floors of dwelling space and the combined height of
all such dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed 35 feet.
The thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally pleasing
houses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The increase in
height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor to be added
to a dwelling. All dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to 28 feet in
height. Partial flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in height.
(5) On bayfront lots the rear yard setback for first floor decks may be
reduced to zero feet at the bulkhead. Any first floor deck which
extends to a bulkhead on bayfront lots must be attached to the
residential home which exists on said lot. No such deck shall be built
higher than elevation 11.6. Second or third floor rear yard decks may
extend to within 10 feet of a bulkhead. All rear yard decks must
comply with the side yard setbacks established in the zone. This
footnote shall be applicable to all bayfront decks within Brigantine.
A. The Schedule of Bulk Requirements for the R-2 Residential District is as
follows:
R-2 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
One-Family Dwellings
Minimum lot area (square feet) 4,500
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 50
Minimum lot depth (feet) 90
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 20
Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 20
One side setback (feet) 7
Second side setback (feet) 3
117. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-39
1:413
R-2 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
Maximum height (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage 40%
Maximum site coverage 60%
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
Accessory structures with floor
area smaller than 120 square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
3
Maximum height (feet) 12
Accessory structures with floor
area of 120 square feet to 432
square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
5
Maximum height (feet) 15
Accessory structures on corner lots
shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the front line and shall
have a minimum distance of 5 feet
to the principal structure on the
property
NOTES:
(1) On bayfront lots, the rear yard setback for first floor decks may be
reduced to zero feet at the bulkhead. The rear yard setback to the
building will remain 20 feet. Any first floor deck which extends to a
bulkhead on bayfront lots must be attached to the residential home
which exists on said lot. No such deck may be built higher than
elevation 11.6. Second and third floor rear yard decks may extend to
within 10 feet of a bulkhead. On lots with rear yards that abut the golf
course, the rear yard setback for first floor decks may be reduced to
10 feet and for second and third floor decks may be reduced to 15
feet. All rear yard decks must comply with the side yard setbacks as
established in the zone.
(2) All dwellings in the R-2 District shall comply with all additional
requirements contained in this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law of the State of New Jersey,118 including any and all parking
requirements.
118. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-39 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-39
1:414
(3) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet between buildings on
adjoining lots in the R-2 Zone. Any applicant for a building permit
shall have the responsibility to submit a survey or other
documentation showing the home/building on contiguous lots are at
least 10 feet away from the proposed home/building on the
applicant's lot.
(4) For any single-family or duplex use in this zone there shall be no
more than three floors of dwelling space and the combined height of
all such dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed 35 feet.
The thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally pleasing
houses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The increase in
height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor to be added
to a dwelling. All dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to 28 feet in
height. Partial flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in height.
B. The schedule of bulk requirements for the R-2A Residential District is
as follows:
R-2A Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
One-Family Dwellings
Minimum lot area (square feet) 5,400
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 60
Minimum lot depth (feet) 90
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 20
Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 20
One side setback (feet) 10
Second side setback (feet) 5
Maximum height (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage 40%
Maximum site coverage 60%
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
Accessory structures with floor
area smaller than 120 square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
3
Maximum height (feet) 12
Accessory structures with floor
area of 120 square feet to 432
square feet
§ 198-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-39
1:415
R-2A Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
5
Maximum height (feet) 15
Accessory structures on corner lots
shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the front line and shall
have a minimum distance of 5 feet
to the principal structure on the
property
NOTES:
(1) Where a lot abuts an alley, the rear yard setback may be reduced
to a minimum of 10 feet if all other bulk requirements are met. This
reduction acknowledges that a twenty-foot wide rear yard alley
provides the desired air, light and open space deemed appropriate by
the goals of this chapter.
(2) On bayfront lots, the rear yard setback for first floor decks may be
reduced to zero feet at the bulkhead. The rear yard setback to the
building shall remain 20 feet. Any first floor decks which extend to a
bulkhead on bayfront lots must be attached to the residential home
which exists on said lot. No such deck shall be built higher than
elevation 11.6. Second and third floor rear yard decks may extend to
within 10 feet of a bulkhead. All rear yard decks must comply with the
side yard setbacks established in the zone.
(3) All dwellings in the R-2 District shall comply with all additional
requirements contained in this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law of the State of New Jersey,119 including any and all parking
requirements.
(4) For any single-family or duplex use in this zone there shall be no
more than three floors of dwelling space and the combined height of
all such dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed 35 feet.
The thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally pleasing
houses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The increase in
height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor to be added
to a dwelling. All dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to 28 feet in
height. Partial flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in height.
119. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-39 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-39
1:416
§ 198-40. R-3 Schedule of Bulk Requirements.
(5) For any preexisting lots of record in the R-2A Zone that have less
than 60 feet of frontage and are not owned by the owner of a
contiguous lot, the side yard setbacks shall be seven feet on one side
and three feet on the other. There shall be a minimum of 10 feet
between dwellings on adjoining lots. Any applicant for a building
permit shall submit a survey or other documentation showing the
home/building on contiguous lots are at least 10 feet away from the
proposed home/ building on the applicant's lot.
A. The Schedule of Bulk Requirements for the R-3 Residential District is as
follows: [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
R-3 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
One-Family Dwellings
Minimum lot area (square feet) 3,600
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 40
Minimum lot depth (feet) 90
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 20
Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 20
One side yard setback (feet) 7
Second side yard setback (feet) 3
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage 40%
Maximum site coverage 60%
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
Accessory structures with floor
area smaller than 120 square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
3
Maximum height (feet) 12
Accessory structures with floor
area of 120 square feet to 432
square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
5
Maximum height (feet) 15
§ 198-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-40
1:417
§ 198-41. (Reserved)
§ 198-42. R-3 B Schedule of Bulk Requirements.
R-3 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
Accessory structures on corner lots
shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the front line and shall
have a minimum distance of 5 feet
to the principal structure on the
property
NOTES:
(1) Where a lot abuts an alley, the rear yard setback may be reduced
to a minimum of 10 feet if all other bulk requirements are met. This
reduction acknowledges that a twenty-foot wide rear yard alley
provides the desired air, light and open space deemed appropriate by
the goals of this chapter.
(2) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet between dwellings on
adjoining lots. Any applicant for a building permit shall submit a
survey or other documentation showing the home/building on
contiguous lots are at least 10 feet away from the proposed home/
building on the applicant's lot.
(3) All dwellings in the R-3 District shall comply with all additional
requirements contained in this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law of the State of New Jersey,120 including any and all parking
requirements.
(4) For any single-family or duplex use in this zone there shall be no
more than three floors of dwelling space and the combined height of
all such dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed 35 feet.
The thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally pleasing
houses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The increase in
height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor to be added
to a dwelling. All dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to 28 feet in
height. Partial flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in height.
(5) On bayfront lots, the rear yard setback for first floor decks may be
reduced to zero feet at the bulkhead. Any first floor deck which
extends to a bulkhead on bayfront lots must be attached to the
residential home which exists on said lot. No such deck shall be built
higher than elevation 11.6. Second and third floor rear yard decks
may extend to within 10 feet of a bulkhead. All rear yard decks must
comply with the side yard setbacks established in the zone.
120. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-40 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-42
1:418
A. The Schedule of Bulk Requirements for the R-3B Residential District is
as follows: [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
R-3B Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
One-Family Dwellings
Minimum lot area (square feet) 4,500
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 50
Minimum lot depth (feet) 90
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 20
Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 20
One side yard setback (feet) 7
Second side yard setback (feet) 3
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage 40%
Maximum site coverage 60%
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
Accessory structures with floor
area smaller than 120 square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
3
Maximum height (feet) 12
Accessory structures with floor
area of 120 square feet to 432
square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
5
Maximum height (feet) 15
Accessory structures on corner lots
shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the front line and shall
have a minimum distance of 5 feet
to the principal structure on the
property
§ 198-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-42
1:419
§ 198-43. R-4 Schedule of Bulk Requirements, Residential.
NOTES:
(1) The lot depth in the R-3B District along Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard abutting St. George's Thorofare may be reduced to a
minimum of 72 feet to meet the requirements of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection for the placement of
bulkheads. No two-family dwellings will be allowed on such lots that
have less than ninety-foot depth and all building, site coverage and
setback requirements shall apply regarding the same.
(2) Those lots in the R-3B District along Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard
abutting St. George's Thorofare shall be set back a minimum of 35
feet from the front lot line. The front yard shall be subject to a fifteenfoot-
wide easement to provide for a seventeen-foot-wide marginal
access road to serve these lots.
(3) The rear yard setback for those lots in the R-3B District along
Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard abutting St. George’s Thorofare may be
reduced to 10 feet as measured from the bulkhead. The rear yard
setback for first floor decks on bayfront lots may be reduced to zero
feet to the bulkhead if said first floor decks are connected to the
primary dwelling situate on said lot. No such deck shall be built
higher than elevation 11.6. Second and third floor rear yard decks
may extend to within 10 feet of a bulkhead. All rear yard decks must
comply with the side yard setbacks established in the zone.
(4) For any single-family or duplex use in this zone there shall be no
more than three floors of dwelling space and the combined height of
all such dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed 35 feet.
The thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally pleasing
houses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The increase in
height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor to be added
to a dwelling. All dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to 28 feet in
height. Partial flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in height.
(5) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet between dwellings on
adjoining lots. Any applicant for a building permit shall submit a
survey or other documentation showing the home/building on
contiguous lots are at least ten feet away from the proposed home/
building on the applicant's lot.
A. The Schedule of Bulk Regulations for the R-4 Residential Districts is as
follows: [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
R-4 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
One-Family Dwellings
Minimum lot area (square feet) 4,050
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 45
§ 198-42 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-43
1:420
R-4 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
Minimum lot depth (feet) 90
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Front yard setback (feet) 20
Rear yard setback (feet) 20
One side yard setback (feet) 7
Second side yard setback (feet) 3
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage 40%
Maximum site coverage 60%
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
Accessory structures with floor
area smaller than 120 square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
3
Maximum height (feet) 12
Accessory structures with floor
area of 120 square feet to 432
square feet
Side and year yard setbacks
(feet)
5
Maximum height (feet) 15
Accessory structures on corner lots
shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the front line and shall
have a minimum distance of 5 feet
to the principal structure on the
property
NOTES:
(1) Where a lot abuts an alley, the rear yard setback may be reduced
to a minimum of 10 feet if all other bulk requirements are met. This
reduction acknowledges that a twenty-foot wide rear yard alley
provides the desired air, light and open space deemed appropriate by
the goals of this chapter.
§ 198-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-43
1:421
§ 198-44. R-4 Schedule of Bulk Requirements, Hotel/Motel.
(2) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet between buildings on
adjoining lots. An applicant for a building permit shall submit a survey
or other documentation showing the home/building on contiguous lots
are at least ten feet away from the proposed home/building on the
applicant's lot.
(3) All dwellings in the R-4 District shall comply with all additional
requirements contained in this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law of the State of New Jersey,121 including any and all parking
requirements.
(4) For any single-family or duplex use in this zone there shall be no
more than three floors of dwelling space and the combined height of
all such dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed 35 feet.
The thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally pleasing
houses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The increase in
height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor to be added
to a dwelling. All dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to 28 feet in
height. Partial flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in height.
A. The Schedule of Bulk Requirements for the R-4 District, Hotels and
Motels, is as follows:
R-4 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
[ Hotel/Motel
Minimum lot area (square feet) 40,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 200
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback
(feet)
25
Minimum rear yard setback
(feet)
20
One side setback (feet) 20
Second side setback (feet) 20
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage 50%
Maximum site coverage 75%
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
121. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-43 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-44
1:422
§ 198-45. R-5 Schedule of Bulk Requirements.
R-4 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
All sides and rear setbacks
(feet)
15
Height (feet) 15
NOTES:
(1) Hotel/motels in the R-4 District shall comply with all additional
requirements contained in this chapter and the Municipal Land Use
Law of the State of New Jersey,122 including any and all parking
requirements.
(2) Hotel/motels as permitted in the R-4 District shall be subject to
the sections titled Commercial design standards, Design standards for
off-street parking, Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design,123
and any other applicable section of this chapter and the Municipal
Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey.124
A. The Schedule of Bulk Requirements for the R-5 Residential District is as
follows: [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
R-5 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
Townhouses
Minimum lot area (square feet) 174,240
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 250
Minimum lot depth (feet) 200
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 40
Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 40
One side setback (feet) 30
Second side setback (feet) 20
Maximum building height (feet) 35
Maximum building coverage 20%
Maximum site coverage 40%
122. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
123. Editor's Note: See Art. XIV, Commercial Use Design Standards, Art. XI, Off-Street Parking
and Art. XII, Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
124. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-45
1:423
§ 198-46. R-6 Schedule of Bulk Requirements.
R-5 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Use Requirement
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
All sides and rear setbacks
(feet)
30
Maximum height (feet) 20
NOTES:
(1) Townhouses as permitted in the R-5 District shall be subject to the
requirements of the section titled Multifamily design standards.125
(2) Townhouses as permitted in the R-5 District shall comply with all
additional requirements contained in this chapter and the Municipal
Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey,126 including any and all
parking requirements.
(3) Senior citizen housing will be permitted in the R-5 Zone.
(4) For any townhouse use in this zone there shall be no more than
three floors of dwelling space and the combined height of all such
dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed 35 feet. The
thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally pleasing
townhouses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The increase
in height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor to be
added to the dwelling. All dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to
28 feet in height. Partial flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in
height.
A. The Schedule of Bulk Requirements for the R-6 Residential District is as
follows: [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
R-6 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Requirement
Use One-Family
Townhouse
Parcel
Minimum lot area (square feet) 6,000 174,240
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 60 250
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100 100
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback (feet) 20 25
125. Editor's Note: See Art. XIII, Multifamily Development Design Standards.
126. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-45 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-46
1:424
R-6 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Requirement
Use One-Family
Townhouse
Parcel
Minimum rear yard setback (feet) 20 25
One side setback (feet) 10 25
Second side setback (feet) 5 25
Maximum building height (feet) 35 35
Maximum building coverage 25% 25%
Maximum site coverage 40% 40%
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
All sides and rear setbacks (feet) 20 25
Maximum height (feet) 15 25
NOTES:
(1) The townhouse requirements in this schedule are applicable to the
overall tract; refer to design standards applicable to townhouses for
individual townhouse lot requirements.127
(2) Townhouses as permitted in the R-6 District shall comply with all
additional requirements contained in this chapter and the Municipal
Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey,128 including any and all
parking requirements.
(3) Townhouses as permitted in the R-6 District shall be subject to the
requirements of the section titled Multifamily design standards129
(4) For any single-family, duplex or townhouse use in this zone there
shall be no more than three floors of dwelling space and the combined
height of all such dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed
35 feet. The thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally
pleasing houses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The
increase in height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor
to be added a dwelling. All dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to
28 feet in height. Partial flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in
height.
127. Editor's Note: See §198-100, Townhouses.
128. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
129. Editor's Note: See Art. XIII, Multifamily Development Design Standards.
§ 198-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-46
1:425
§ 198-46.1. R-7 Schedule of Bulk Requirements.
(5) The rear yard setback for first floor decks on bayfront lots may be
reduced to zero feet to the bulkhead if said first floor decks are
connected to the primary dwelling situate on said lot. No such deck
shall be built higher than elevation 11.6. Second and third floor rear
yard decks may extend to within 10 feet of a bulkhead. All rear yard
decks must comply with the side yard setbacks established in the
zone.
A. The Schedule of Bulk Requirements for the R-7 Residential District is as
follows: [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
R-7 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Requirement
Use One-Family Hotel/Motel
Townhouse
Parcel
Minimum lot area
(square feet)
6,000 40,000 174,240
Minimum lot frontage
(feet)
60 200 250
Minimum lot depth (feet) 100 200 200
Principal Building
Yard Requirements
Minimum front
yard (feet)
20 25 25
Minimum rear yard
(feet)
20 20 25
One side setback
(feet)
10 20 25
Second side
setback (feet)
5 20 25
Maximum building
height (feet)
35 35 35
Maximum building
coverage
35% 50% 20%
Maximum site
coverage
60% 75% 40%
Accessory
Building Yard
Requirements
All sides and rear
setback (feet)
20 15 25
§ 198-46 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-46.1
1:426
§ 198-46.2. R-8 Schedule of Bulk Requirements.
R-7 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Requirement
Use One-Family Hotel/Motel
Townhouse
Parcel
Maximum height
(feet)
15 15 15
NOTES:
(1) One-family residential, townhouses and hotel/motels as permitted
in the R-7 District shall comply with all additional requirements
contained in this chapter and the Municipal Land Use Law of the
State of New Jersey,130 including any and all parking requirements.
(2) Townhouses as permitted in the R-7 District shall be subject to the
requirements of the section titled Multifamily design standards.131
(3) Hotels/motels in the R-7 District shall be subject to the
requirements of sections titled Commercial design standards, Design
standards for off-street parking, Landscaping, Buffers and Open
Space Design,132 and any other applicable section of this chapter and
the Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey.133
(4) For any single-family or townhouse use in this zone there shall be
no more than three floors of dwelling space and the combined height
of all such dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed 35 feet.
The thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally pleasing
houses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The increase in
height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor to be added
to the dwelling. All dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to 28 feet
in height. Partial flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in height.
A. The Schedule of Bulk Requirements for the R-8 Residential District is as
follows: [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
R-8 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Requirement
Use One-Family Marina
Minimum lot area (square feet) 4,500 10,000
Minimum lot frontage (feet) 50 100
Minimum lot depth (feet) 90 100
130. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
131. Editor's Note: See Art. XIII, Multifamily Development Design Standards.
132. Editor's Note: See Art. XIV, Commercial Use Design Standards, Art. XI, Off-Street Parking
and Art. XII, Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
133. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-46.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-46.2
1:427
R-8 Schedule Of Bulk Requirements
Requirement
Use One-Family Marina
Principal Building Yard
Requirements
Minimum front yard setback
(feet)
20 20
Minimum rear yard setback
(feet)
20 20
One side setback (feet) 7 10
Second side setback (feet) 3 5
Maximum height (feet) 35 30
Maximum building coverage 40% 40%
Maximum site coverage 60% 60%
Accessory Building Yard
Requirements
All side and rear setbacks
Accessory structures with
floor area smaller than 120
square feet (feet)
3 3
Accessory structures with
floor area of 120 square feet
to 432 square feet (feet)
5 5
Accessory structures on
corner lots shall be set back a
minimum of 25 feet from the
front lot line and shall have a
minimum distance of 5 feet to
the principle structure on the
property.
Maximum height 15 15
NOTES:
(1) The rear yard setback for the first floor decks on bayfront lots may
be reduced to zero feet to the bulkhead if said first floor decks are
connected to the primary dwelling situate on said lot. No such deck
shall be built higher than elevation 11.6. Second and third floor rear
yard deck setbacks may be reduced to 10 feet along the bulkhead. All
rear yard decks must comply with the side yard setbacks established
in the zone.
§ 198-46.2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-46.2
1:428
§ 198-47. Exceptions to bulk requirements in residential zones.
(2) All dwelling and structures in the R-8 District shall comply with all
additional requirements contained in this chapter and the Municipal
Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey,134 including any parking
requirements.
(3) Uses and activities ancillary to a marina shall be allowed on
properties where marinas are located in the R-8 District. Such
ancillary uses and activities include, but are not limited to repair of
boats, sale of bait, tackle and fishing supplies, sale of marine
equipment and motors and sale of food to boaters and visitors.
(4) For any single-family or duplex use in this zone there shall be no
more than three floors of dwelling space and the combined height of
all such dwelling space or portions thereof shall not exceed 35 feet.
The thirty-five-foot height is to allow more architecturally pleasing
houses to be constructed in the City of Brigantine. The increase in
height over 30 feet is not designed to allow a fourth floor to be added
to the dwelling or living space in excess of the thirty-foot limit. All
dwellings with flat roofs shall be limited to 28 feet in height. Partial
flat roofs shall also be limited to 28 feet in height.
A. (Reserved)
B. Irregular pie-shaped lots.
(1) In the case of irregular pie-shaped lots in all residential zones, the
minimum lot frontage may be measured at the point and place on
said lot where the lot is wide enough to meet the minimum frontage
requirements specified in the schedule of bulk requirements for the
zone in which the lot is located. This exception will only apply if all
other setback and bulk requirements are met using said point and
place. This exception shall not apply or be granted for any lot which
is less than 40 feet wide at any point.
(2) EXAMPLE: An irregular pie-shaped lot in the R-2 Zone needs 50
feet of lot frontage. If a lot in the R-2 Zone has 43 feet of frontage
closest to the street and expands so that it is 125 feet at the rear
portion of the lot, the property owner can be given a building
permit without need for seeking a variance if the point and place
where the lot is fifty feet wide is used as the front yard lot line and
all other setback and bulk requirements are met.
C. Yard setback encroachments.
(1) Eaves or roof overhangs, 12 feet or more above average finished
grade, shall not exceed 12 inches. (Note that both side yard
setbacks may be encroached).
134. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-46.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-47
1:429
(2) The following extensions or projections from residential structures
are permitted in front and rear yards only:
(a) Open entry porches, not to exceed four feet.
(b) Chimneys, not to exceed 18 inches.
(c) Steps (up to eight feet wide) into the principal building, not to
exceed a thirty-six-inch encroachment. [Amended
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
(d) Bay windows, not to exceed twenty-four-inch encroachment.
(e) Mechanical equipment in rear yard not to exceed 48 inches
encroachment. Mechanical equipment is permitted in rear
yards within the center 1/3 of the lot width and shall be
soundproofed to conform to the local sound ordinance.135
(f) Decks and porches are to be considered as part of the principal
structure unless specifically addressed in other portions of this
chapter.
D. Height requirements. [Added 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
(1) Church steeples.
(2) A chimney, to the extent necessary to comply with Building Code
requirements.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 216, Noise.
§ 198-47 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-47
1:430
ARTICLE VI
Business Zone Regulations
§ 198-48. Intent.
It is the intent of this article governing commercial uses to maintain the
character and vitality of the existing business districts in the City, while
encouraging their development and enhancement as set forth in the Master
Plan adopted November 2001.
§ 198-49. Business use matrix. [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No.
25-2007; 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
The following matrix and schedule provides a summary of the permitted
commercial, residential, accessory uses and conditional uses in the business
districts. Uses which are not specifically set forth in this section are
considered prohibited uses and shall not be permitted unless otherwise
permitted by this chapter, with the exception of municipal uses, municipal
facilities and municipal recreation facilities which are permitted to be
placed by the Brigantine City Council in any zone.
Business Use Matrix
Uses Zone District
B-1A B-1 B-2 B-3 B-6
Hotels N/A P N/A N/A P
Automobile body and
repair shops
N/A P N/A N/A N/A
Automobile sales
facility
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Banks P P N/A P P
Bars N/A P N/A P P
Boardinghouses N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Drugstores P P N/A P N/A
Funeral homes N/A P N/A N/A N/A
Amusement facilities N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Laundromats N/A P N/A N/A N/A
Lodges P P N/A N/A N/A
Marinas, commercial N/A P P N/A P
Marina, private club/
yacht club
N/A N/A P N/A P
Motels N/A P N/A N/A P
Retail food
establishments
P P N/A P N/A
§ 198-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-49
1:431
Business Use Matrix
Uses Zone District
B-1A B-1 B-2 B-3 B-6
Retail trade
establishments
P P P P P
Retail service
establishment
P P N/A P N/A
Restaurants P P N/A P P
Restaurants, carry-out P P N/A P P
Restaurants, fast-food N/A P N/A P N/A
Shopping centers N/A N/A N/A P N/A
Taxicab storage, repairs N/A P P P N/A
Commercial Uses
Specialty food stores N/A P N/A P P
Supermarkets N/A P N/A P N/A
Theaters N/A P N/A P N/A
Accessory Uses
Parking lots P P P P P
Parking garages P P N/A P P
Accessory building P P P P P
Fences P P P P P
Signs P P P P P
Residential Uses
One-family dwelling N/A N/A P N/A N/A
Three-family dwelling N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Four-family dwelling N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Garden apartments N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Townhouses N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Conditional Uses
Automobile service
stations
N/A C N/A N/A N/A
Amusement facilities N/A N/A N/A N/A C
Churches N/A C C C C
Home occupations N/A N/A C N/A C
Hospitals, municipal
facilities
C C C C C
Public utility facilities N/A C C P C
Recreational facilities N/A C C C C
§ 198-49 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-49
1:432
Business Use Matrix
Uses Zone District
B-1A B-1 B-2 B-3 B-6
Two-family dwelling N/A N/A C N/A N/A
NOTES:
P = Permitted use
C = Conditional use
N/A = Not allowed
§ 198-50. (Reserved)
§ 198-51. B-1 Schedule of Bulk Requirements. [Amended
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
The B-1 Schedule of Bulk Requirements, comprised of area and bulk
requirements and minimum yard and setback requirements, is as follows:
Uses
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot Depth
(feet)
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Site
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet)
Automobile
body and
repair shop
200 20,000 100 40 60 30
Banks 100 10,000 100 40 60 30
Bars 100 10,000 100 40 60 30
Drugstores 200 20,000 100 40 60 30
Funeral
homes
200 20,000 100 40 60 30
Laundro- mats 100 10,000 100 40 60 30
Lodges 100 10,000 100 40 60 30
Marinas,
commercial
200 20,000 100 40 60 30
Motels/ Hotels 200 20,000 100 40 60 30
Retail food
establishments
80 7,200 90 40 60 30
Retail trade
establishments
50 4,500 90 40 60 30
§ 198-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-51
1:433
Uses
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot Depth
(feet)
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Site
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet)
Retail service
establishments
50 4,500 90 40 60 30
Restaurants 200 20,000 100 40 60 30
Restaurants,
carry-out
100 10,000 100 40 60 30
Restaurants,
fast-food
200 20,000 100 40 60 30
Specialty food
stores
50 4,500 90 40 60 30
Supermarkets
200 20,000 100 40 60 30
Theaters 200 40,000 200 40 60 30
Conditional Uses
Automobile
service
stations
150 30,000 200 40 60 30
Churches 200 40,000 200 40 60 30
Hospitals 200 40,000 200 40 60 30
Public utility 100 10,000 100 40 60 30
Recreational
facility
200 40,000 100 40 60 30
Residential Uses
Single-family
(where
permitted)
50 4,500 90 40 60 30
Minimum Yard and Setback Requirements
Uses
Front Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
2nd Side
Yard
(feet)
Accessory
Building
(feet)
Automobile
body and
repair
shop
20 15 5 5 5
Bank 20 15 5 5 5
Bar 20 15 5 5 5
§ 198-51 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-51
1:434
Minimum Yard and Setback Requirements
Uses
Front Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
2nd Side
Yard
(feet)
Accessory
Building
(feet)
Drug
store
20 15 5 5 5
Funeral
homes
20 15 5 5 5
Laundromats
20 15 5 5 5
Lodges 20 15 5 5 5
Marinas,
commercial
20 15 5 5 5
Motels/
Hotels
20 15 5 5 5
Retail
food
establishment
20 15 5 5 5
Retail
trade
establishment
20 15 5 5 5
Restaurant 20 15 5 5 5
Restaurant,
carry-out
20 15 5 5 5
Restaurant,
fast-food
20 15 5 5 5
Specialty
food
store
20 15 5 5 5
Supermarkets
20 15 5 5 5
Theaters 20 15 5 5 5
Conditional
Use
Automobile
service
station
20 20 20 20 10
Churches 20 20 20 20 10
Hospitals 60 60 60 60 10
§ 198-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-51
1:435
Minimum Yard and Setback Requirements
Uses
Front Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
2nd Side
Yard
(feet)
Accessory
Building
(feet)
Public
utilities
20 20 20 20 10
Recreational
facility
60 60 60 60 10
NOTES:
(1) On bay front lots, the rear yard setback for first floor decks may be
reduced to zero feet at the bulkhead. The rear yard setback will be 20
feet. Any first floor decks which extend to the bulkhead on bayfront lots
must be attached to the primary structure on said lot. No said deck may
be built higher then 12 inches above the cap of said bulkhead or elevation
11.6 and must be built to the lower of the above two options. Second and
third floor rear yard decks must comply with the rear yard setbacks as
established in the zone. All rear yard decks must comply with the side
yard setbacks established in the zone.
(2) The bulk and setback requirements for home occupations will be the
same bulk and setback requirements as required for the residential use in
which the home occupation is located. A home occupation may not be
conducted in a preexisting nonconforming residential dwelling unless said
home occupation was being conducted at the time of the effective date of
the 1996 Municipal Land Use Ordinance136 or the residential use is
brought into conformity with the zoning regulations as set forth in this
chapter.
(3) Within the B-1 District, freestanding commercial signs are permitted in
accordance with the following standards:
(a) Signs shall not exceed 30 square feet, measured on one
side;
(b) Such signs may be internally or directly lit;
(c) Such signs shall be limited to 15 feet in height or no higher
than the highest part of the principal building on the site,
whichever is lower;
(d) The sign shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from the
street right-of-way and shall not intrude into any sight triangles
for driveways or adjacent streets.
136. Editor's Note: A copy of the 1996 Land Use Ordinance, adopted 6-5-1996, and which was
superseded by this chapter, is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-51 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-51.1
1:436
§ 198-51.1. B-1A Schedule of Bulk Requirements.
The area and bulk requirements for permitted uses in the B-1A Zone shall
be the exact same requirements as required for those same uses in the B-1
Zone. Some uses permitted in the B-1 Zone are prohibited in the B-1A Zone.
§ 198-52. B-2 Schedule of Bulk Requirements. [Amended
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
The Schedule of Bulk Regulations for the B-2 District is as follows:
B-2 Schedule of Bulk Requirements Area and Bulk Requirements
Uses
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Site
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet)
Commercial Uses
Marina,
commercial
100 10,000 100 40 60 25
Marina,
private club/
yacht club
100 10,000 100 40 60 25
Retail trade
establishment
100 10,000 100 40 60 25
Residential Uses
Single-family 50 4,500 90 40 60 35*
Two-family
(conditional
use)
60 5,400 90 40 60 35
* No such single-family dwelling shall be permitted to have a fourth floor.
Minimum Yard and Setback Requirements
Uses
Front Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
2nd Side
Yard
(feet)
Accessory
Building
(feet)
Commercial Uses
Marina,
commercial
20 20 7 3 3
Marina,
private
club/yacht
club
20 20 7 3 3
Retail trade
establishments
20 20 7 3 3
Residential Uses
§ 198-51.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-52
1:437
Minimum Yard and Setback Requirements
Uses
Front Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
2nd Side
Yard
(feet)
Accessory
Building
(feet)
Singlefamily
20 20 7 3 3
Two-family
(conditional)
20 20 10 5 3
NOTES:
(1) On bayfront lots, the rear setback for decks may be reduced to zero
feet at the bulkhead. The rear yard setback to the building will remain 20
feet. Any deck which extends to the bulkhead on bayfront lots must be
attached to the primary structure on said lot. No such deck shall be
higher than 12 inches above the cap of said bulkhead or elevation 11.6
and must be built to the lower of the above two options. Second and third
floor rear yard decks must comply with rear yard setbacks as established
in the zone. All rear yard decks must comply with the side yard setbacks
established in the zone.
(2) Bulk requirements and setback requirements for conditional uses
which are permitted in the B-2 Zone shall be the same as set forth for said
conditional uses in the B1 and B1A Zones.
(3) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet between buildings on adjacent
lots unless setback requirements require a greater distance. An applicant
for a building permit shall submit a survey or other documentation
showing the home/building on contiguous lots are at least 10 feet away
from the proposed home/building on the applicant's lot.
§ 198-53. B-3 Schedule of Bulk Requirements; additional
requirements. [Amended 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
The B-3 Schedule of Bulk Requirements, comprised of area and bulk
requirements and minimum yard and setback requirements, is as follows:
B-3 Schedule of Bulk Requirements Area and Bulk Requirements
Uses
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Setbacks
(feet)
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Site
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet)
Shopping
centers
700 453,600 – 500 45 75 30
Banks 150 30,000 – 200 40 60 30
Restaurants 200 40,000 – 200 40 75 30
§ 198-52 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-53
1:438
B-3 Schedule of Bulk Requirements Area and Bulk Requirements
Uses
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Lot
Area
(square
feet)
Setbacks
(feet)
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Site
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet)
Public
utility uses
75 30,000 20
(to all lot
lines)
200 40 60 30
§ 198-54. (Reserved)
§ 198-55. B-6 Schedule of Bulk Requirements. [Amended
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
The B-6 Schedule of Bulk Requirements, comprised of area and bulk
requirements and minimum yard and setback requirements, is as follows:
B-6 Schedule of Bulk Requirements Area and Bulk Requirements
Uses
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Site
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet)
Banks 100 10,000 100 40 60 30
Bars 100 10,000 100 40 60 30
Marinas, commercial 80 8,000 100 40 60 30
Marinas, private club 80 8,000 100 40 60 30
Motels/Hotels 80 8,000 100 40 60 30
Retail trade
establishments
90 8,000 100 40 60 30
Restaurants 80 8,000 100 40 60 30
Restaurants, carry-out 80 8,000 100 40 60 30
Specialty food stores 80 8,000 100 40 60 30
Single-family 60 5,400 100 40 60 351
Accessory
structure
Floor
area
smaller
than 120
square
feet
— — — — — 12
§ 198-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-55
1:439
B-6 Schedule of Bulk Requirements Area and Bulk Requirements
Uses
Lot
Frontage
(feet)
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Building
Coverage
(percent)
Site
Coverage
(percent)
Building
Height
(feet)
Floor
area 120
to 432
square
feet
— — — — — 15
Minimum Yard and Setback Requirements
Uses
Front Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
2nd Side
Yard
(feet)
Accessory
Building
(feet)
Banks 20 20 10 10 15
Bars 20 20 10 10 15
Marinas, commercial 20 20 10 10 15
Marinas, private club 20 20 10 10 15
Motels/Hotels 20 20 10 10 15
Retail trade
establishments
20 20 10 10 15
Restaurants 20 20 10 10 15
Restaurants, carry-out 20 20 10 10 15
Specialty food stores 20 20 10 10 15
Single-family 20 20 10 5 See below
Accessory
structure2
Floor area
smaller
than 120
square feet
— 3 3 — —
Floor area
120 to 432
square feet
— 5 5 — —
NOTES:
1 No such single-family dwelling shall be permitted to have a fourth floor.
2 Accessory structures on corner lots shall be set back a minimum of 25
feet from the front lot line and shall have a minimum distance of 5 feet to
the principal structure on the property.
§ 198-55 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-56
1:440
§ 198-56. Regulations applicable to all commercial districts.
The following notes are applicable to the commercial district schedules in
this article:
§ 198-56.1. Affordable Housing Overlay. [Added 8-15-2018 by Ord.
No. 18-2018]
A. Commercial structures may be set back a minimum of five feet from the
street line or the average of the setbacks within the block on the same
side of the street, whichever is greater, if such setback is given Board
approval and will conform with the commercial district in which the
commercial structure is located.
B. Individual commercial uses in the B-3 District shall not be subject to the
area and bulk requirements or minimum yard and setback
requirements in § 198-53, when included as an integral part of a
shopping center.
C. No structure in any commercial or residential zone shall contain a mix
of residential and commercial uses unless specifically permitted by this
chapter.
D. The maximum height of accessory uses for residential dwellings shall
be 15 feet.
E. Awnings extending from any principal building shall be considered part
of such building and shall meet all applicable setback requirements.
[Added 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
A. Affordable Housing Overlay: B1 (AHO-B1) Zone.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Overlay B1 (AHOB1)
overlay zone is to create an incentive to redevelop property for
inclusionary development. The tract may be developed at a density
of 20 units per acre. The density is predicated on a set-aside for
affordable housing (low- and moderate-income housing). If the
affordable units are for sale, the set-aside shall be 20%. If the
affordable units are for rent, the set-aside shall be 15%.
(2) Designated overlay area. The AHO-B1 Zone will encompass a
portion of the B1 (Business) Zone. This district will be the focus of
an overlay zone with residential uses over existing commercial.
This zone contains an existing commercial retail and service uses
that are located along Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard and is listed
on the Tax Map as Block 3701, Lots 1 to 9 and Block 3702, Lots 1 to
9. The overlay zone at this location will provide for up to three
residential floors above the existing or new commercial uses. There
will be a fifteen-percent set-aside for affordable family rental units
with 13% of the affordable units for very-low-income households.
The underlying B1 Zone, its permitted uses, area and bulk
requirements shall remain unchanged unless the overlay district
§ 198-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-56.1
1:441
option for affordable housing is implemented by the property
owner(s) or developer.
(3) Permitted uses: mixed use, commercial first floor with residential
above.
(4) Schedule of Area and Bulk Requirements.
(a) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be based on the
underlying B-1 lot size requirements.
(b) Lot frontage. The minimum frontage shall be based on the
underlying B-1 lot frontage requirements.
(c) Perimeter setbacks. The minimum perimeter setback shall be
based on the minimum setbacks as outlined in the underlying
B-1 District.
(d) Density: 20 dwelling units per acre.
(e) Public service. Every residential and commercial unit shall be
served by public water and sanitary sewer, which, if required,
shall be installed by and at the expense of the developer.
[1] The developer shall install, at his sole expense, the
following minimum site improvements: streets,
accessways, off-street parking areas, sidewalks,
streetlighting, storm drainage facilities, landscaping and
open space areas. These improvements shall be installed
in accordance with this chapter unless a specific waiver is
granted as provided for within the applicable standards or
requirements. Whenever a developer is required to place
catch basins as part of an approval, the Planning Board
shall, in its discretion, require the developer to pay for and
place a sign at each such catch basin setting forth the
requirements and penalties of §§ 220-23 to 220-26 of the
Code of the City of Brigantine.
[2] All utilities shall be installed underground within the
mixed-use development. These utilities shall include but
not be limited to gas, television cable, telephone, and
electric.
(f) Parking.
[1] On-site parking for the residential component of the
development in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
[2] Parking for the commercial aspect of the development
shall be provided in accordance with the City of Brigantine
on-site parking requirements.
§ 198-56.1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-56.1
1:442
(g) Solid waste disposal areas.
[1] All trash compactors, bins and areas of refuse storage and
recyclable storage areas shall be located in a common area
and in such a manner to be screened from the general view
of the public and must comply with all other ordinances of
the City of Brigantine, including any ordinance in
reference to dumpsters.
[2] Solid waste disposal areas shall be fully accessible to
service vehicles.
[3] Solid waste disposal areas shall be maintained in a clean
and orderly condition at all times.
[4] Solid waste disposal areas shall be designed of a durable
material consistent with the architectural theme of the
development.
[5] Disposal areas and all facilities shall be provided and
maintained by the owner of the development.
(h) Public safety considerations.
[1] All multifamily developments shall address the following
public safety issues within the application for
development:
[a] Emergency access routes for police, fire and
ambulance vehicles.
[b] Architectural techniques utilized to enhance the
security of the development's occupants.
[2] All public safety facilities located in a project shall be kept
unobstructed by parking and/or any other type of storage.
No parking spaces shall be placed to obstruct access as
approved by the Fire Chief and/or Police Chief of the City
of Brigantine.
B. Affordable Housing Overlay: B1A (AHO-B1A) Zone.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Overlay B1A
(AHO-B1A) overlay zone is to create an incentive to redevelop
property for inclusionary development. The tract may be developed
at a density of 20 units per acre. The density is predicated on a setaside
for affordable housing (low- and moderate-income housing).
If the affordable units are for sale, the set-aside shall be 20%. If the
affordable units are for rent, the set-aside shall be 15%.
(2) Designated overlay area. The AHO-B1A Zone will encompass a
portion of the B1A (Business) Zone. This district will be the focus of
an overlay zone with residential uses over existing commercial.
§ 198-56.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-56.1
1:443
This zone contains an existing commercial retail store (former CVS
Store) that is located along Brigantine Avenue and is listed on the
Tax Map as Block 806, Lot 1. The overlay zone at this location will
provide for up to three residential floors. There will be a fifteenpercent
set-aside for affordable family rental units with 13% of the
affordable units for very-low-income households. The underlying
B1A Zone, its permitted uses, area and bulk requirements shall
remain unchanged unless the overlay district option for affordable
housing is implemented by the property owner(s) or developer.
(3) Permitted uses: mixed use, commercial first floor with residential
above.
(4) Schedule of Area and Bulk Requirements.
(a) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 24,000 square feet.
(b) Lot frontage. The minimum frontage shall be based on the
underlying B1A lot frontage requirements.
(c) Perimeter setbacks. The minimum perimeter setback shall be
based on the minimum setbacks as outlined in the underlying
B1A District.
(d) Density: 20 dwelling units per acre.
(e) Public service. Every residential and commercial unit shall be
served by public water and sanitary sewer, which, if required,
shall be installed by and at the expense of the developer.
[1] The developer shall install, at his sole expense, the
following minimum site improvements: streets,
accessways, off-street parking areas, sidewalks,
streetlighting, storm drainage facilities, landscaping and
open space areas. These improvements shall be installed
in accordance with this chapter unless a specific waiver is
granted as provided for within the applicable standards or
requirements.
Whenever a developer is required to place catch basins
as part of an approval, the Planning Board shall, in its
discretion, require the developer to pay for and place a
sign at each such catch basin setting forth the
requirements and penalties of §§ 220-23 to 220-26 of the
Code of the City of Brigantine.
[2] All utilities shall be installed underground within the
mixed-use development. These utilities shall include but
not be limited to gas, television cable, telephone, and
electric.
(f) Parking.
§ 198-56.1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-56.1
1:444
[1] On-site parking for the residential component of the
development in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
[2] Parking for the commercial aspect of the development
shall be provided in accordance with the City of Brigantine
on-site parking requirements.
(g) Solid waste disposal areas.
[1] All trash compactors, bins and areas of refuse storage and
recyclable storage areas shall be located in a common area
and in such a manner to be screened from the general view
of the public and must comply with all other ordinances of
the City of Brigantine, including any ordinance in
reference to dumpsters.
[2] Solid waste disposal areas shall be fully accessible to
service vehicles.
[3] Solid waste disposal areas shall be maintained in a clean
and orderly condition at all times.
[4] Solid waste disposal areas shall be designed of a durable
material consistent with the architectural theme of the
development.
[5] Disposal areas and all facilities shall be provided and
maintained by the owner of the development.
(h) Public safety considerations.
[1] All multifamily developments shall address the following
public safety issues within the application for
development:
[a] Emergency access routes for police, fire and
ambulance vehicles.
[b] Architectural techniques utilized to enhance the
security of the development's occupants.
[2] All public safety facilities located in a project shall be kept
unobstructed by parking and/or any other type of storage.
No parking spaces shall be placed to obstruct access as
approved by the Fire Chief and/or Police Chief of the City
of Brigantine.
C. Affordable Housing Overlay: B3 (Town Center) (AHO-B3) Zone.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of the Affordable Housing Overlay B3 (Town
Center) (AHO-B3) overlay zone is to create an incentive to
redevelop property for inclusionary development. The density is
predicated on a set-aside for affordable housing (low- and
§ 198-56.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-56.1
1:445
moderate-income housing). If the affordable units are for sale, the
set-aside shall be 20%. If the affordable units are for rent, the setaside
shall be 15%.
(2) Designated overlay area. The AHO-B3 Zone will encompass a
portion of the B3 (Business) Zone. This district will be the focus of
an overlay zone with residential uses over existing commercial.
This zone contains a shopping area (Town Center) that is located
between Harbor Beach Boulevard, 38th Street, Bayshore Avenue
and Amhurst Avenue (Block 3804, Lot 1). The overlay zone at this
shopping center will provide for three residential floors above
commercial. There will be a fifteen-percent set-aside for affordable
family rental units with 13% of the affordable units for very-lowincome
households. The underlying B-3 Zone, its permitted uses,
area and bulk requirements shall remain unchanged unless the
overlay district option for affordable housing is implemented by the
property owner(s) or developer.
(3) Permitted uses: mixed use, commercial first floor with residential
above.
(4) Schedule of Area and Bulk Requirements.
(a) Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be based on the
underlying B-1 lot size requirements.
(b) Lot frontage. The minimum frontage shall be based on the
underlying B-1 lot frontage requirements.
(c) Perimeter setbacks. The minimum perimeter setback shall be
based on the minimum setbacks as outlined in the underlying
B-1 District.
(d) Density: 20 dwelling units per acre.
(e) Public service. Every residential and commercial unit shall be
served by public water and sanitary sewer, which, if required,
shall be installed by and at the expense of the developer.
[1] The developer shall install, at his sole expense, the
following minimum site improvements: streets,
accessways, off-street parking areas, sidewalks,
streetlighting, storm drainage facilities, landscaping and
open space areas. These improvements shall be installed
in accordance with this chapter unless a specific waiver is
granted as provided for within the applicable standards or
requirements. Whenever a developer is required to place
catch basins as part of an approval, the Planning Board
shall, in its discretion, require the developer to pay for and
place a sign at each such catch basin setting forth the
requirements and penalties of §§ 220-23 to 220-26 of the
Code of the City of Brigantine.
§ 198-56.1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-56.1
1:446
[2] All utilities shall be installed underground within the
mixed-use development. These utilities shall include but
not be limited to gas, television cable, telephone, and
electric.
(f) Parking.
[1] On-site parking for the residential component of the
development in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
[2] Parking for the commercial aspect of the development
shall be provided in accordance with the City of Brigantine
on-site parking requirements.
(g) Solid waste disposal areas.
[1] All trash compactors, bins and areas of refuse storage and
recyclable storage areas shall be located in a common area
and in such a manner to be screened from the general view
of the public and must comply with all other ordinances of
the City of Brigantine, including any ordinance in
reference to dumpsters.
[2] Solid waste disposal areas shall be fully accessible to
service vehicles.
[3] Solid waste disposal areas shall be maintained in a clean
and orderly condition at all times.
[4] Solid waste disposal areas shall be designed of a durable
material consistent with the architectural theme of the
development.
[5] Disposal areas and all facilities shall be provided and
maintained by the owner of the development.
(h) Public safety considerations.
[1] All multifamily developments shall address the following
public safety issues within the application for
development:
[a] Emergency access routes for police, fire and
ambulance vehicles.
[b] Architectural techniques utilized to enhance the
security of the development's occupants.
[2] All public safety facilities located in a project shall be kept
unobstructed by parking and/or any other type of storage.
No parking spaces shall be placed to obstruct access as
approved by the Fire Chief and/or Police Chief of the City
of Brigantine.
§ 198-56.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-56.1
1:447

ARTICLE VII
Conservation Zone Regulations
§ 198-57. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this article to define those environmentally sensitive
areas, such as the beaches, dunes and wetlands unique to the barrier island
environs of the Jersey shore, as well as those recreational resources created
by man for his enjoyment, in order to protect, enhance and preserve for the
general public. Consistent with the overall purpose and intent, this article is
the exercise of the power of the municipality to protect the resources of the
community in the interest of the safety and welfare of the general public.
§ 198-58. Findings and declarations.
It is hereby noted as a finding of fact that the City of Brigantine, as a barrier
island in the New Jersey Coastal Zone, is a unique environment requiring
special means of maintenance, protection and preservation. There are three
separate and distinct areas in the Conservation Zone, each with a distinct
declaration and finding of fact.
A. Dune and beach.
(1) Certain portions of the beachfront and strand bordering on the
Atlantic Ocean, the entire length of the oceanfront from the north
City boundary line to the stone jetty on the north side of the
Absecon Inlet, have in the past suffered from damage caused by
storms and storm tides, at which time the sea has encroached upon
the land and has caused damage to both public and private
property and has endangered the safety and welfare of the general
public.
(2) The situation created along the beach by reason of such storm tides
and resulting damage has been so serious that thousands of dollars
of both public and private funds have been expended for the
erection of bulkheads, sand fences and other devices intended to
prevent encroachment by the sea.
(3) It has been demonstrated that well-established and protected sand
dunes, together with berms, beaches and underwater slopes of
suitable configuration and of proper grade and height, are some of
the elements of a durable and effective protection against tides and
flooding and against damage by the ocean under storm conditions,
and are the natural protection of the coastal areas adjacent
thereto, and the state and its subdivisions and their inhabitants
have an interest in the continued protection thereof and in the need
to restore them in the event of damage or destruction.
(4) Sand dunes are vulnerable to erosion by both wind and water, but
primarily by wind, since its attacks against the dunes are sustained
for substantial and frequently recurring periods of time, whereas, if
§ 198-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-58
1:449
protected by typical berms, beaches and underwater slopes, the
dunes are attacked by water only at infrequent intervals. The best
available means of protecting said dunes against wind erosion is
by preventing indiscriminate trespassing,construction or other acts
oceanward of the development restriction line which might destroy
or damage said dunes and through the use of native plantings,
supplemented by sand fencing and other devices designated to
prevent the free blowing of sand and the maintenance of the
surface tensions, root accumulations, normal contours and other
features found in typical natural dunes.
(5) The immediate dune and beach areas, located between the ocean
and the development restriction line, are not capable of rigid
definition or delineation or of completely firm stabilization, so that
particular sites at the time free of dunes, may, as a result of natural
forces, become part of the dune area necessary for the continuation
of the protection outlined above. The residents of the City of
Brigantine must therefore be prepared to revise the development
restriction line from time to time.
(6) The erosion of the beachfront has created a threat and danger to
the property and life of persons in the City of Brigantine by reason
of the destruction of the sand barriers which protect the City's
oceanfront on both public and private property within the City of
Brigantine.
(7) The interference with or the depletion of the beach and sand dunes
tends to permit encroachment by the sea, and conditions recited
above make it imperative that the governing body regulate and
control the removal of sand from the beach or dunes or any other
interference with or depletion of the protective barrier on the
oceanfront of the City of Brigantine.
B. Wetlands.
(1) In agreement with the Legislature of the State of New Jersey, the
City of Brigantine finds and declares that one of the most vital and
productive areas of the barrier island system is the estuarine zone.
(2) This area protects the land from the force of the sea, moderates the
weather at the shore, provides a home for waterfowl, fish and
shellfish and assists in absorbing sewerage discharge by the rivers
of the land.
(3) Coastal wetlands contribute to the physical stability of the coastal
zone by serving as:
(a) A transitional area between the forces of the open sea and
uplands areas that absorb and dissipate wind-driven storm
waves and storm surges.
(b) A floodwater storage area.
§ 198-58 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-58
1:450
§ 198-59. C-1 Conservation - Beaches, Dunes and Wetland
regulations.
The following regulations are applicable to the C-1 Zone District, which is
comprised of the Dune Maintenance District, Dune Restoration District and
Dune Reconstruction District as shown on the maps of the Brigantine Dune
and Shoreline Management Plan, and the wetlands.
(c) A sediment and pollution trap.
(4) The wetlands naturally perform the wastewater treatment process
of removing phosphorous and nitrogenous water pollutants.
C. Golf course.
(1) One of the unique recreational and environmental assets other than
the coastal environs within the City of Brigantine is the golf course
area established during the initial development of the island. This
course is the only such recreational feature on any barrier island
along the New Jersey shore.
(2) The existence of a recognized eighteen-hole regulation golf course
adds not only to the recreational opportunities of the residents of
the City, but is a vital element of the total open space available for
the visual enjoyment of those residents adjoining the facility.
(3) Such a golf course, by its open and spacious nature, offers a
counterbalance to the residential densities of the City.
(4) The long-range impact of establishing and maintaining an uplands
recreational facility with substantial contiguous open space is in
the best interest of the residents of the City of Brigantine.
A. Prohibited activities. Within the above-designated areas of the C-1
District, no construction of any type shall be allowed except works
undertaken by the City of Brigantine as approved by the Division of
Coastal Resources, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and/or United States Army Corps of Engineers when
required by regulations and the following activities within the beach
and dune areas:
(1) Sand fencing placed to encourage the accumulation of sand and
enhance the growth of the dune system.
(2) Temporary or seasonal structures utilized by lifesaving personnel.
(3) Raised walkways designed to allow pedestrian access to the beach,
while protecting the dune system from damage due to pedestrian
travel.
(4) Protective fencing placed to control access to endangered species,
such as the least tern.
§ 198-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-59
1:451
(5) Signs as permitted in § 198-114.
B. Beach access.
(1) Access to the beach shall be along and within designated beach
accessways as shown on the Brigantine Beach Access Plan, such as
street ends or properly constructed and permitted walkways.
(2) No access shall be constructed by a private owner without a permit
as required in Subsection E.
(3) No access across the dune systems located between the ocean and
the development restriction line shall be restricted or denied from
the reasonable and safe use, as permitted by the governing body, of
the general public.
(4) All beach accessways shall be linear and direct pedestrian
movements from the uplands to the beach without unnecessary or
uncontrolled movements from the accessway.
(5) Commercial and multifamily developments adjacent to the beach
and dune system shall be encouraged to construct beach
accessways for the use of the general public in accordance with
the intent of this section.
C. Beach access structures.
(1) The development of beach access structures which protect the
dune fields, as well as natural and artificial means used to stabilize
said dune fields, is hereby encouraged by this chapter.
(2) In addition to those beach accessways shown in the Beach Access
Plan, the City of Brigantine may, from time to time, require and
request the development of additional beach access structures.
(3) In any development application, the Planning Board shall require
that persons seeking to develop property adjacent to dunes in the
Conservation District for either multifamily or commercial uses
erect beach accessways at the sole cost and expense of the
applicant. Any application for development or subdivision shall
include as part of said application a legal description and plot plan
showing the development restriction line. No development shall be
permitted beyond said line.
(4) Beach accessways will be constructed in such a manner as to
protect the right of public access to the beach and shore front.
(5) In cases where the most appropriate accessway is determined to be
at or originating from a street end, the Planning Board and/or City
shall require that the applicant erect, own and maintain such
accessways on an easement and under a declaration of covenants
and restrictions agreed to by the applicant and the City.
§ 198-59 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-59
1:452
(6) In the case of single lots for development of single-family dwellings,
the Construction Official shall refer the applicant to the governing
body for determination as to whether the erection of any beach
accessway should be required.
D. Sand fencing. The City may erect or require the installation of sand
fencing in and along the districts delineated by the Dune and Shoreline
Management Plan137 as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of
this chapter and require signage to identify the same. Persons may
enter such areas only to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Where
beach accessways exist, the dune field shall be suitable bordered with
sand fencing to prevent damage to the dunes or berms which they
cross.
E. Special permit required. No individual, firm or corporation shall be
permitted to move or displace sand within the C-1 Zone District except
to protect improvements to their prior condition. Prior to the
commencement of such activities, a special permit shall be required
pursuant to the review and approval of the governing body.
F. Information required for permit review. The following information shall
be furnished in any application to the Municipal Engineer for the
movement and displacement of sand in the C-1 District:
(1) The name and address of applicant.
(2) The location of site and boundaries of the sand to be removed.
(3) The nature and purpose of the proposed activity.
(4) A description of the methods by which the applicant intends to
move or displace the sand, including a listing and description of the
equipment, machinery or any other apparatus to be used.
(5) An estimate of the volume of sand, expressed in cubic yards, to be
moved or displaced.
(6) A topographic survey, prepared by a professional land surveyor,
showing the existing conditions of the site.
(7) A grading plan, prepared by a professional engineer, showing the
proposed grades and contours of the site upon completion of the
proposed project.
(8) A delineation of the methods of stabilization to be used during
construction, including a construction timetable.
(9) Any reasonable information that may be required by the Municipal
Engineer in order to fully review the application.
(10) The permit fee as required in § 198-17.
137. Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-59
1:453
G. Conditions for the issuance of permit.
(1) No permit in the C-1 District shall be issued without a
determination by the Municipal Engineer, based on an inspection of
the site, that such removal or displacement of sand shall not create
a danger or hazard to the property or the general public.
(2) No permit shall be granted if the movement or displacement of
sand will:
(a) Adversely impact the littoral drift in the districts delineated by
the Dune and Shoreline Management Plan.138
(b) Result in a reduction of dune protection and the dune area as
provided for the Dune and Shoreline Management Plan.
(c) Interfere with the general configuration of the beach and dune
areas of either the property in question or the adjoining
beachfront properties.
(d) Interfere with the general configuration of the districts as
delineated by the Dune and Shoreline Management Plan.
(e) Otherwise substantially impair or interfere with the intent and
purpose of his chapter.
H. Specifications for the movement of sand. The following specifications
shall be applied to the movement or displacement of sand within the C-1
Zone District:
(1) The applicant or the applicant's contractor shall, in the process of
performing work on the dune, maintain the elevation of the dune as
established by the Municipal Engineer.
(2) The applicant shall be required to preserve all existing dune grass
during the course of any construction work, removal or
displacement of sand within the dune field. The reestablishment or
transplanting of dune grasses shall be American beach grass
(Ammophila breviligulata) and such dune grass shall be planted in
conformance with the current standards of the United States
Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service. Reference is
made to Technical Note NJ-25, Guide for Dune\Protection, New
Jersey dated October 1978.
(3) The applicant shall place a one-inch mat of salt hay over the entire
area of the portion of the dune which has been disturbed during
construction.
(4) The applicant shall preserve all existing dune grass during the
course of any construction, removal or displacement of sand within
138. Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-59 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-59
1:454
the dune field. The reestablishment or transplanting of dune
grasses shall be required in all disturbed areas.
(5) Where, by the action of high winds and/or tides, sand is blown or
washed upon the lands, including street ends, lying westwardly
from the dune line, such sand shall be placed only on the back
beach area.
(6) It is required, in addition to the planting of dune grass, that the
applicant shall install sand fencing. Said fencing shall be set in a
parallel row or rows in the backshore area and along the fore dune
according to the specification of the City Engineer.
(7) The applicant shall notify the Municipal Engineer 72 hours prior to
the start of construction or work.
I. Movement of sand by natural forces. Where, by the action of high winds
and/or tides, sand is blown or washed upon the lands, including street
ends, lying westwardly from the development restriction line, such sand
shall be placed only on the back beach area.
J. Permit fees.
(1) Each application for a permit to move or displace sand in the C-1
Zone District shall be accompanied by the fees as specified in
§ 198-17 of this chapter. This shall include both an inspection fee
for the City Engineer and legal fees.
(2) The applicant shall be responsible for retention and payment to the
professional engineer for the filing and preparation of an
application for a permit.
K. Performance guaranty.
(1) A cash bond of not less than $1,000 shall be deposited by the
applicant at the time of the issuance of the permit. The actual
amount of said bond shall be determined by the Municipal
Engineer, based on the scope of the work.
(2) The bond shall be refunded upon the Municipal Engineer's
approval of the work which has been done. If the work has not been
in compliance with the specifications contained in Subsection H
herein, the City shall have the right to have the work done as so
required, charging the cost thereof against the bond. Any portion of
the deposit remaining unused for such purpose shall be returned to
the applicant. No interest shall accrue on funds deposited as a
performance guaranty.
L. Permit review procedure. Any application to move or displace sand in
the C-1 Zone District shall be reviewed in conformance with § 198-13B,
Application for minor site plan approval.
M. Form of City approval.
§ 198-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-59
1:455
§ 198-60. C-2 Conservation - Golf Course/Country Club.
The following regulations are applicable to the C-2 Zone District, which is
comprised of the country club facility and adjoining golf course, commonly
referred to as "Brigantine Country Club":
(1) All permits to move or displace sand in the C-1 Zone District shall
be issued by the City government of the City of Brigantine, in the
form of a resolution, for temporary activities on City-owned
properties, or in the form of ordinance, granting an easement over
City-owned properties for permanent activities.
(2) Permits shall be issued by resolution, on privately owned
properties, within the area delineated by the Dune and Shoreline
Management Plan139 only for those activities permitted by this
chapter.
N. Stop-work order. The Municipal Engineer is empowered to pursue such
equitable and legal relief as may be necessary to abate any violation of
this chapter. In the event that the violation involves either the
movement or displacement of sand or conduct in violation of any permit
issued pursuant to this section, the Municipal Engineer is hereby
empowered to issue a stop-work order, in addition to pursuing any legal
or equitable remedy hereunder.
O. Adoption of Dune and Shoreline Management Plan. The following are
hereby adopted:
(1) The Dune and Shoreline Management Plan as set forth and
delineated in Section III of the Dune and Shoreline Management
Plan prepared for the City of Brigantine by Pennoni Associates,
Inc., consisting of an index map and 16 pages dated June 24, 1981,
and revised August 12, 1981.140
(2) The Beach Access Plan prepared by Pennoni Associates, Inc.,
consisting of 16 pages dated August 14, 1981, all of which are
considered to be supplemental to the Official Zoning Map and Tax
Map, previously adopted by the City Council.141
A. Preservation of existing facilities. Within the context of the Brigantine
Master Plan and this chapter, any development activity which impairs,
restricts or eliminates the existing use of the C-2 Zone District as a
country club and golf course is prohibited. The repair, reconstruction or
replacement of the country club and golf course is permitted and
encouraged.
B. Principal uses shall be as follows:
139. Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the City offices.
140. Editor's Note: The Dune and Shoreline Management Plan is in file in the City offices.
141. Editor's Note: The Beach Access Plan is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-59 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-60
1:456
(1) Golf course.
(2) Municipal facilities deemed necessary and appropriate by the
governing body.
(3) Restaurants and bars only as an integral part of the country club
use.
C. Accessory uses are as follows: customary accessory uses and structures
incidental to the principal uses and structures, such as country clubs,
golf and tennis equipment stores, maintenance buildings, motels and
yacht clubs.
D. Area and bulk requirements. The expansion of the existing country club
facilities or reconfiguration of the golf course shall be reviewed as a
conditional use. Area and bulk requirements shall be determined by
the findings and purposes of this article.
§ 198-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-60
1:457

ARTICLE VIII
Regulations Applicable to All Zones
§ 198-61. Compliance required.
§ 198-62. Prohibited uses.
A. New construction or renovation. No building or structure shall be
erected or constructed and no existing building or structure shall be
moved, structurally altered, rebuilt, added to or enlarged unless it is in
conformance with the applicable sections for the zone district in which
it is located and all necessary permits, including a zoning permit, have
been obtained.
B. Land use. No land shall be used for any purpose other than those
included among the uses listed as permitted uses in the applicable zone
district described in this chapter and shall meet the specific
requirements herein.
C. Yards and open space. Any open space contiguous to any building shall
not be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in
conformity with the yard, lot area, building setbacks, building and site
coverage, off-street parking areas and all other regulations specified for
the zone district in which it is located.
D. Nonconformance. In the event of any unlawful encroachment or
reduction, such building, structure or use shall be deemed to be in
violation of this chapter, and the development permit and any other
permits shall become null and void.
E. No structure in any commercial or residential zone shall contain a mix
of residential and commercial uses unless specifically permitted by this
chapter.
A. Any use not specifically permitted in a zoning district established by
this chapter is hereby expressly prohibited from the district.
B. In addition, the following uses and activities shall be specifically
prohibited in any zone district in the City of Brigantine:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2 within
1,000 feet of any church, synagogue, temple or other place of
worship, any school or school bus stop, any beach or playground or
any area zoned for residential use.
(2) Signs and advertisements: all billboards, signboards, advertising
signs or devices not expressly related to the business being
conducted on the premises or otherwise specifically permitted by
this chapter.
§ 198-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-62
1:459
(3) Mobile homes: trailers, mobile homes or houses, trailer sales or
servicing, trailer camps, trailer parks or courts and trailer coach
parks.
(4) Houseboats: residential houseboat facilities and residential use of
houseboats. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the use of
recreational boating facilities for one overnight accommodation, so
long as such overnight accommodations are not used for temporary
or permanent residential use.
(5) Camping structures: tents or other temporary structures for either
sleeping or dwelling purposes, as well as camping activities, either
temporarily or permanently in trailers, tents or other temporary or
mobile structures.
(6) Warehousing: wholesale, storage or warehouse facilities or uses
except for governmental uses deemed necessary and approved by
the Planning Board or City Council.
(7) Mining activities: extractive or surface-stripping activities such as
gravel pits, topsoil or turf removal.
(8) Off-shore support facilities: all on-shore supply bases, docks,
warehouses, fabrication or storage areas used in connection with
the exploration, development, extraction, transmission or
transportation of oil or natural gas.
(9) Public nuisance: any use which may be noxious or a nuisance due to
the emission of excessive or objectionable amounts of dust fumes,
noise, odor, smoke, vibration or waste products, as stated in
Chapter 216, Noise.
(10) Intercept or satellite parking lots: any parking lot or area designed
solely for the purpose of accommodating automobiles, buses or any
other vehicles not directly associated with a permitted use in the
zone district.
(11) Any business engaged primarily in check cashing or like activity
that is not a financial institution.
(12) Spiritual advisors, fortune tellers, palm or card readers,
phrenologists, mediums, clairvoyants, soothsayers, reader-advisors
or other such occupations. [Added 9-17-2008 by Ord. No.
26-2008]
(13) Any piercing parlors, tattoo parlors or similar uses. [Added
9-17-2008 by Ord. No. 26-2008]
(14) Escort services, massage parlors or other similar uses. [Added
9-17-2008 by Ord. No. 26-2008]
§ 198-62 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-62
1:460
§ 198-63. General regulations.
(15) The sale of recreational marijuana and/or paraphernalia that
facilitate the use of such marijuana. [Added 4-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 8-2018]
C. General prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited:
(1) Roadside or sidewalk stands of any sort.
(2) Auctions or auction markets except for auctions of real estate or
other foreclosure activities if otherwise permitted by law and
auctions conducted by the City of Brigantine pursuant to statute.
(3) Auto scrap metal or other junkyards.
(4) Gambling, gaming, bookmaking, or other similar criminal
activities.
A. Street frontage. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with
frontage on a public street which has either been improved to meet City
standards or for which such improvements have been insured by the
posting of a performance guaranty pursuant to the provisions of Article
III, Development Application Review and Approval Procedures.
B. Conflict with the Master Plan or Official Map.142 Where a lot has
frontage upon a street where the Master Plan or Official Map has
proposed a widening of the existing right-of-way, the front yard shall be
measured from the proposed right-of-way.
C. (Reserved)143
D. Corner lots. [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
(1) On all corner lots, the front yard shall be determined by the
following methods:
(a) The small dimension shall be considered the primary lot
frontage on regularly shaped lots and the front yard setback
from that line.
(b) Secondary front yards are permitted a setback of 15 feet,
provided that all other area and bulk requirements are being
met. Should parking be proposed within this front yard, a
minimum of an eighteen-foot setback must be provided.
(c) On an irregularly shaped lot, primary frontage shall be
considered the smaller dimension either along the right-of-way
line or building setback line as measured at the required front
yard setback for that zone district.
142. Editor's Note: Said plan and map are on file in the City offices.
143. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Yards, was repealed 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007.
§ 198-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-63
1:461
(d) On a lot having equal dimension along both street right-of-way
lines, primary lot frontage shall be considered as that on the
more heavily traveled street.
(e) The rear yard or rear lot line shall be that yard or line opposite
and most distant from the primary lot frontage.
(f) The rear yard on corner lots, in all zones, shall be a minimum of
10 feet.
(2) The yard opposite the secondary front yard, considered a side yard
in this subsection, shall meet the required setback and building
separation requirements of the particular zone in which the parcel
is located.
E. Accessory buildings.
(1) No accessory building shall be permitted in any required front yard
area.
(2) Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall comply in
all respects with the yard requirements of this chapter for principal
buildings.
(3) Detached accessory buildings shall be located to the rear of the
front building line of the principal building and, if located in a side
yard area, shall conform to the side yard requirements of this
chapter.
F. Principal buildings. No residential lot shall have erected upon it more
than one principal building.
G. Storage of materials.
(1) No front yard shall be used for the storage of boats, vehicles or any
other equipment except for validly licensed and validly inspectionstickered
vehicular parking on driveways.
(2) All open storage areas shall be properly landscaped in accordance
with Article XII.
H. Displays. Business structures or uses shall not display goods for sale or
coin-operated vending machines of any type in any location which
would encroach upon required yard areas specified in this chapter.
I. Artificial lighting.
(1) No artificial lights shall be used by any building or on any premises
which, because of intensity, location, color or any other factor,
disturb the comfort, health or safety of those residing, working or
using public property, including streets within the range of those
lights.
§ 198-63 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-63
1:462
(2) Artificial lighting systems shall be installed in accordance with
§ 198-71, Lighting.
J. Temporary buildings. Temporary buildings and structures for use
incidental to construction work shall be permitted in all zones, provided
that such buildings are removed upon completion or abandonment for
30 days of the construction work.
K. Solid waste disposal. The dumping of refuse, solid waste material or
other similar substances is prohibited within the City of Brigantine. Any
waste disposal necessary in connection with all new construction,
remodeling, renovation and/or additions shall complete a document
available at the Bureau of Inspections stating the name of the disposal
dump location. No building permit is to be issued until this information
is provided in writing.
L. Placement of fill.
(1) Only inorganic matter may be used for the purpose of fill in order to
establish grades. All fill material shall conform to New Jersey State
Highway Department Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction: Division 2, Earthwork, Section 4, Borrow excavation
used as fill.
(2) A permit shall be obtained by the owner or developer from the
Construction Official prior to the placement of five or more cubic
yards of approved fill material on any property to be developed.
M. Essential services. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the
construction, operation and maintenance of public utility, transmission,
distribution or collection systems in any zone for water, gas, telephone,
or electric service subject to the conditions of this chapter. Such
systems may include systems of poles, wires, underground pipes,
conduits, ducts and transformation equipment, including substations
and appurtenances, necessary for the transmission and/or distribution
of the commodity or service rendered by the public utility to its
customers.
N. Decks. No decks will be permitted in any zone which in anyway extend
from or are attached to peaked roof.
§ 198-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-63
1:463

ARTICLE IX
Design Standards
§ 198-64. General requirements.
The developer shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision and site planning in the design of each subdivision, site
plan or portion thereof. The subdivision plat or site plan shall conform to
design standards that will encourage good development patterns within the
City of Brigantine. Where either or both an Official Map or Master Plan
has or have been adopted, the subdivision or site plan shall conform to
the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The streets, drainage rightsof-
ways, school sites, public parks and playgrounds and conservation areas
shown on the officially adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be
considered in approval of subdivision plats or site plans. Where no Master
Plan or Official Map exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be
shown in the final plat or site plan in accordance with Section 20 of Chapter
433 of the Laws of 1953144 and shall be such as to lend themselves to
the harmonious development of the City of Brigantine and enhance the
public welfare in accordance with the design standards enumerated in the
following sections.
§ 198-65. Blocks.
§ 198-66. Lots.
A. Minimum standards. Block length, width and acreage within the
boundary roads shall be such as to accommodate the size of lot required
in the zoning district by this chapter and to provide for convenient
access, circulation control and safety of both pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. For commercial and multifamily housing, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements specified in this
chapter for such uses.
B. Maximum length. Blocks shall not be in excess of 600 feet long.
Pedestrian walk-through may be required through the block in locations
deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such walkways shall be 10
feet wide and straight from street to street.
A. Minimum standards. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the
requirements as specified in Article V, Residential Zone Regulations,
and Article XIV, Commercial Zone Regulations.
B. Frontage on improved streets. Each lot shall front upon an improved
street with the appropriate width as specified in Article X, Design of
Streets. Alleys are not considered as streets in this subsection.
C. Side lot lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles
to straight streets and radial to curved streets.
144. Editor's Note: See now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 198-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-66
1:465
§ 198-67. Easements.
§ 198-68. Fences and walls.
D. Dedication of additional lot width. Where additional lands have been
dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at the street
line as widened, and all setback lines shall be measured from such line.
E. Grading. All grading of the lot or lots shown in the subdivision site plan
shall be in accordance with the final plan. No building or structure shall
be erected upon a lot which does not meet the requirements for grade
level as specified in the Building Code of the City of Brigantine.
F. Setback to existing buildings. When a new lot is formed so as to include
within its boundaries any part of a former lot on which there is an
existing building or use, the subdivision must be carried out in such a
manner as will not infringe upon any of the provisions of this chapter,
either with respect to any existing buildings, structures or uses and any
proposed structures, buildings or uses, and shall be carried out in
conformance with this chapter.
G. Curbing and sidewalks shall be required on all new construction.
Curbing and sidewalk shall be installed on all adjacent street frontage.
H. Applications for subdivisions shall include legal descriptions and
demarcation of the development restriction line. No development shall
be permitted beyond said line.
A. Minimum width of utility easements. In any development which
requires easements for the installation of utilities, such easements shall
be a minimum of 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the
utility concerned, as well as the Department of Public Works and
Municipal Engineer.
B. Minimum width of pedestrian easements. In any development which
requires an easement to allow public access either to or through the
development, such easements shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and
located in consultation with the Planning Board.
C. Storm drainage. Where a subdivision, site plan or any new construction
is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way or street, there shall be
provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially to the lines of such watercourse and such further width or
construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. All drainage
shall be directed toward a public right-of-way. No drainage shall be
permitted to drain on any adjacent property.
A. Permit required. No fence, wall, fence-like or wall-like structure shall
be erected without first obtaining a permit from the Construction
Official or Zoning Official.
§ 198-66 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-68
1:466
B. Maintenance. Every fence or wall shall be maintained in safe, sound,
upright condition and in accordance with the approved plan on file
with the Construction Official. If the Zoning Officer, upon inspection,
determines that any fence is not being maintained in a safe, sound or
upright condition,, he shall notify the owner of such fence, in writing, of
his findings and state briefly the reasons for such finding and order
such fence or portion of such fence repaired or removed within 15 days
of the date of the written notice.
C. Prohibited fence types. Except for required security fences, the
following fences and fencing material are specifically prohibited:
barbed-wire fences, sharp pointed fences, canvas, cloth and electrically
charged fences and expandable and collapsible fences.
D. Height limitations.
(1) Fences may be erected, altered or reconstructed to a height not to
exceed four feet above the ground level when located within 25 feet
of any street line in a residential zone. [Amended 12-19-2007 by
Ord. No. 25-2007]
(2) Fences may be erected, altered or reconstructed to a height not to
exceed six feet above ground level when located more than 25 feet
from any street line in a residential zone or when located in any
yard area of a use in a business zone. Fences or walls as permitted
above shall be constructed with the finished side facing out. The
post for the fence may be extended an additional six inches in
height and the pilasters for a wall may extend an additional 12
inches in height. The same decorative extensions to the posts and
pilasters permitted in rear yards are also permitted in the front
yard. [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
(3) Fences may be erected, altered or reconstructed to a height not to
exceed six feet when located in the side or rear yard of any dwelling
in a residential zone and erected around a swimming pool.
(4) The foregoing restrictions shall not be applied so as to prevent the
erection of an open-wire fence not exceeding eight feet above
ground level anywhere within a park, public playground or school
premises.
E. Location. All fences must be erected within the property lines, and no
fence shall be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way.
F. General. The foregoing restriction shall not be applied so as to restrict
the erection of a retaining wall for the purpose of retaining earth or a
temporary fence for the protection of shrubbery
G. A “privacy fence or wall” is defined as any fence or wall that obscures
visibility through the fence by 50% if viewed at right angles. [Added
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
§ 198-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-69
1:467
§ 198-69. Swimming pools.
§ 198-70. Off-street loading and unloading.
A. Required setbacks. No swimming pool shall be located closer to any
property line than specified in Subsection B, in the Schedule of
Swimming Pool Setbacks. The required setbacks shall be measured
from the nearest pool line to the property line.
B. The Schedule of Swimming Pool Setbacks is as follows:
Schedule of Swimming Pool Setbacks
Zone District
Front
(feet)
Required Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
R-1 20 7 7
R-2 20 6 6
R-2A 20 6 6
R-3 20 6 6
R-3B 20 7 7
R-4 20 6 6
R-5 40 20 20
R-6 25 20 20
R-7 25 20 20
R-8 20 7 7
C. Safety enclosure. All swimming pools shall be completely surrounded
by a safety enclosure, permanent barrier or obstruction, such as a fence
or wall. This enclosure shall be a minimum of four feet in height and
shall be constructed in such a manner to entirely enclose the area on
which the swimming pool is located and prevent all reasonable and
normal access to the swimming pool except through a substantial selfclosing
gate or gates of the same height as the fence, equipped with a
facility for locking said gate when the pool is unattended or unguarded.
A residence or clubhouse may be considered as part of the safety
enclosure if it meets the preceding criteria.
A. General requirements. For every building, structure or part thereof
having over 3,000 square feet of gross floor area, erected and occupied
for retail trade establishments, motels, places of public and quasipublic
assembly and other similar uses involved in the receipt and
distribution of materials or merchandise by vehicles, there shall be
provided and permanently maintained adequate space for off-street
standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue
interference with the public use of streets or alleys. Every building,
structure or addition thereto having a use which complies with the
above definition shall be provided with as least one loading space. One
§ 198-69 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-70
1:468
§ 198-71. Lighting
The following lighting standards shall be applied to all zone districts in the
City of Brigantine.
§ 198-72. Stormwater management.
additional truck space of these dimensions shall be provided for every
additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
B. Dimension. A required loading space shall be a minimum of 15 by 40
feet or 600 square feet.
C. Access. Access to the loading and unloading space shall be provided
directly from a public street or from an accessway that will not interfere
with public convenience and will permit orderly and safe movement of
service vehicles.
D. Restricted use. Loading spaces as required under this section shall be
provided as area in addition to off-street parking space and shall not be
considered as furnishing off-street parking space.
A. Public safety and security. All off-street parking areas, pedestrian
walkways and accessways serving both residential and commercial
uses shall be adequately illuminated for security and safety purposes.
B. Glare prevention. All lighting shall be designed, oriented and installed
in order to prevent glare.
C. Lighting intensity standards. Lighting intensity standards shall be as
follows:
(1) Minimum intensity in any illuminated area shall be 0.3 footcandle.
(2) Average lighting intensity in any illuminated area shall be 0.5
footcandle.
(3) Off-street parking areas for commercial and multifamily uses shall
have a lighting intensity of 1 1/2 footcandles.
(4) Lighting intensity in all other areas shall be based on accepted
industry standards.
D. Fixture heights. The maximum height for any lighting standard shall not
exceed 25 feet, unless specifically waived by the Planning Board.
A. Intent. The intent of this section is to provide clear design criteria for
the various types of development in the City of Brigantine. The
objective of stormwater management within the City is to keep all
postdevelopment flows.
B. Provision for emergency overflow. Whenever feasible, as determined by
the City Engineer, positive outflows for emergency stormwater
§ 198-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-72
1:469
§ 198-73. Performance standards.
discharge are required. This design requirement will be strictly
enforced for new development along the beaches and back bays.
C. Soil borings. Soil borings shall be required to verify if on-site
stormwater recharge is feasible.
D. On-site retention of stormwater. Stormwater retention basins, designed
to hold water for lengthy periods of time, are discouraged.
E. Design storm criteria. All proposed development projects in the City
shall use a twenty-five-year storm event of twenty-four-hour duration as
the design criteria.
F. Whenever an applicant has received approval from the Planning Board
for a development which will require the placement of catch basins at
or near said development, the Planning Board shall, in its discretion,
require the developer to pay for and place a sign at each said catch
basin setting forth the requirements and penalties of §§ 220-23 to
220-26 of the Code of the City of Brigantine.
A. Standards for review. All permitted uses shall conform to the following
performance standards. If the performance characteristics of any
proposed use are questionable, a building permit may be withheld until
the applicant for such use shall, upon request of the review agency,
furnish any or all of the following:
(1) A detailed description of the proposed process and its product.
(2) Reports prepared by competent technical experts showing that
dissemination of smoke, dust, odors, fumes and other obnoxious
gases shall be within the limits of the State of New Jersey.
(3) Liquid waste and effluents shall be discharged into an approved
existing sewage treatment plant, in accordance with that plant's
regulations.
(4) Precaution against fire hazards, radiation and explosion and proper
handling and storage of materials and structural design and
safeguards for the health of workers shall comply with the state
statutes and requirements of the State Department of Health and
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
(5) No vibration or glare will be evident at any point beyond the
property lines of the lot on which it is located.
B. All uses must stay within the tolerance standards set forth above, and
the user shall furnish proof of this when asked to so by the governing
body.
§ 198-72 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-73
1:470
ARTICLE X
Design of Streets
§ 198-74. Intent.
The intent of this article is to ensure that the future arrangement of streets
not presently shown on the Master Plan145 be in harmony with the existing
street patterns, provide for the logical and orderly extension of existing
streets and enhance the control of vehicular movements within the City of
Brigantine.
§ 198-75. Street widths.
A. All streets shall be designed in accordance with the standards shown in
the following schedule:
Schedule of Street Widths
Minimum Width
Category
Street Rightof-
Way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet)
Major arterial 100 60
Minor arterial 80 48
Collector 60 40
Local 50 36
Cul-de-sac 50 30
Limited access 42 28
Marginal access 40 26
B. Modification of street width.
(1) The above schedule shall be construed as the minimum standards
and may be increased in special cases where, because of high
traffic volumes or reasons of public safety, the Planning Board or its
experts deem such modification as necessary.
(2) Applications requesting the reduction of either street or cartway
widths shall require a public hearing and be reviewed as an
application for variance.
C. Street dedication. Subdivisions or site plans that adjoin or include
existing streets do not conform to the widths as shown on the Master
Plan or in Subsection A, which contains the Schedule of Street Widths,
shall dedicate additional width along either or both sides. One-half of
the required extra width shall be dedicated on each or either side.
145. Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-76
1:471
§ 198-76. Street geometry.
The following design standards shall be utilized in the design of any new
street or extension of an existing street:
§ 198-77. Sight triangles.
At the intersection of two or more streets, no vegetation, landscaping, fence
or wall, other than a single post or tree not exceeding one square foot in
cross section, which is higher than three feet above street grade, nor any
other obstruction to vision, shall be permitted in the triangular area formed
by the intersecting street lines and a line joining points each 25 feet distant
from said intersection along said street lines. This standard is subject to the
rules and regulations of the Atlantic County Division of Planning and the
New Jersey Department of Transportation.
§ 198-78. (Reserved)
§ 198-79. General requirements.
A. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible and in
no case less than 60.
B. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
C. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper site distance.
D. Maximum grade on arterial and collector streets shall be 4%.
E. Maximum grade on local, internal access and marginal access streets
and culs-de-sac shall be 10%.
F. Minimum grade on all streets shall be 1/2%.
G. Curb radii at intersections shall not be less than 20 feet.
H. A tangent at least 100 feet in length shall be introduced between
reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
I. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10 and not more than 45, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for local streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
A. Local streets. Local streets shall be designed so as to discourage
through traffic.
B. Street names. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so
nearly duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets.
The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
§ 198-76 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-79
1:472
§ 198-80. Accessways and access control.
C. Reserve strips. No subdivision or site plan showing reserve strips
controlling access to streets shall be approved except where the
control and disposal of land comprising such strips has been placed
with the City government under conditions approved by the Planning
Board.
D. Restriction of use. No yard, open space, parking area, buffer strip or
landscaping shall be permitted within a dedicated street.
A. Purpose. The purpose of controlling site access is to encourage the
sound development of street frontage by the elimination of
unchannelled automobile access or egress to nonresidential sites.
B. Access barriers. All buildings or building complexes used for
nonresidential purposes, including off-street parking areas, shall be
physically separated from any street by a curb. In addition to curbing,
arterial streets shall have a landscaped strip of not less than 10 feet in
depth along the entire frontage except for accessways permitted in
Subsection C. Streets other than arterial streets shall have a landscape
strip with a minimum depth of five feet. The design of access barriers
shall be in accordance with Article XII, Landscaping, Buffers and Open
Space Design.
C. Accessways. Each permitted nonresidential use shall be limited to the
number of accessways or driveways as shown in Subsection D, which
contains the Schedule of Permitted Accessways. These standards shall
be followed in the design of accessways or driveways.
(1) If practical, the use of common accessways by two or more
permitted uses shall be provided for in order to reduce the number
and closeness of access points along the streets.
(2) The use of marginal access streets shall be considered for
nonresidential uses along arterial streets.
(3) Accessways for nonresidential uses shall be a minimum of 24 feet in
width and shall not exceed 40 feet in width.
(4) Accessways for other than nonresidential uses shall be a minimum
of 20 feet in width and shall not exceed 30 feet in width.
D. The Schedule of Permitted Accessways is as follows:
§ 198-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-80
1:473
§ 198-81. Street construction.
Schedule of Permitted Accessways
Permitted Accessway
Frontage
(feet) 1-Way 2-Way
Residential use
200 or less 2 1
200 to 500 4 2
500 to 1,000 5 3
1,000 to 2,000 7 5
2,000 or more 8 6
Nonresidential use
200 or less 2 1
200 to 500 4 2
500 to 1,000 6 4
1,000 to 2,000 7 5
2,000 or more 8 6
E. Construction of accessways.
(1) Grading of accessways shall conform to the following:
(a) Five-tenths percent minimum to 10% maximum.
(b) Maximum slope of 2% for the first 20 feet from the street line.
(2) Curb cuts to a public street shall not be closer than 25 feet from the
point of curvature or point of tangency of the corner radius curb of
an intersecting street.
(3) Driveway pavement shall extend to the paved portion of the street
which it connects and shall be constructed with a minimum of six
inches of portland cement concrete Class B.
(4) No accessways shall be curbed closer to any property line than five
feet.
(5) Driveway pavement serving a loading area shall be constructed
with a minimum of six inches of portland cement concrete.
F. Pedestrian safety. The means for the vehicular access and egress to any
commercial or multifamily development shall be clearly defined and
controlled to ensure the safe integration of automotive traffic with other
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
§ 198-80 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-81
1:474
§ 198-82. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
A. Pavement thickness. The pavement thickness design of a dedicated
public street shall, as a minimum, conform to the following schedule:
TYPE II
Street
Classification
Type of
Pavement
Bituminous
Stabilized Base
(inches)
Class B Subbase
(inches)
Arterial 2-inch FABC 4 12
Collector 2-inch FABC 3 6
Local or cul-desac
2-inch FABC 2 6
Marginal access 2-inch 2 6
B. Alternate street design.
(1) At the option of the Municipal Engineer, the pavement thickness
may be determined by the certified results of soil testing and
analysis conducted to determine the bearing strength of the
subgrade soil, together with the projected use of the street with an
adequate margin to cover all contingencies and extraordinary
conditions.
(2) When such tests are conducted, the pavement design shall be
reviewed and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
(3) In no event shall the paving be less than six inches of Type II Class
B subbase, with two inches of bituminous stabilized base and two
inches of FABC-1 surface.
A. Sidewalk requirements.
(1) Concrete sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of the street in
accordance with the construction standards in Subsection B.
(2) All new construction of any nature shall require concrete sidewalk
and concrete curbing, as described in Subsection B. Cracked
existing concrete shall be replaced to new condition (Class C
concrete).
B. Construction standards.
(1) All sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet wide and four inches
thick portland cement concrete, Class C.
(2) All driveways, including walkway crossings, shall be six inches
thick, portland cement concrete, Class C, and shall include six-bysix-
by-six inch No. 6 gauge wire mesh reinforcement.
§ 198-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-82
1:475
(3) All sidewalk and driveway concrete shall be struck with contraction
joints every five feet, maximum, and have an approved expansion
joint each 25 feet, maximum. Expansion joint material to be cork or
mastic materials or approved equal.
(4) All sidewalks serving multifamily developments shall be a minimum
of five feet wide and four inches thick.
(5) All sidewalks serving commercial and business uses shall be a
minimum of six feet wide and four inches thick.
C. Curb requirements. Concrete curbing shall be installed on both sides of
the street in accordance with the construction standards in Subsection
D.
D. Construction standards for curbs.
(1) All curbing shall be constructed to the dimensions of six inches
wide at the top, eight inches wide at the bottom and 18 inches deep
and construction of portland cement concrete, Class B.
(2) Expansion joints of cork or mastic materials or approved equal
shall be installed every 25 feet, maximum.
§ 198-82 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-82
1:476
ARTICLE XI
Off-Street Parking
§ 198-83. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to ensure that adequate off-street parking
is provided to meet the parking needs of all uses located within the City
of Brigantine. All parking areas shall be designed and situated so as to
ensure their usefulness, to protect the public safety and, where appropriate,
to mitigate potential adverse impact on adjacent uses. It shall be the
responsibility of the developer, owner or operator of a specific use to
provide and maintain adequate off-street parking for that use.
§ 198-84. Off-Street Parking Schedule; additional requirements.
A. The Off-Street Parking Schedule is as follows: [Amended 12-19-2007
by Ord. No. 25-2007]
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Proposed Land Use
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Amusement facility 1 per 200 square feet, plus 1 per
employee
Automobile service
station
2, plus 4 per service bay
Barbershop or beauty
parlor
2 per chair or station, plus 1 per
employee
Bowling alley 2 per lane
Billiard hall 2 per table, plus 1 per employee
Commercial marina 1 per berth
Church 1 per 4 seats
Golf course, country
club
6 per regulation hole, plus additional
parking as required by use
Laundromat 1 per 4 washing machines
Marina yacht club 1 per berth
Motel or hotel Refer to Subsection B
Multifamily Refer to Subsection D
Office building 4 per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable
area
Professional office 1 per 300 square feet, plus 1 per
employee
Public assembly 1 per 4 seats or 1 per 35 square feet
Recreational facility 10 minimum, plus 1 per 35 square feet
§ 198-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-84
1:477
Off-Street Parking Schedule
Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Proposed Land Use
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Restaurant and bars 1 per 3 seats or portion thereof, plus 1
per 2 employees
Restaurant, fast-food 1 per 3 seats or portion thereof, plus 1
per employee
Retail food
establishment
1 per 100 square feet
Retail service
establishment
4 per 1,000 square feet of gross leasable
area
Retail trade
establishment
1 per 400 square feet
Single-family detached Refer to Subsection D
Supermarket 1 per 100 square feet
Specialty food store 1 per 100 square feet
B. Hotels and motels.
(1) Parking requirements for hotels and motels shall be determined
according to the following types of units:
Proposed Land Use
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces
Single room unit 1 per unit
Efficiency unit 1 per unit
Suite unit 1 per bedroom
(2) Parking must be provided for each employee intended to be on the
premises (one space per employee). Parking space and sufficient
driveways must also be shown for purposes of guest check-in and
each accessory use intended for the premises. The Planning Board
may take into account potential joint use of the facilities by guests,
between principal uses and accessory uses, in determining the
maximum required spaces for any motel or hotel facility. In making
such determination, the Planning Board and the applicant should
take into account the reasonable requirements of the operation of a
proposed motel or hotel, of the type presented to the Board and the
impact upon the surrounding uses to ensure that sufficient parking
exists such that the proposed use will not adversely impact
adjoining neighborhoods or access to the beach, dunes or other
recreation areas.
C. The applicable standard shall be whichever results in the greater
number of parking spaces.
§ 198-84 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-84
1:478
§ 198-85. Applicability; general requirements.
D. Parking must be provided for all residential construction according to
the following housing types:
Proposed Land Use
Minimum Number of Off-Street Parking
Spaces
Single-family
detached
2
Multifamily attached 2 per unit*
*NOTE: Except one space for each two bedrooms in any zone where
the dwelling unit is an apartment above a store or office where such
use is permitted and parking is provided for in accordance with this
chapter. Where such dwelling unit exceeds two bedrooms, then the
minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be an additional
one space per each additional bedroom.
E. General notes.
(1) Where the application of the preceding schedules results in a
fractional space, then the fraction shall be rounded to the higher
whole number.
(2) The number of parking spaces required by these schedules may be
increased as a condition of a conditional use approval if it can be
demonstrated through a parking study that the proposed use would
have a parking demand in excess of the requirements given in this
chapter.
(3) The parking requirements for uses not specifically listed in the
schedule shall be determined by the Planning Board on the basis of
requirements for similar uses and on any traffic engineering and
planning data that is appropriate to the establishment of a
minimum requirement.
(4) In applications that propose a combination of uses on the site,
parking shall be provided for each of the uses on the site according
to the schedules given in this chapter.
(5) Total coverage restrictions of Article XI of this chapter shall
exempt, as a matter of right, the off-street parking required by this
chapter for single-family construction.
A. New construction. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for any
new building constructed, for any new use established, for any addition
or enlargement of an existing building or use and for any change of
occupancy of an existing building or the manner in which a use is
conducted that would result in additional parking spaces being
required.
§ 198-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-85
1:479
§ 198-86. Modification of requirements.
Decreases in the number of off-street parking spaces required by this
chapter in the preceding schedules may be granted under the following
criteria:
B. Additions to existing buildings. For additions or enlargements of any
existing building or use, or any change of occupancy or manner of
operation that would increase the number of parking spaces required,
the additional parking spaces shall be required only for such addition,
enlargement or change and not for the entire building or use, unless
required as a condition of approval of conditional use permit.
C. Handicapped spaces. In all situations where additional off-street
parking is required, all existing and proposed handicapped parking
spaces located on the site shall be marked and striped in accordance
with § 198-88.
D. Temporary uses. The requirements of this chapter shall apply to
temporary as well as permanent uses.
E. Continuance. No building or use of land lawfully existing as of the
effective date of this chapter shall be considered nonconforming solely
because of lack of off-street parking facilities required by this chapter.
F. Approved projects of records. Projects with unexpired site plan or
conditional use approvals prior to the effective date of this chapter must
only meet the requirements of this section of this chapter in effect on
the date of final approval.
A. Shared parking areas.
(1) In the instance of an application for a variance from the Off-Street
Parking Schedule146 due to the consideration for shared parking, a
parking study shall be submitted by the applicant demonstrating
that there will not exist substantial conflict in the peak hours of
parking demand for the uses for which shared parking is proposed.
(2) The number of parking spaces which may be credited against the
requirements for the structures or uses involved shall not exceed
the number of spaces reasonably anticipated to be available during
differing hours of operation.
(3) An application for shared parking shall be accompanied by a
written agreement executed by the parties concerned assuring the
continued availability of the parking spaces designated for shared
use. The agreement shall be subject to the review of the Municipal
Attorney.
B. Transportation management plan.
146. Editor's Note: See §198-84.
§ 198-85 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-86
1:480
§ 198-87. Parking space dimensions.
(1) The number of required parking spaces for retail trade and service
establishments may be reduced up to 20%, subject to the approval
of a transportation management plan furnished by the applicant.
(2) The evaluation of such a reduction shall include, but not be limited
to, the evaluation of the following factors:
(a) Projected effectiveness of car pools, van pools, staggered work
hours or similar transportation programs.
(b) Proximity to public transportation facilities serving a
significant portion of employees and/or customers.
(c) Evidence that employees and/or customers utilize on a regular
basis transportation alternatives to the automobile.
C. Required findings of fact. Any application for a variance from the
required off-street parking in the preceding schedules shall require the
Planning Board to make the following findings:
(1) That the intent of this section of this chapter shall be preserved.
(2) That the parking provided will be sufficient to serve the use for
which it is intended.
(3) That the modification will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare.
A. Automobile, residential.
(1) Covered stall or space. Each covered off-street parking space shall
be in a garage or carport. Such a space shall be a minimum of nine
feet in width and 20 feet in depth. These measurements shall not
include the exterior walls or structural supports. No stacked
covered parking shall be provided unless full-time valet parking is
provided.
(2) Uncovered stall. Each uncovered off-street parking space shall be a
minimum of nine feet in width and 18 feet in depth.
(3) Parallel stall. Each parallel off-street parking space shall have a
minimum dimension of eight feet wide by 22 feet long. If a parallel
space abuts one or fewer parallel spaces and access is adequate to
that space, then the length may be reduced to 20 feet.
(4) Stacked space. No stacked parking is permitted except when one
parking space is stacked behind a closed-door, garaged single
space in connection with one-to-two dwelling unit residential
construction. Stacked parking is permitted in commercial uses
when full-time valet parking is provided.
§ 198-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-87
1:481
§ 198-88. Standard improvements.
The following improvements shall be required for all off-street parking
areas:
(5) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, stacked parking will be
permitted in association with detached single-family residential
uses.
B. Automobile, all other uses.
(1) Full-sized space. Each full-sized off-street parking space shall be a
minimum of nine feet in width and 18 feet in depth. If such a space
is covered, these dimensions shall not include the exterior walls or
structural supports.
(2) Employee/valet or long-term space. Parking spaces shall be
specifically assigned to employees, parking spaces shall be utilized
by a valet parking system, and parking spaces designated for longterm
usage may be reduced to 8.5 feet in width.
(3) Parallel stall. Each parallel off-street parking space shall have a
minimum dimension of eight feet wide by 22 feet long. If a parallel
space abuts one or fewer parallel spaces and access is adequate to
that space, then the length may be reduced to 20 feet.
C. Handicapped, all applicable uses. Each handicapped space shall be 14
feet wide, lined to provide a nine-foot-wide parking area and a five-footwide
loading area, and 19 feet in depth. If two handicapped spaces are
adjacent to each other, they may share the five-foot-wide loading area,
resulting in a width of 23 feet for both spaces.
A. Surfacing. All parking spaces, driveways and aisles shall be paved with
a dustless durable, asphaltic or portland concrete all-weather surface
or as approved by the Municipal Engineer.
B. Wheel stops. All parking spaces shall have concrete wheel stops not less
than six inches in height where required to prevent encroachment into
landscaped or pedestrian areas, fences and property lines.
C. Directional arrows and signage. Parking areas or facilities containing
10 or more parking spaces shall have all aisles, driveways, approach
lanes and maneuvering areas clearly marked with directional arrows
and signs in order to expedite traffic movement. Signage shall be in
conformance with Article XV, Sign Regulations, of this chapter.
D. Pedestrian safety islands. Pedestrian safety islands shall be required at
the end of alternate parking bays if such bays are more than 200 feet in
length. Such islands shall be landscaped and designed in such a manner
as to provide a safe area for pedestrians to wait prior to crossing
vehicular traffic lanes. Each safety island shall be at least 300 square
feet in area.
§ 198-87 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-88
1:482
§ 198-89. Location of parking spaces.
The purpose of the requirements in this section is to ensure that parking
facilities are situated so that they will conveniently access the uses they
are intended to serve. All parking spaces required by this chapter shall be
located on the same site they are intended to serve, except as permitted in
the following sections:
E. Striping and identification.
(1) Automobile. All parking stalls shall be clearly outlined with either
single or double lines of a minimum of three inches in width, in
white paint, according to the sizes delineated in § 198-87, Parking
spaces dimensions.
(2) Handicapped. All handicapped spaces shall be striped and marked
according to the applicable state standards.
(3) All spaces shall be clearly identified according to their respective
use, such as employee, handicapped, valet or car-pool spaces.
F. Operation and maintenance.
(1) All parking areas and facilities required by this chapter or in
operation at the time of the adoption of this chapter shall be
maintained for the duration of the use requiring these facilities.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator of a specific
use to ensure that the required parking facilities are maintained in
good operating condition and to ensure that the parking facilities
are periodically swept and cleaned.
G. Restriction of parking lot uses.
(1) These facilities shall be used exclusively for the parking of vehicles.
(2) The parking facilities shall not be used for the storage of
merchandise storage or repair of vehicles or equipment.
(3) Parking facilities shall not be used for the sale of merchandise,
except on a temporary basis for special events, subject to the
approval of City Council or its designated representative.
H. General requirements. All parking areas shall either meet or exceed the
requirements of the following sections of this chapter:
(1) Article XII, Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
(2) Section 198-71, Lighting.
(3) Section 198-72, Stormwater management.
A. Residential parking areas.
§ 198-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-89
1:483
(1) All automobile spaces required for residential uses shall be located,
at a maximum, the following distances from the units they are
serving:
(a) Resident parking: 200 feet.
(b) Visitor parking: 250 feet.
(2) Distances shall be measured from a dwelling unit's entry to the
parking space(s) serving that unit. For developments where a
stairway or elevator provides access to the dwelling unit(s), that
stairway or elevator shall be considered to be the entrance to the
dwelling unit(s) for the purpose of computing distances.
(3) Variation from this section shall be considered as a design waiver
subject to the approval of the Planning Board.
B. Handicapped spaces. All handicapped spaces shall be located as close
as it is practical to the principal entrance of the use they are intended to
serve and oriented so that a user of the handicapped space does not
have to go past the rear of the parking space in order to reach the
building's principal entrance.
C. Commercial and nonresidential uses.
(1) For commercial and all nonresidential uses in business districts,
required off-street parking shall be provided within 200 feet of such
use. It shall be measured from the nearest point of the parking
facility to the nearest point of the use it is intended to serve.
(2) Additional parking areas may be maintained as accessory to such
use, provided that such areas are located within 1,000 feet of the
subject property, measured as herein provided, and are in the same
zone.
D. Shared parking between uses. A parking area or facility may serve two
or more buildings or uses located on adjacent lots within the same zone,
provided that the total of the parking spaces furnished to serve these
buildings or uses shall not be less than the total number of off-street
parking spaces required by this chapter if computed separately for each
use or building. Furthermore, the land on which this shared parking
facility is located shall be owned by one or more of the collective users.
E. Yard restrictions. Parking areas for commercial uses and multifamily
uses, not including garden apartments and townhouses, may be located
in any yard area, but not closer than five feet from a street line. Parking
areas containing spaces for more than six vehicles shall not be closer
than 15 feet to a property line which is a common property line with a
lot zoned to permit a one-family dwelling unless said adjacent lot is
used for either a nonresidential purpose or a residential use, including
parking for 20 or more vehicles.
§ 198-89 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-89
1:484
F. Access aisles. Access aisles and driveways to parking areas shall not be
less than 10 feet in width. Access aisles and driveways within parking
areas shall have minimum width as follows:
(1) For angle parking from 90º to 60º: 25 feet.
(2) For angle parking from 60º to 45º: 20 feet.
(3) For angle parking from 45º and less: 18 feet.
(4) For parallel parking: 12 feet.
§ 198-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-89
1:485

ARTICLE XII
Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design
§ 198-90. Purpose and intent.
The intention of this article is to improve the appearance of nonresidential
yards, off-street parking areas and service areas in the City of Brigantine.
Its purpose is to protect and preserve the character and value of the
surrounding neighborhoods, thereby promoting the general welfare. The
unique Brigantine shore and beachfront environment shall be maintained,
enhanced and improved through the implementation of good landscaping
practices in the development, installation and construction of buffer area
and select screening devices and plantings.
§ 198-91. Areas requiring landscaping.
§ 198-92. Landscaping required adjacent to streets.
On the site of a building or open lot use providing an off-street parking area
or other vehicular use area, where such area will not be entirely screened
visually by an intervening building or structure from any abutting street,
excluding dedicated alleys, there shall be provided landscaping between
these areas and the street as follows:
A. Off-street parking areas. All areas used for the parking of any and all
types of vehicles, boats or heavy-construction equipment, whether such
vehicles, boats or equipment are self-propelled or not, and all land upon
which vehicles traverse the property as a function of the primary use,
including but not limited to activities of a drive-in nature such as, but
not limited to, automobile service stations, drugstores and
supermarkets, banks, restaurants and the like, shall conform to the
minimum landscaping requirements hereinafter provided, save and
except areas used for parking or other vehicular uses under, on or
within buildings, and parking areas serving one- and two-family uses as
normally such residential areas are voluntarily landscaped.
B. All areas of transition between either buildings, structures or uses
having different visual and scenic characteristics shall conform to the
minimum landscaping requirements contained in this article.
A. Buffer strips along off-street parking areas.
(1) A strip of land at least five feet in depth located between the
abutting street and the off-street parking area or other vehicular
use area which is exposed to an abutting street shall be
landscaped, such landscaping to include one tree for each 50 linear
feet or fraction thereof.
(2) Trees located between the abutting street and off-street parking
area or other vehicular use area shall be planted in a area of at
least 25 square feet with one dimension of at least five feet.
§ 198-90 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-92
1:487
§ 198-93. Buffer strips.
§ 198-94. Required landscape screening.
(3) In addition to shade trees, a hedge, wall or other durable landscape
barrier of at least two feet in height shall be placed along only the
perimeter of such landscape strip.
(4) If such durable barrier is of nonliving material, for each 10 feet
thereof, one shrub or vine shall be planted abutting such barrier
but need not be spaced 10 feet apart. Such shrubs or vines shall be
planted along the street side of such barrier unless they are of
sufficient height at the time of the planting to be readily visible over
the top of such barrier.
(5) The remainder of the required landscaped areas shall be
landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape treatment,
excluding paving.
B. Accessways and driveways. Necessary accessways from the public
street through all such landscaping shall be permitted to service the
parking or other vehicular use areas, and such accessways may be
subtracted from the linear dimension used to determine the number of
trees required.
A. General areas. All property other than the required landscaped strip
lying between the street and off-street parking area or other vehicular
use area shall be landscaped with at least grass or other ground cover.
B. Nonresidential and residential areas. Where a side or rear
nonresidential or multifamily development lot line coincides with a
residential lot line, a fifteen-foot-wide buffer strip shall be provided
along the side and rear property lines of the nonresidential or
multifamily project so as to furnish a visual barrier and to provide
protection between the structures, buildings and uses.
C. Extension of use areas. Where a commercial use is extended into a
residential zone district in accordance with § 198-29, Extension of use
area, a fifteen-foot-wide buffer strip shall be provided along either side
or rear property lines abutting the residential zone or within the
extended use area so as to furnish a visual barrier between the
structures, buildings and uses.
D. Minimum widths. Buffer strips shall be a minimum of 15 feet in width,
unless waived by the Planning Board.
E. Restricted use. Buffer strips shall be from buildings, structures,
accessory buildings, signs, accessways, off-street parking areas,
outdoor storage areas, recreational facilities or any other uses.
A. Screening required.
§ 198-92 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-94
1:488
(1) On the site of a building or structure or open lot use providing an
off-street parking area or other vehicular use, where such areas
will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or
structure from abutting property, that portion of such area not so
screened shall be provided with a wall or hedge or other durable
landscape barrier not greater than six feet in height nor less than
four feet in height to form a continuous screen between the offstreet
parking area and such abutting property.
(2) All utilitarian areas, including but not limited to delivery and
pickup areas for multifamily development, retail trade and service
establishments, shall be screened to provide both a visual and
acoustical barrier. Such screening may include the following
structural and landscaping elements, subject to review and
approval by the Planning Board:
(a) A solid masonry wall not less than five feet, six inches above
finished grade.
(b) A solid fence, with an uniform surface treatment, constructed
of a naturally durable material suitable to the coastal
environment not less then six feet above finished grade.
(c) A densely landscaped evergreen screen planted at 30 inches on
center in a single row or at five feet on center in two staggered
rows. This evergreen screen shall be a minimum of five feet
above finished grade at the time of planting with a projected
minimum growth to six feet above finished grade.
B. Location of screening. Such landscape barrier shall be located between
the common lot line and the off-street parking area or other vehicular
use area exposed to the abutting property, provided that the purpose of
screening off-street parking area and other vehicular use areas is
accomplished. If such barrier consists all or in part of plant materials,
such plant materials shall be planted in a planting strip of not less than
2 1/2 feet in width. In addition, one tree shall be provided for each 75
linear feet in such landscape barrier or fractional part thereof. Such
trees shall be located between the common lot line and the off-street
parking area or other vehicular use area. Each shade tree shall be
planted in at least 25 square feet of planting area with a minimum
dimension of at least five feet. Each such planting area shall be
landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape material,
excluding paving, in addition to the required trees.
C. Exceptions. The provisions of Subsection B shall not be applicable in
the following situations:
(1) When a property line abuts a dedicated alley, or to those portions of
the property that are opposite a building or other structure located
on the abutting property.
§ 198-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-94
1:489
§ 198-95. Interior landscaping of parking area.
(2) Where a proposed parking area or other vehicular use area abuts
an existing hedge, wall or other durable landscape barrier on an
abutting property, said existing barrier may be used to satisfy the
landscape barrier requirements of Subsection B, provided that said
existing barrier meets all applicable standards of this chapter and
protection against vehicular encroachment is provided for hedges.
(3) Where the abutting property is zoned or used for nonresidential
uses, only the tree provision with its planting area as prescribed in
Subsection B shall be required; however, the number of trees may
be reduced to one tree for every 125 linear feet or fraction thereof,
but all perimeter requirements shall apply within the front setback
area.
A. Minimum landscaping requirements.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall have at least 10 square feet of
interior landscaping for each parking space, excluding those
spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is required by
other sections hereof and excluding all parking spaces which are
directly served by an aisle abutting and running parallel to such a
perimeter.
(2) Other vehicular use areas shall have one square foot of landscape
area for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof of the total paved
area excluding the first 5,000 square feet of paved area.
B. Minimum landscaped area requirement for property containing both
parking areas and other vehicular use areas. Where the property
contains both parking areas and other vehicular use areas, the two
types of areas may be separated for the purpose of determining the
other vehicular use area by first multiplying the total number of parking
spaces by 400 and subtracting the resulting figure from the total square
footage of the paved area.
C. Minimum landscaped area requirements.
(1) Each separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum dimension
of at least five feet and shall include at least one tree having a clear
trunk of at least five feet, with the remaining area adequately
landscaped with shrubs, ground cover or other permitted
landscaping material not to exceed three feet in height.
(2) The total number of trees shall not be less than one for each 100
square feet or fraction thereof of required interior landscaped area.
Such landscaped areas shall be located in such a manner as to
divide and break up the expanse of paving.
(3) In other vehicular use areas where the strict application of this
subsection will seriously limit the function of said area, the
§ 198-94 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-95
1:490
§ 198-96. Landscaping in sight triangles.
§ 198-97. Plant material.
required landscaping may be located near the perimeter of the
paved area including such perimeters which may be adjacent to a
building on the site. Such required interior landscaping which is
relocated as herein provided shall be in addition to the perimeter
landscaping requirements.
D. Vehicular encroachment. The front of a vehicle may encroach upon any
interior landscaped area when said area is at least 3 1/2 feet in depth
per abutting parking space and protected by wheel stops or curbing.
Two feet of said landscaped area may be part of the required depth of
each abutting parking space.
A. Applicability of sight triangle requirements. When an accessway
intersects a public right-of-way or when the subject property abuts the
intersection of two or more streets, all landscaping within the
triangular areas described below shall provide unobstructed crossvisibility
at a level between three feet and six feet; provided, however,
that trees having limbs and foliage trimmed in such a manner that no
limbs or foliage extend into the cross-visibility area shall be allowed,
provided that they are so located so as not to create a traffic hazard.
Landscaping except required grass or ground cover shall not be located
closer than three feet from the edge of any accessway pavement.
B. Description of sight triangles. The triangular areas above referred to
are:
(1) The areas of property formed by the intersecting lines of the public
street and accessway and a line joining points, each 15 feet distant
from said intersection along said lines of the street and accessway.
(2) The area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection
of two or more streets and a line joining points each 25 feet distant
from said intersection along said lines of the street and accessway.
A. Existing plant material. In instances where healthy plant material exists
prior to its development, in part or in whole, for purposes of off-street
parking or other vehicular use areas, the Planning Board may adjust the
application of these standards to allow credit for such plant material if,
in its opinion, such an adjustment is in keeping with and will preserve
the intent of this section.
B. Plant materials used in conformance with provisions of this chapter
shall conform to the Standards of the American Standard of Nursery
Stock.
C. Trees.
§ 198-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-97
1:491
§ 198-98. Installation, inspection and maintenance.
(1) Trees shall be species having an average mature spread of crown of
greater than 15 feet in Atlantic County and having trunk(s) which
can be maintained in a clean condition over five feet of clear wood.
(2) Trees having an average mature spread of crown less than 15 feet
may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the
equivalent of a fifteen-foot crown spread.
(3) Tree species shall be a minimum of seven feet overall height
immediately after planting.
(4) Trees of species whose roots are known to cause damage to streets
or other public works shall not be planted closer than 12 feet to
such public works. A list of such tree species shall be maintained by
the Department of Public Works for the guidance of the applicant or
developer.
D. Shrubs and hedges.
(1) Shrubs shall be a minimum of two feet in height when measured
immediately after planting.
(2) Hedges, where required, shall be planted and maintained so as to
form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual screen within a
maximum of one year after time of planting.
E. Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of 30 inches in height immediately
after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or
walls to meet physical barrier requirements as specified.
F. Ground cover. Ground covers used in lieu of grass, in whole or in part,
shall be planted in such a matter as to present a finished appearance
and reasonably complete coverage within three months after planting.
G. Lawn grass.
(1) Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as
permanent lawns in Atlantic County.
(2) Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded except
that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to
erosion, and provided that, in areas where other than solid sod or
grass seed is used, nursegrass seed shall be sown for immediate
effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved.
A. Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a sound workmanlike
manner and according to accepted good planting procedures with the
quality of plant materials as described in § 198-97, Plant material. All
elements of landscaping, exclusive of plant material except hedges,
shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances and code
requirements.
§ 198-97 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-98
1:492
B. Inspection. The Building Inspector or his representative shall inspect all
landscaping, and no certificate of occupancy or similar authorization
will be issued unless the landscaping meets the requirements of this
section and/or the specifications of the final plan.
C. Irrigation systems. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily
available water supply with at least one outlet located within 150 feet of
all plant material to be maintained.
D. Maintenance. The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly
and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping which
shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat
and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris.
§ 198-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-98
1:493

ARTICLE XIII
Multifamily Development Design Standards
§ 198-99. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to afford the opportunity for residential
development of moderate to high densities in the coastal environment of
the City of Brigantine, while maintaining the character of the existing
neighborhoods. The intent of these standards is to provide an attractive
and effective transition zone between low-density residential uses and
commercial districts.
§ 198-100. Townhouses.
A. Lot area. The minimum area of a townhouse parcel shall be four acres.
B. Lot frontage. The minimum frontage of a townhouse parcel upon the
principal street shall be 250 feet.
C. Perimeter setbacks. No townhouse structure shall be closer than 25
feet to any boundary of the townhouse parcel except where such
boundary is a common boundary with Conservation Zone District C-1.
Where such common boundary exists, the minimum setback shall be
determined by the Planning Board and its experts but shall in no case
exceed 50 feet.
D. Minimum bulk requirement for individual lots shall be as follows:
(1) Lot area: 2,000 square feet.
(2) Lot width: 20 feet.
(3) Lot depth: 100 feet.
(4) Front setback: 25 feet.
(5) Rear setback: 25 feet.
(6) Side setback: zero feet.
(7) Maximum height: 35 feet.
(8) Maximum site coverage: 75%.
E. Density
(1) There shall be not more than 40 townhouse dwelling units per four
acre parcel of developable land. All lands below the mean highwater
line or designated as coastal wetlands shall not be included
within the gross acreage of the tract for purposes of calculating
density.
F. Public service.
§ 198-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-100
1:495
(1) Every townhouse unit shall be served by public water and sanitary
sewer, which, if required, shall be installed by and at the expense of
the developer.
(2) The developer shall install, at his sole expense, the following
minimum site improvements: streets, accessways, off-street
parking areas, sidewalks, street-lighting, storm drainage facilities,
landscaping and open space areas. These improvements shall be
installed in accordance with this chapter unless a specific waiver is
granted as provided for within the applicable standards or
requirements. Whenever a developer is required to place catch
basins as part of an approval, the Planning Board shall, in its
discretion, require the developer to pay for and place a sign at each
such catch basin setting forth the requirements and penalties of
§§ 220-23 to 220-26 of the Code of the City of Brigantine.
(3) All utilities shall be installed underground within the townhouse
development. These utilities shall include but not be limited to gas,
television cable, telephone, and electric.
G. Parking areas and garages.
(1) All common parking areas, whether open-air or sheltered, shall be
owned, operated and maintained by either a homeowners'
association or condominium association, whichever is applicable,
upon the completion of the project or transfer of ownership from
the developer.
(2) If private residential garages are provided, they shall be an integral
part of the townhouse units and not separate structures.
(3) Private residential garages shall be included in the calculation of
minimum off-street parking spaces to be furnished within the
project.
H. Private area requirements.
(1) Each townhouse dwelling unit shall have a private area at grade
and/or a deck or balcony accessible from the dwelling unit and
adjacent to open space. The total area of the combined elements
shall be a minimum of 400 square feet.
(2) Each townhouse dwelling unit shall be situated on a fee simple lot
defined as under the control of the occupant for their private use.
This lot shall include both front and rear yards having frontage on a
public or private street or common open space.
(3) No accessory building shall be permitted within the private areas
unless proposed as part of the individual unit and townhouse
complex and approved by the Planning Board.
§ 198-100 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-100
1:496
§ 198-101. Garden apartments and nontransient condominiums.
(Reserved)
§ 198-102. Standards applicable to all multifamily developments.
(4) The enclosure of private areas by fences, wall, landscaping or any
other solid form is permitted, subject to the review and approval of
the Planning Board.
I. Structural requirements.
(1) A maximum of eight living units shall be allowed in each row of
townhouses.
(2) The front facade of any townhouse structure shall not continue on
the same plane for a distance of more than the width of two
adjacent dwelling units. Offsets between front facade planes shall
be a least four feet.
(3) When an end unit of a row of townhouses does not side on a street,
an open space of at least 20 feet in width shall be provided between
the street and the adjacent row of townhouses.
(4) Townhouses shall be constructed up to the side lot lines without
side yards, and no windows, door or other openings shall be
installed in any common wall between units. However, where a twostory
townhouse adjoins a single-story townhouse, windows may be
installed in the second-story wall of the two-story townhouse.
J. Appearance. An architectural theme shall be utilized within the
townhouse complex to form an aesthetically pleasing environment for
the occupants. A variety of design elements shall be utilized within this
theme to avoid a repetitive and monotonous appearance of the units.
K. Distance between buildings. Minimum distances between buildings are
shown in § 198-102A, in the Schedule of Distances Between Buildings.
A. The Schedule of Distances Between Buildings is as follows:
Schedule of Distances Between Buildings
BuildingFace
Minimum
(feet)
Average
(feet)
End to end (garden
apartment)
-- --
End to end
(townhouse)
16 18
End to back 30 35
Back to Back 40 50
§ 198-100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-102
1:497
Schedule of Distances Between Buildings
BuildingFace
Minimum
(feet)
Average
(feet)
Front to back 70 75
Front to front 70 75
Front to end 70 75
B. Measurement of building separation. Distances shall be measured
perpendicular to the walls of any multifamily structure. In no case shall
a multifamily structure be closer then 16 feet to another structure, as
measured from any angle. Averages shall be computed within the entire
project or portions of the project if different portions of the project are
separated by 200 feet or more.
C. Solid waste disposal areas.
(1) All trash compactors, bins and areas of refuse storage and
recyclable storage areas shall be located in a common area and in
such a manner to be screened from the general view of the public
and must comply with all other ordinances of the City of Brigantine
including any ordinance in reference to dumpsters.147
(2) Solid waste disposal areas shall be fully accessible to service
vehicles.
(3) Solid waste disposal areas shall be maintained in a clean and
orderly condition at all time.
(4) Solid waste disposal areas shall be designed of a durable material
consistent with the architectural theme of the development.
(5) Disposal area and all facilities shall be provided and maintained by
the owner of the apartment or condominium project.
D. Public safety considerations.
(1) All multifamily developments shall address the following public
safety issues within the application for development:
(a) Emergency access routes for police, fire and ambulance
vehicles.
(b) Architectural techniques utilized to enhance the security of the
development's occupants.
(2) All public safety facilities located in a project shall be kept
unobstructed by parking and/or any other type of storage. No
parking spaces shall be placed to obstruct access as approved by
the Fire Chief and/or Police Chief of the City of Brigantine.
147. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
§ 198-102 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-102
1:498
ARTICLE XIV
Commercial Use Design Standards
§ 198-103. Intent.
It is the intent of this article to assimilate commercial uses within the
City without physically or visually impacting the established residential
character of Brigantine.
§ 198-104. Motels, hotels and transient condominiums.
A. Bulk requirements. Motels and hotels shall be subject to the bulk
requirements of the specific zone district where these uses are located.
Refer to Article XIV, Commercial Zone Regulations.
B. Density. The permitted number of motel or hotel rooms shall be
determined according to the following schedule:
Room Type
Minimum Site Area Per Room
(square feet)
Motel or hotel room (bedroom
room only)
800
Motel or hotel efficiency unit,
including kitchen
1,000
Motel or hotel suite unit (1 or
more bedrooms)
1,250
C. Density calculation. The following formulas shall be used to determine
the maximum number of motel or hotel rooms permitted on site:
Room type x Minimum site
area per room
= Total site area required
OR
Total site
area Total motel
or
Minimum site
area per room
= hotel rooms
permitted
D. Solid waste disposal areas.
(1) All trash compactors, bins and areas of refuse storage and
recyclable storage shall be located in a common area and in such a
manner to be screened from the general view of the public and
must comply with all other ordinances of the City of Brigantine
including any ordinances in reference to dumpsters.148
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
§ 198-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-104
1:499
(2) Solid waste disposal areas shall be fully accessible to service
vehicles.
(3) Solid waste disposal areas shall be maintained in a clean and
orderly condition at all times.
(4) Solid waste disposal enclosures shall be designed of a durable
material consistent with the architectural theme of the
development.
E. Public safety considerations. All motel or hotel developments shall
address the following public safety issues within the application for
development:
(1) Emergency access routes for police, fire and ambulance vehicles.
(2) Architectural techniques utilized to enhance the security of the
development's occupants.
(3) Barrier-free access throughout the facility.
F. Minimum habitable floor area. A motel or hotel room shall contain a
minimum of 275 square feet.
G. Accessory uses.
(1) Restaurants and bars are permitted accessory uses within a motel
or hotel complex containing 100 units or more, subject to the bulk
requirements of the zone district.
(2) The site area assigned to these uses will not reduce the total site
area used to compute the maximum number of motel or hotel
rooms permitted.
(3) Other permitted accessory uses to a motel or hotel complex
containing 100 rooms or more include management and sales
offices, health clubs and small retail trade establishments.
(4) No individual accessory use shall exceed 2,000 square feet of gross
leasable area, and the total aggregate area of these accessory uses
within a single complex shall not exceed 10% of the total gross floor
area.
(5) Accessory uses as described herein shall not be permitted above
the ground floor.
H. Building separation. There shall be a minimum of 75 feet between
building faces containing windows. In any other case, there shall be a
minimum of 20 feet between structures.
I. Off-street parking. All off-street parking shall be designed and operated
in accordance with Article XI, Off-Street Parking.
§ 198-104 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-104
1:500
§ 198-105. Shopping centers.
J. Signs. All signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the provisions of Article XV, Sign Regulations.
K. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article
XII, Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
L. All motels/hotels must have a main lobby, a central reservation desk and
a specified area for the pickup and dropoff of guests and luggage.
A. Permitted commercial uses. Those uses specified in § 198-49, Business
use matrix, are permitted uses when included as an integral part of a
shopping center. Banks, restaurants, fast-food and carry-out
restaurants, motels or hotels are permitted on separate parcels within
the B-3 Zone District subject to the area and bulk requirements
previously stated. These uses must be integrated with the overall
design of the shopping center in respect to parking, signage,
landscaping, traffic circulation and aesthetic character.
B. Maximum floor area. The gross leasable area of the commercial and
business uses shall not exceed 150% of the total site area or be less
than 25% of the total site area.
C. Commercial and business use mix. Retail service establishments
(business) shall not exceed 60% of the occupancy of the gross leasable
area. The total area of either hotel or motel rooms shall be considered
as gross leasable area for those uses in this zone district and shall not
exceed 30% of the occupancy of the gross leasable area.
D. Hotel and motel density. The total number of motel or hotel rooms
permitted shall be determined as specified in § 198-104.
E. Solid waste disposal areas.
(1) All trash compactors, bins and areas of refuse storage and
recyclables shall be located in a common area and in such a manner
as to be screened from the general view of the public and must
comply with all other ordinances of the City of Brigantine including
any ordinance in reference to dumpsters.149
(2) Solid waste disposal areas shall be fully accessible to service
vehicles.
(3) Solid waste disposal areas shall be maintained in a clean and
orderly condition at all times.
(4) Solid waste disposal enclosures shall be designed of a durable
material consistent with the architectural theme of the
development.
149. Editor's Note: See Ch. 187, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
§ 198-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-105
1:501
§ 198-106. Commercial marinas.
F. Building separation. There shall be a minimum of 15 feet between any
commercial structure.
G. Off-street parking. All off-street parking shall be designed and operated
in accordance with Article XI, Off-Street Parking.
H. Signs. All signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the provisions of Article XV, Sign Regulations.
I. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article
XII, Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
J. Design coordination. A shopping center shall be designed and
constructed as one attached architectural unit, including building, onsite
parking facilities, on-site loading facilities and other requirements
contained in this chapter.
K. Underground services. All utility service lines in the shopping center
complex shall be underground.
A. Permitted activities. The following activities and commercial uses may
be permitted as part of the operation of a commercial marina:
(1) Berth rental and watercraft dockage.
(2) Wet storage and temporary docking.
(3) Watercraft rental.
(4) Launching facilities.
(5) Dry storage.
(6) Maintenance and minor repairs.
(7) Retail food establishments.
(8) Retail trade establishments.
(9) Business and administrative offices.
B. Signs. All signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the provisions of Article XV, Sign Regulations.
C. Off-street parking. All off-street parking areas shall be designed and
operated in accordance with Article XI, Off-Street Parking.
D. Dry storage.
(1) The dry storage of seaworthy watercraft and outside storage of
licensed watercraft trailers shall not exceed 10% of the total lot
area between May 1 and October 31, inclusive, and 50% of the total
lot area between November 1 and April 30, inclusive.
§ 198-105 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-106
1:502
(2) Dry storage shall be considered as an accessory use to a
commercial marina subject to the yard and setback requirements in
Article XIV, Commercial Zone Regulations.
(3) The stacked dry storage of watercraft shall not exceed 30 feet in
height. [Amended 8-6-2003 by Ord. No. 9-2003]
E. Watercraft maintenance. Maintenance of watercraft shall be limited to
those simple repairs that can normally be done while the vessel is in
the water, although such maintenance and repair work may be done on
land, and may include scraping, sanding, painting and emergency
repairs of watercraft.
F. Limitation of retail sales. Retail sale activities within a commercial
marina shall be limited to those relating to and in support of the marina
functions. Specifically, these sales shall be limited to groceries, fishing
supplies, watercraft, watercraft accessories, and marine engines.
Vending machines dispensing foods and beverages are permitted.
[Amended 8-6-2003 by Ord. No. 9-2003]
G. Launching facilities.
(1) Launching ramps for watercraft are permitted, subject to
Subsection A(4).
(2) Hoists for the launching and removal of watercraft shall be limited
to a maximum rated lift capacity of 4,000 pounds.
H. Administrative offices. Offices and/or administrative facilities shall be
limited to those required for the operation of the commercial marina.
I. Marine fuel sales. The sale and dispensing of marine fuels is permitted
in commercial marinas in the City of Brigantine, subject to the review
and approval of the Planning Board. Marinas must provide emergency
containment equipment, including but not limited to floating booms and
oil-absorbent pads in case of fuel spill.
J. Pump-out facility. Waste transferred from boat to shore shall utilize an
approved system for waste disposal pump-out.
K. Environmental design standards. In evaluating marina uses, the
Planning Board shall consider the following factors:
(1) Maintenance of state water quality standards.
(2) Preservation of the natural shoreline and wetland vegetation.
(3) Reduction of stormwater runoff and erosion by minimizing use of
impervious surfaces.
(4) Location and maintenance of marina uses in such a manner that
shall provide the least detrimental impact to adjacent residential
properties.
§ 198-106 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-106
1:503
§ 198-107. Marina private club.
(5) Preservation of natural circulation patterns, tidal flow patterns,
salinity and distribution of nutrients in the water.
(6) Maintenance of the pattern and volume of littoral drift passing the
site.
A. Permitted activities. The following activities and commercial uses may
be permitted as part of the operation of a marina yacht club:
(1) Berth rental and watercraft dockage.
(2) Wet storage and temporary docking.
(3) Watercraft rental.
(4) Launching facilities.
(5) Dry storage.
(6) Maintenance and repairs.
(7) Retail food establishments.
(8) Retail trade establishments.
(9) Business and administrative offices.
(10) Restaurants and bars.
(11) Recreational facilities.
B. Signs. All signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with
the provisions of Article XV, Sign Regulations.
C. Off-street parking. All off-street parking areas shall be designed and
operated in accordance with Article XI, Off-Street Parking.
D. Dry storage.
(1) The dry storage of seaworthy watercraft shall not exceed 10% of
the total lot area.
(2) Dry storage shall be considered as an accessory use to a marina
private club subject to the yard and setback requirements of
Article XIV, Commercial Zone Regulations.
(3) The stacked dry storage of watercraft is not permitted.
E. Watercraft maintenance. Maintenance of watercraft shall be limited to
those simple repairs that can normally be done while the vessel is in the
water.
F. Limitation of retail sales. Retail sales activities within a marina private
club shall be limited to those relating to and in support of the marina
§ 198-106 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-107
1:504
functions. Specifically these sales shall be limited to groceries, fishing
supplies and watercraft accessories. Vending machines dispensing
foods and beverages are permitted within the marina facility only.
Specifically excluded is the sale of watercraft, marine engines and
watercraft trailers.
G. Launching facilities.
(1) Launching ramps for watercraft are permitted, subject to
Subsection A(4).
(2) Hoists for the launching and removal of watercraft shall be limited
to a maximum rated lift capacity of 4,000 pounds.
H. Administrative offices. Offices and/or administrative facilities shall be
limited to those required for the operation of the commercial marina.
I. Marine fuel sales. The sale and dispensing of marine fuels is permitted
in marina yacht clubs in the City of Brigantine, subject to municipal
approval, and must conform to the requirements of § 198-106I and J.
J. Recreational facilities. A marina yacht club may include the following
recreational facilities:
(1) Swimming pools, subject to § 198-69 of this chapter.
(2) Tennis courts.
(3) Playground equipment.
(4) Other recreational facilities normally associated with waterfront
uses.
K. Restaurants and bars.
(1) A restaurant shall be considered an accessory use to a marina
private club subject to the following conditions:
(a) The restaurant shall be compatible with the permitted marina
use and be an integral part of the club.
(b) The restaurant shall not preempt waterfront activities
normally associated with a marina.
(c) Off-street parking shall be furnished in accordance with
Subsection C.
(d) The gross floor area of the restaurant shall not exceed 20% of
the total lot area.
(2) No bar shall be permitted, unless included as an accessory use to
the proposed restaurant.
L. Environmental design standards. A marina private club shall be subject
to environmental design standards as stated in § 198-106K.
§ 198-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-107.1
1:505
§ 198-107.1. Bed-and-breakfast inns.
A. Bed-and-breakfast inns as conditional uses. Any and all bed-andbreakfast
establishments shall be conditional uses and must obtain
conditional use approval from the Planning Board of the City of
Brigantine prior to commencing operation or opening for business.
B. Permitted locations. Bed-and-breakfast establishments shall only be
located on Brigantine Avenue, Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard, Bayshore
Avenue or on any other lot in the City of Brigantine which meets the
requirements of this chapter and is directly adjacent to and abutting
any bay, beach or lagoon within the City of Brigantine.
C. Submission to Planning Board. All applications for approval of a bedand-
breakfast must contain all plans and documentation as set forth in
the section of the Municipal Land Use Ordinance governing Planning
Board applications. All proposed bed-and-breakfast applicants must
receive, at a minimum, conditional use approval including site plan
approval. Said plans shall also clearly show and identify all guest rooms
and other rooms contained in said bed-and-breakfast and the
dimensions thereof.
D. Bed-and-breakfasts must be owner-occupied. No property shall be
approved for a bed-and-breakfast use unless the same will be owneroccupied
and is the primary residence of the proprietor of said bed-andbreakfast
establishment.
E. Guest bedrooms. In order to be approved as a bed-and-breakfast
establishment, the structure housing said bed-and-breakfast
establishment must have at least four but no more then eight bedrooms
within a single structure. At least three but no more than seven of said
bedrooms must be guest bedrooms which are available for public use at
all times. At least one bedroom must be used at all times as the
bedroom and living quarters of the proprietor of said bed-andbreakfast.
F. Bathrooms. All bed-and-breakfast establishments within the City of
Brigantine are encouraged to have a full bathroom for each guest room
although shared bathrooms may be permitted in the discretion of the
Planning Board. A bed-and-breakfast shall have at least three full
bathrooms of which at least two shall be available to guests of the bedand-
breakfast at all times.
G. Cooking facilities. All bed-and-breakfast establishments in the City of
Brigantine shall have a central cooking area large enough to prepare
meals for all guests at one time. Any and all cooking facilities or
devices, of any nature, shall be strictly prohibited in guest rooms.
H. Common dining area. All bed-and-breakfast establishments in the City
of Brigantine shall have a common dining area large enough to seat all
guests of said bed-and-breakfast at one sitting. Said dining area shall
have a minimum of two chairs for every one bedroom at the bed-and-
§ 198-107.1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-107.1
1:506
breakfast establishment. Said common dining area must be arranged so
that breakfast, lunch, dinner and afternoon tea/coffee may be served to
guests therein.
I. Room service shall be permitted.
J. Common lounge area. All bed-and-breakfast establishments in the City
of Brigantine shall have a common living room or lounge where guests
may sit or otherwise relax and mingle.
K. Parking.
(1) All bed-and-breakfasts in the City of Brigantine shall have the
following number of parking spaces:
(a) One parking space for each bedroom in the bed-and-breakfast
including nonguest bedrooms;
(b) One parking space for each employee who shall be employed at
the bed-and-breakfast at any time; plus
(c) Any and all handicap space(s) as required by law or regulation.
(2) Each parking space shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and 18
feet in depth. Each handicap space shall be a minimum of 14 feet in
width and 19 feet in depth.
L. Landscaping. All landscaping at bed-and-breakfast establishments in
the City of Brigantine shall be plants indigenous to the Brigantine and
southern New Jersey area. All landscaping and landscaping schemes
shall be approved by the Planning Board.
M. Fences. Fences shall be permitted at bed-and-breakfast establishments
in the style and height of fences permitted for single-family residential
uses in the zone in which said bed-and-breakfast establishment is
located.
N. Signs. Each bed-and-breakfast establishment within the City of
Brigantine shall be permitted to erect one five square feet,
freestanding, two-sided sign which may indicate the name of the bedand-
breakfast, its address and whether vacancies exist or not. All other
signs included but not limited to wall-mounted signs, rooftop signs or
other signs of any nature are strictly prohibited.
O. Compliance with laws. All bed-and-breakfast establishments in the City
of Brigantine shall comply with all federal, state, county and municipal
laws, rules and regulations. This includes, but is not limited, to all
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code including square
footage for guest rooms, BOCA Property Maintenance Code, State Fire
Safety Code, including but not limited to the Uniform Fire Code Retrofit
Guidelines and all County Health Department guidelines.150
§ 198-107.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-107.1
1:507
P. Length Of stay. No bed-and-breakfast establishment within the City of
Brigantine shall be operated in such a manner as to become a
permanent guest house, boardinghouse or other type of permanent
living quarters. No guest may stay at any bed-and-breakfast
establishment in the City of Brigantine for longer than 14 consecutive
days, nor shall any guest stay at a bed-and-breakfast establishment in
the City of Brigantine for more than 14 days in any month. This section
shall be interpreted in a light most favorable to the City of Brigantine
and in such a manner as to further the intent of the City of Brigantine to
create bed-and-breakfast establishments pursuant to this chapter and
not to create rooming houses or other types of permanent or
semipermanent living quarters.
Q. Employees. Bed-and-breakfast establishments in the City of Brigantine
shall have employees who are occupants of the bed-and-breakfast or
familial relationships thereof. No more than three employees shall work
at a bed-and-breakfast establishment at any time who are not resident
members of the family unit which occupies and owns said bed-andbreakfast
establishment.
R. Accessory uses. Fences, signs and parking areas are the only accessory
uses permitted to be used in conjunction with a bed-and-breakfast
establishment. All bed-and-breakfast establishments shall contain all
guest rooms within one structure only and there shall not be more than
one structure on any lot. All storage of food, etc., shall be contained
within the principle structure and no sheds shall be permitted.
S. Trash enclosure. The pickup and removal of trash, and the cost for the
same, shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator of the bed-andbreakfast
establishment. They shall contract with a private trash hauler
for said services. Trash shall only be stored in trash containers on the
side of or behind the bed-and-breakfast establishment and all such
trash areas shall be enclosed by a fence whose height and style is the
same as that permitted in the residential zone in which the bed-andbreakfast
establishment is located. No trash container, can or
enclosure, or any portion thereof, shall be located in front of the front
wall of the bed-and-breakfast establishment.
T. Additional Planning Board approval. Any enlargement of, addition to or
expansion of a bed-and-breakfast establishment must receive Planning
Board approval and must comply with all conditions of the Municipal
Land Use Ordinance. Any bed-and-breakfast establishment which is
going to deconvert into a single-family use, must receive prior approval
of the Brigantine Construction Official, Zoning Officer and Fire
Department to insure that said deconversion is performed in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code, Uniform Fire Code
and all other applicable statutes and regulations.151
150. Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Construction Codes, Uniform, Ch. 175, Fire Prevention and Ch.
238, Property Maintenance.
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Construction Codes, Uniform and Ch. 175, Fire Prevention.
§ 198-107.1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-107.1
1:508
U. Licensure. Each bed-and-breakfast establishment shall be licensed on
an annual basis by the City Council of the City of Brigantine. The annual
fee shall be $250.
V. Revocation. Any owner/operator of a bed-and-breakfast establishment
in the City of Brigantine may be fined up to $1,250 and/or have their
license to operate revoked for any violation of this section. No license
shall be revoked unless notice of such revocation is provided and a
hearing regarding any violation is held before the Brigantine City
Council. If a license is revoked, the property can no longer be used and/
or operated as a bed-and-breakfast establishment.
W. Bulk requirements. Any lot within the City of Brigantine where a bedand-
breakfast establishment will be located must contain a minimum of
80 feet of frontage, depth of 90 feet and total area of 7,200 square feet.
All other bulk and setback requirements including, but not limited to,
building height, lot coverage, rear, front and side yard setbacks, shall
be the same as established for single-family homes in the zone where
the bed-and-breakfast establishment is located.
§ 198-107.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-107.1
1:509

ARTICLE XV
Sign Regulations
§ 198-108. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the design, use,
erection and maintenance of signs in such a manner as to support and
complement the goals and objectives expressed both within this chapter, as
well as the Master Plan of the City of Brigantine.152 The intent is to permit
such signs that will not, by their size, location, construction or manner of
display, endanger the public safety of the general public; obstruct the clear
views necessary for traffic safety; or lead to the deterioration of the visual
environment of the City.
§ 198-109. Permitted signs.
Except as otherwise provided, signs permitted shall be as enumerated in
the following sections:
§ 198-110. Prohibited signs.
A. Section 198-112, Residential zones.
B. Section 198-113, Commercial zones.
C. Section 198-114, Conservation zones.
A. General restrictions. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any sign
which is not included under the types of signs permitted in this chapter.
B. Advertisement.
(1) Any sign which advertises or publicizes an activity not conducted
on the premises upon which the sign is maintained is prohibited.
Electronic message boards are also prohibited. [Amended
12-19-2007 by Ord. No. 25-2007]
(2) Any advertisement sign which uses a series of two or more signs or
units, placed in a line parallel to a street, or in similar fashion, all
carrying a single advertising message, part of which is contained
on each sign, is prohibited.
(3) Billboards, signboards, portable signs or other freestanding
advertising signs are prohibited.
C. Flashing or electronic interference.
(1) No blinking, flashing, fluttering or animated signs are permitted in
the City.
152. Editor's Note: Said plan is on file in the City offices.
§ 198-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-110
1:511
§ 198-111. General requirements and design criteria.
The following requirements, provisions or design criteria are applicable
to all zoning districts with the City of Brigantine or those specific zone
districts, uses or structures enumerated:
(2) Signs with any lighting or control mechanism which may cause
radio or television interference are prohibited.
D. Public safety.
(1) Any sign so erected, constructed or maintained as to obstruct or be
attached to any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a
means of egress, or for firefighting purposes or places so as to
interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation, is
prohibited.
(2) Any sign which is of such a form, character or shape as to confuse
or dangerously distract the attention of the operator of a motor
vehicle is prohibited.
(3) Signs which in any way simulate official or directional or warning
signs erected or maintained by the State of New Jersey, County of
Atlantic, City of Brigantine or by any federal, public utility or
similar agency concerned with the protection of public health,
welfare and safety are prohibited.
A. Height restriction. No sign shall be located on a roof or extension
thereof.
B. Illumination. All illuminated signs shall be shielded to prevent any
glare, and no sign shall be illuminated by lighting of intermittent or
varying intensity.
C. Building graphics. Letters, numerals, symbols and designs of any
structure cut in the shape which are an integral part of that structure
and not intended to draw attention to any goods, merchandise,
business, entertainment or amusement activity or establishment shall
be considered as a part of that structure and shall be subject to the
regulations of this chapter. Signage mounted on or attached to awnings
shall also be considered as part of the structure and shall be subject to
the regulations of this chapter. [Amended 12-19-2007 by Ord. No.
25-2007]
D. Calculation of sign area.
(1) Sign area shall be considered the entire face of the sign, including
the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding, but not
including the supporting structure.
(2) In the case of two or more business uses occupying the same
structure, the front wall area to be used in determining permitted
§ 198-110 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-111
1:512
sign area shall only include that portion of the front wall area
occupied by the use in question.
(3) On a freestanding two-sided sign, only one face is counted in
computing the sign area.
E. Side and rear wall sign.
(1) Where the side or rear of a business structure adjoins an off-street
parking area or a private area intended for the use of the structure
in question, identification signs may be placed or inscribed on said
side or rear wall.
(2) Where a business structure is located at the intersection of two
public streets, an additional identification sign may be erected or
inscribed upon the side wall on the second street side, provided
that the combined areas of two signs do not exceed the sign area
permitted in that zone district.
(3) Except as permitted in Subsection E(1) and (2), no signs shall be
permitted to be placed, erected or inscribed on a side or rear wall
of any structure.
F. Special event displays. Portable signs and banners may be utilized on
the property of an establishment having a grand opening or special
event, provided that such signs shall be displayed for a period not to
exceed seven calendar days within any six-month period.
G. Clearances.
(1) Signs shall maintain all clearances from electrical conductors and
communication equipment in accordance with the regulations of
the public utility in question as well as any applicable municipal or
state codes.
(2) Signs and their supporting structures shall maintain clearance and
noninterference with all surface and underground facilities or
utilities. In addition, such placement shall not interfere with either
natural or artificial drainage or surface water or groundwater.
H. Maintenance. Every sign, including those signs erected prior to the
adoption of this chapter, shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and
good structural material condition at all times, including the
replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning and other
acts required for the maintenance of said sign. The owner of any
property on which a sign is located and those responsible for
maintenance of the sign shall be equally responsible for the conditions
of the area in the vicinity of the sign and shall be required to keep this
area clean, sanitary and free from noxious or offensive substances.
§ 198-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-112
1:513
§ 198-112. Residential zones.
Within the residential zone districts of the City of Brigantine, no sign or
signs shall be erected or altered in whole or in part unless in compliance
with the following regulations; all heights are to top of sign:
A. Address sign. Address signs shall not be larger than one square foot in
area. The sign shall be limited to showing the name and/or address of
the occupant of the dwelling unit without direct illumination; it shall be
limited to five feet in height where freestanding and eight feet in height
where wall-mounted and located within the property lines of the
dwelling unit or units it identifies.
B. Construction sign. Construction signs shall not be larger than nine
square feet in area. Said sign shall be limited in use as defined in Article
IV of this chapter without direct illumination; it shall be limited to eight
feet in height where freestanding and 12 feet in height where wallmounted.
A construction sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet
from any property line. The sign shall be removed from the premises
within seven days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
C. Directional sign. Directional signs shall be designed and constructed
according to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways.
D. Governmental sign. Governmental signs shall be designed and
constructed according to the needs and standards of the City of
Brigantine, County of Atlantic and State of New Jersey.
E. Identification sign. Identification signs shall not be larger than 20
square feet in area for churches, municipal or recreational facilities.
Lodges and public utility installations shall not have a sign larger than
12 square feet in area. All identification signs shall be limited to eight
feet in height where freestanding and 12 feet in height where wallmounted.
F. Real estate sign. Real estate signs shall not be larger than nine square
feet in area. Said sign shall be limited in use as defined in Article IV of
this chapter without direct illumination; it shall be limited to eight feet
in height where freestanding and 12 feet in height where wall-mounted.
A real estate sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any
property line. The sign shall be removed from the premises within
seven days of the completion and execution of an agreement of sale for
the property in question. See § 198-77, Sight triangles.
G. Informational sign. Signs conveying information for the convenience of
the general public using the facility or structure shall not be larger than
five square feet in area. Said sign shall be limited to six feet in height
where freestanding and eight feet in height where wall-mounted. No
direct illumination of the sign shall be located within property in
question in such a position to maximize its use without being a visual
§ 198-112 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-112
1:514
§ 198-113. Commercial zones.
Within the commercial zone district of the City of Brigantine, no sign or
signs shall be erected or altered in whole or in part unless in compliance
with the following regulations; all heights are to top of sign.
nuisance or obstruction to sight. No informational signs are permitted
in the R-1 and R-2 Zones.
H. Clarification of signs not permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Residential Zones
on City property, including recreation areas and any other public areas.
Advertisement signs and any other sign that publicizes any use and/or
activity either on the site or any other site are not permitted.
A. Address sign. Refer to § 198-112A, Address sign, for residential
districts.
B. Construction sign.
(1) Construction signs shall not be larger than nine square feet in area.
(2) Said sign shall be limited in use as defined in Article IV of this
chapter without direct illumination.
(3) The sign shall be limited to eight feet in height where freestanding
and 12 feet in height where wall-mounted.
(4) A construction sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from
any property line.
(5) The sign shall be removed from the premises within seven days of
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
C. Directional sign. Directional signs shall be designed and constructed
according to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways.
D. Governmental sign. Governmental signs shall be designed and
constructed according to the needs and standards of the City of
Brigantine, County of Atlantic and State of New Jersey.
E. Identification sign. Refer to § 198-112E, Identification sign.
F. Real estate sign.
(1) Real estate signs shall not be larger than 12 square feet in area.
(2) Said sign shall be limited in use as defined in Article IV of this
chapter without direct illumination.
(3) The sign shall be limited to eight feet in height where freestanding
and 12 feet in height where wall-mounted.
(4) A real estate sign shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any
property line.
§ 198-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-113
1:515
§ 198-114. Conservation zones.
Within the conservation zone districts of the City of Brigantine, no sign or
signs shall be erected or altered in whole or in part unless in compliance
with the following regulations. A permit shall be obtained from the City
Engineer.
(5) The sign shall be removed from the premises within seven days of
the completion and execution of an agreement of sale for the
property in question.
G. Informational sign.
(1) Signs conveying information for the general public using the
facility shall not be larger than five square feet in area.
(2) Said sign shall be limited to six feet in height where freestanding
and eight feet in height where wall-mounted.
(3) No direct illumination of the sign shall be located within property in
question in a position to maximize its use without being an
obstruction to sight.
H. Business signs.
(1) Signs identifying a commercial use may be placed or inscribed
upon the facade or front wall of the building in question.
(2) Such signs shall not exceed an area equal to an area of three
square feet for each one foot in width of the building upon which
the sign is to be placed.
(3) No sign shall project more than 12 inches beyond the building
facade.
(4) Such a sign may be directly illuminated.
(5) The sign shall be limited to 15 feet in height where wall-mounted
and located within the property lines of the premises.
A. Directional sign. Directional signs shall be designed and constructed
according to standards in § 198-113C.
B. Governmental sign. Governmental signs shall be designed and
constructed according to the needs and standards of the City of
Brigantine, County of Atlantic and State of New Jersey.
C. Informational sign. Signs conveying information for the convenience of
the general public using the facility or structure shall not be larger than
five square feet in area. Said sign shall be limited to six feet in height
and must be freestanding. No direct illumination of the sign shall be
permitted unless required for safety reasons. It shall be located within
property in question in such a position to maximize its use without
being a visual nuisance or obstruction to sight.
§ 198-113 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-115
1:516
§ 198-115. Multifamily developments.
§ 198-116. Shopping centers.
A. (Reserved)
B. Townhouses.
(1) For the purposes of identifying townhouses, no signs shall be
permitted except a sign containing the name of the particular
townhouse and information with respect to the name and address
of the person or firm managing the townhouse.
(2) Sign area shall not exceed 40 square feet.
(3) Only one such identifying sign shall be permitted for each street
from which the development has an entrance drive.
(4) Such sign or signs shall blend with the color and architectural style
of the development and be erected and designed in such a manner
so as to not detract from the surrounding area.
C. Motels/hotels.
(1) A maximum of three signs are permitted to identify and advertise a
motel or hotel.
(2) The total area of these signs shall not exceed 20% of the area of the
first- or ground-story facade. A story shall not exceed 12 feet in
calculation the area permitted.
A. Business sign (wall-mounted or facade).
(1) One sign may be placed or inscribed upon the front or facade of
each individually owned and operated establishment with the
shopping center.
(2) The sign area for each use shall not exceed an area equal to 15% of
the facade.
(3) These signs may be directly illuminated.
(4) The sign may not project more than 12 inches from the face of the
building and shall not extend above the top or beyond the sides of
the facade.
B. Business sign (canopy-mounted).
(1) In the case of a shopping center wherein walkways are roofed over
with a permanently installed rigid canopy or other structural
device, one sign may be hung vertically from the underside of said
canopy for each individually owned and operated establishment
within the shopping center.
§ 198-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-116
1:517
(2) These signs shall not be larger than four square feet nor less than
eight feet above the walkway.
(3) These signs may be directly illuminated.
C. Identification sign (freestanding).
(1) Freestanding signs shall be erected only in the B-3 Zone District to
identify a shopping center and list individual occupants.
(2) Only one sign shall be erected for each 500 feet of frontage on a
public street.
(3) The aggregate area of such sign(s) shall not exceed 200 square
feet, plus one square foot sign area for every 1,000 square feet of
gross leasable area of the retail trade establishments within the
center in excess of 50,000 square feet.
(4) These signs shall not exceed the height of the principal building.
(5) No sign shall exceed the height of the principal building, or 20 feet,
whichever is the highest.
(6) A freestanding sign in a shopping center shall be located as follows:
(a) A minimum of 50 feet from any right-of-way line or parking
area driveway.
(b) A minimum of 25 feet from any property line.
(c) A minimum of 200 feet from the boundary of any residential
zone district.
(7) Such sign or signs shall in no way interfere with the safe
functioning of any traffic control signal or directional device.
D. Directional sign (ingress).
(1) One freestanding directional sign may be erected at each driveway
which provides a means of ingress for the off-street parking areas
within the shopping center.
(2) The directional signs shall contain only the name of the use or
facility and appropriate traffic instructions.
(3) Sign areas shall not exceed 20 square feet and shall be mounted so
as not to obstruct vision for a height of seven feet above ground
level and shall not exceed 11 feet in total height.
(4) Where directional signs are located in buffer areas, the sign area
shall be reduced to 12 square feet.
E. Directional signs (egress).
§ 198-116 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-116
1:518
(1) Freestanding signs may be erected within the shopping center for
the purpose of providing directional information to vehicles leaving
the premises.
(2) The number and location of these signs shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Planning Board and its experts.
(3) Sign area shall not exceed 20 square feet, and the sign shall be
mounted so as not to obstruct vision for a height of seven feet
above ground level and shall not exceed 11 feet in total height.
(4) Only one directional sign shall be erected in conjunction with each
driveway which provides egress from the shopping center.
F. Traffic control signs.
(1) Freestanding signs may be erected within the shopping center to
control and regulate the movement of traffic on the internal
driveways and aisles.
(2) The number and location of these signs shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Planning Board and its experts.
(3) Sign area shall not exceed four square feet level and shall not
exceed seven feet in height.
G. Parking lot signs.
(1) Freestanding signs may be erected within the shopping center
parking areas in order to identify either particular areas or sections
for the convenience of the shopper.
(2) Only one parking lot sign shall be permitted for each 20,000 square
feet of parking area.
(3) Sign area shall not exceed four square feet on any one side, and the
sign shall be mounted so as not to obstruct vision for a height of
seven feet above ground level and shall not exceed 20 feet in total
height.
(4) Aisle identification signs shall not exceed an area of one foot on any
one side and shall be mounted so as not to obstruct vision for a
height of seven feet above ground and shall not exceed 11 feet in
total height.
§ 198-116 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-116
1:519

ARTICLE XVI
Conditional Uses
§ 198-117. Purpose and intent.
§ 198-118. Churches and places of worship.
A. Establishment of procedures. In recognition of the fact that certain
necessary specific uses may be, or become, inimical to the public
health, safety and general welfare of the City of Brigantine if located or
permitted without due consideration to the existing conditions and
surroundings, the following standards and procedures are hereby
established for the uses designated as conditional uses.
B. Purpose of standards. These standards are intended to provide the
standards for reviewing and deciding upon certain uses not otherwise
permitted except under the restrictions or criteria of this article. In
approving a site plan for a conditional use, the Planning Board may
suggest or require modifications and revisions to the application for
development. Such changes and modifications, as well as the original
provisions of the site plans which have not been modified, shall be
maintained as a condition of the establishment and maintenance of the
conditional use to which they are appurtenant.
A. Permitted areas of use. Churches and all places of worship shall be
permitted in any residential and business zone district where the
general criteria of Subsection C are met.
B. Site plan requirements. An application to construct or expand a church
shall be filed with the Planning Board in accordance with § 198-12, Site
plan details.
C. General criteria.
(1) The minimum lot area for a church shall be 40,000 square feet.
(2) The minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet.
(3) Off-street parking areas shall be furnished in accordance with
Article XI, Off-Street Parking.
(4) Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article XII,
Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
D. Special considerations.
(1) In its evaluation and review of the site plan, the Planning Board
shall consider the impact of the structure upon the established
character of the surrounding neighborhood in respect to size,
location, building materials, architectural style and massing.
(2) The Planning Board shall review means of access and egress,
internal traffic patterns, placement of accessways, projected traffic
§ 198-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-118
1:521
§ 198-119. Recreational facilities.
volumes for both scheduled and special events to determine the
impacts on streets serving the church as well as its accessory
facilities, if any.
A. Permitted areas of use. Recreational facilities shall be permitted in any
zone district where the general criteria of Subsection D are met.
Municipally owned recreation facilities may be placed in any zone and
do not have to met the requirements of Subsection D.
B. Site plan requirements.
(1) An application to construct or expand a nonmunicipal recreational
facility shall be filed with the Planning Board in accordance with
§ 198-12, Site plan details.
(2) The application for development shall include an operational plan
describing in full detail the method and means of operating the
facility.
(3) A full membership list, including names and addresses, shall be
filed with the application.
C. Definition of "recreational facility". For purposes of this section of this
chapter, a recreational facility shall include, but not be limited to,
clubhouses, parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, tennis courts and
other structures dedicated to housing recreational activities operated
by either nonprofit membership organizations, civic and service clubs,
fraternal organizations or lodges.
D. General criteria.
(1) The minimum lot area for a recreational facility shall be 10,000
square feet.
(2) The minimum lot frontage shall be 100 feet.
(3) Building coverage shall not exceed 40%.
(4) No recreational facility shall be located within 25 feet of a
residential zone.
(5) Off-street parking areas shall be furnished in accordance with
Article XI, Off-Street Parking.
(6) Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article XII,
Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
E. Special considerations.
(1) In its evaluation and review of the site plan, the Planning Board
shall consider the improvement of the facility upon the established
character of the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 198-118 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-119
1:522
§ 198-120. Hospitals, nursing homes, philanthropic or
eleemosynary uses and municipal recreation.
(2) The Planning Board shall find that the proposed recreational
facility, by the nature of its siting, will not adversely affect the safe
and comfortable enjoyment of property rights or the value of the
adjacent properties.
(3) The Planning Board shall review means of access and egress,
internal traffic patterns, placement of accessways and projected
traffic volumes for both scheduled and special events to determine
the impacts on streets providing access to the facility.
(4) The Board shall determine that the facility is to be operated by a
bona fide nonprofit organization solely for the recreation and
enjoyment of its membership.
(5) The membership of the nonprofit organization shall be determined
and fixed at maximum limit based on the capacity of the facility at
the time of the application for development. No further increase in
membership shall be permitted until additional lands are acquired
to accommodate this increase. A supplemental application will be
required for Board review.
A. Permitted areas of use. Hospitals, nursing homes, philanthropic or
eleemosynary uses shall be permitted in any residential and business
zone district where the general criteria of Subsection C are met.
B. Site plan requirements.
(1) An application to construct or expand a permitted use as defined in
Subsection A shall be filed with the Planning Board in accordance
with § 198-12, Site plan details.
(2) The application for development shall include an operational plan
describing in full detail the method and means of operating the
facility.
(3) A statement of need shall be furnished to the Board for its review.
C. General criteria.
(1) The minimum lot area for uses defined in Subsection A shall be two
acres.
(2) The minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet.
(3) Building coverage shall not exceed 40%.
(4) All buildings or structures erected to house or serve these uses
shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from any property line.
(5) Building height shall not exceed 30 feet.
§ 198-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-120
1:523
§ 198-121. Public utilities.
(6) The minimum setback requirements shall be increased one foot for
each foot the building exceeds the maximum building height limit
established for the zone district in which it is located.
(7) Off-street parking areas shall be furnished in accordance with
Article XI, Off-Street Parking.
(8) Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article XII,
Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
D. Special considerations.
(1) In its evaluation and review of the site plan, the Planning Board
shall consider the impact of the facility upon the established
character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) The Planning Board shall find that the proposed facility, by the
nature of its siting, will not adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights or the value of the
adjacent properties.
(3) The Planning Board shall review means of access and egress,
internal traffic patterns, placement of accessways and projected
traffic volumes for both scheduled and special events to determine
the impacts on streets providing access to the facility.
(4) The Board shall determine that the facility to be operated is, in fact,
required by an established and documented need and will further
the general welfare of both the residents of the City of Brigantine
and general public of the region.
A. Permitted areas of use. Public utility uses, such as high-voltage (in
excess of 69 kilovolts) transmission lines and towers, substations and
telephone exchanges and telephone exchanges, shall be permitted in
any zone district where the general criteria of Subsection C are met.
B. Site plan requirements.
(1) An application to construct or expand such a public utility shall be
filed with the Planning Board in accordance with § 198-12, Site
plan details.
(2) The application for development shall include an operational plan
describing in full detail the method and means of operating the
facility.
(3) A statement of need shall be furnished to the Board for its review.
C. General criteria.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be furnished in accordance with
Article XI, Off-Street Parking.
§ 198-120 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-121
1:524
§ 198-122. Home occupations.
(2) Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article XII,
Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
D. Special considerations.
(1) The Planning Board shall find that the proposed facility, by the
nature of its siting, will not adversely affect the safe and
comfortable enjoyment of property rights or the value of the
adjacent properties. All high-voltage transmission towers shall
have at least a one-hundred-foot buffer area from any residential
home.
(2) The Planning Board shall find, based on information furnished by
the public utility in question, that the proposed installation in the
specific location is necessary for the convenient and efficient
operation of the public utility system or the satisfactory and
convenient provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood or
area in which the particular use is to be located. The public utility
must have considered and presented to the Board other options or
methods for the delivery of said utility services.
(3) The design of any building or structure erected in connection with
a public utility installation shall conform to the general character of
the neighborhood in which it is located.
(4) The utility installation shall be furnished with safety devices and
features as required to adequately protect the general public.
(5) The facility shall be maintained by the utility responsible for its
operation to sufficient standards so as to eliminate any visual
impact during the lifetime of its use.
A. Purpose and intent. It is the intent of this section of this chapter to
permit certain limited and suitable occupations to be conducted
entirely within residential dwellings solely by the residents thereof for
the purpose of earning income for these residents. The uses are clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the building as a residence, and
they must not change, in any way, the residential character of the zone
and neighborhood and/or exert an adverse effect upon other residents
of the zone.
B. Permitted home occupations.
(1) The following are permitted home occupations, provided that they
do not violate any of the provisions of Subsection D, Criteria:
(a) Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring.
(b) Painting, sculpturing or writing.
§ 198-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-122
1:525
(c) Home crafts, such as model making, weaving and lapidary
work.
(d) Educational tutoring, limited to two students at one time.
(e) Music instruction, limited to one student at one time.
(f) Computer programming.
(g) Home professional service. (Only permitted on Brigantine
Avenue and Bayshore Avenue.)
(h) Offices for off-site tradesman owned and operated businesses.
(2) Any home occupation not included above and not prohibited below
shall be considered a conditional use and must apply to the
Planning Board for approval prior to the start of said use.
C. Prohibited home occupations. The following are prohibited as home
occupations.
(1) Barbershops, beauty salons, nail salons, manicurists, and
pedicurists.
(2) Animal hospitals, veterinarian offices, animal grooming, kenneling
and training facilities
(3) Dancing studios, photography studios and sound studios.
(4) Mortuaries, taxidermy.
(5) Nursery schools, babysitting service, daycare centers except as
permitted by state statute.
(6) Private clubs.
(7) Repair shops including but not limited to any repairs of a
mechanical nature and any jewelry repair.
(8) Restaurants.
(9) Automobile repair or paint shop.
(10) Marine equipment sales or repairs.
(11) Sales of any products that have not had value-added modifications
and/or changes made to the original materials. Repackaging shall
not be considered as value added.
(12) Spiritual advisors, fortune tellers, palm or card readers or other
such occupations.
(13) Taxicab businesses, parking of taxicabs or dispatching of taxicabs.
(14) Any retail business.
§ 198-122 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-122
1:526
(15) Piercing parlors, tattoo parlors or similar uses.
(16) Retail service establishment unless explicitly stated above as
permitted.
(17) Retail trade establishments unless explicitly stated above as
permitted.
(18) Escort services and massage parlors.
D. Criteria. All home occupations shall meet the following criteria. See
Subsection B for permitted home occupations:
(1) The activity is conducted in such a manner that will not alter the
normal residential character of the premises and in no way be a
nuisance to the adjoining residences. This means that there shall
be no outside storage or window display, there shall be no
advertisement and/or informational signs, there shall be no dust,
odors, noxious fumes or vibrations emanating from the premises
and mechanical or electronic equipment which is incidental to the
home occupation may be used, provided that it would not create
visible or audible interference in radio and/or television receivers
or cause fluctuations in line voltage off the premises, and shall not
exceed five kilowatts.
(2) The proposed home occupation does not generate greater traffic
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood. This means no delivery of materials or commodities
to and from the premises. This also means no parking of customers'
or clients' vehicles except for home professional services. Only one
commercial vehicle, owned by the practitioner and related to the
occupation, may be parked on the premises at any time and shall
not exceed a curb weight of 4,000 pounds when fully loaded and
may not be parked on any public street, alley, cul-de-sac or other
right-of-way.
(3) Only merchandise or stock in trade sold, repaired or displayed and
used in the performance of the home occupation shall be stored on
site and entirely within the residential structure. Merchandise and/
or stock and other materials shall not be shipped to any other
location under the control or owned by home occupation operator.
(4) The home occupation does not increase water or sewer use so that
combined total use for the dwelling and home occupation is more
than the average for residences in the neighborhood.
(5) The home occupation shall be conducted only by members of the
family residing in the dwelling. Persons in building trades or similar
fields, using their homes or apartments as an office for business
activities carried on off the premises, may have other employees,
provided that they are not employed on the premises and they do
not visit the residence during the course of business. Employees
§ 198-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-122
1:527
§ 198-123. Private residential marinas.
shall not report to the residence for work orders or other business
reasons. No materials, supplies or equipment to be used at other
locations can be stored at the residence in which the home
occupation is operated. The home occupation shall serve one client
at a time.
(6) Home occupations shall occupy no more the 300 square feet of
residence space and shall be located on the lowest habitable floor
level.
(7) Home occupations shall comply with all other municipal, county or
state regulations pertinent to the activity pursued.
(8) Home occupations may only be conducted between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(9) Home occupations may only be conducted in single-family
residences.
(10)Home occupations may only be conducted by the owner of the
property and his/her family.
(11)Home professional services shall only be allowed on Brigantine and
Bayshore Avenues.
A. Purpose and intent. It is the intent of this section of this chapter to
maintain the residential character of existing waterfront properties
while allowing private enjoyment of the back bays, thoroughfares and
waterways of Brigantine for those residents and their guests abutting
the water's edge. As the basic nature of the City is water-oriented, it is
the purpose of the following sections to ensure the maximum freedom
of boating uses, water sports and recreational activities, including
public access to the water, while protecting the individual resident from
unnecessary noise and intrusions into private areas due to over-intense
marina uses, commercial activities and function.
B. Permitted areas of use. A private residential marina is a permitted
conditional use in all residential zone districts, where the tract or lot
adjoins or abuts a navigable waterway.
C. General criteria. All private residential marinas shall meet the following
criteria:
(1) Docks, piers and other mooring facilities, whether floating or fixed,
shall be legally recognized by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the Army Corps of Engineers
through the issuance of a waterfront development permit for the
construction and maintenance of the structure under the currently
enforced rules and regulations of either or both agencies.
§ 198-122 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-123
1:528
§ 198-124. Automobile service stations.
(2) The size and the extension of any dock or pier shall be limited to
that required for the intended use.
(3) All docks and piers shall be constructed and maintained in such a
manner that will not degrade the waterfront environment, conflict
with the existing residential character or infringe on the scenic
values of the back bays.
(4) Bulkheads shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable
building codes at the mean high-water line. Wherever possible,
bulkheads shall be structurally tied into adjacent shoreline
protection structures.
(5) All docks and piers shall be sited so as not to hinder navigation or
the public use of the waterways.
(6) All docks and piers shall be designed and constructed so that
alterations of the natural productive potential of the intertidal zone
and littoral habitat is minimized.
(7) The intended use of a private residential marina shall be for the
sole use and enjoyment of the occupant or owner of the uplands
property and their guests; therefore, the number of permanent or
seasonal mooring berths shall be limited to one berth for each
bedroom within the principal residential use.
(8) An additional off-street parking space shall be required for each
berth over two.
(9) Maintenance and repair work on any watercraft shall be limited to
a type that can be normally done while the vessel is in the water,
although normal boating maintenance can include repair activities,
such as scraping, sanding and painting, which are normally landbased.
D. Approval of private residential marinas. Upon presentation of the
required state and federal waterfront development permits, the
Building Inspector shall issue a local building permit, if the general
criteria in Subsection C have been met. Private residential marinas
shall not require Planning Board review unless requested by the
Building Inspector.
E. Conditional use. Any private residential marina not meeting the general
criteria of Subsection C shall be considered a conditional use and be
granted or denied by the Planning Board upon full review at public
hearing held according to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10).
A. Permitted areas of use. Automobile service stations shall be permitted
in any business zone where such use is specifically permitted.
§ 198-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-124
1:529
B. Site plan requirements.
(1) An application to construct or expand an automobile service station
shall be filed with the Planning Board in accordance with § 198-12,
Site plan details.
(2) The site plan shall also show the following information:
(a) The number and location of fuel tanks to be installed.
(b) The dimensions and capacity of each storage tank.
(c) The depth each tank will be placed below the finished grade.
(d) The number and location of the fuel pumps or dispensers to be
installed.
(e) The type of structure and accessory buildings to be
constructed.
(f) The maximum number of automobiles that can be garaged or
stored on-site.
C. General criteria.
(1) The minimum lot area for an automobile service station shall be
30,000 square feet.
(2) The minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
(3) Off-street parking areas shall be furnished in accordance with
Article XI, Off-Street Parking.
(4) Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Article XII,
Landscaping, Buffers and Open Space Design.
(5) The entire area of the site dedicated to the travel movement,
parking or storage of automobiles shall be paved according to the
minimum requirements of this chapter.
(6) Site coverage shall not exceed 60%.
(7) Except for gasoline or oil sales, changing of tires and other similar
minor automobile servicing, all other repair work shall be
performed in a fully enclosed building.
(8) No automobile or any other vehicle shall be offered for sale, lease
or rent while parked or stored on-site.
(9) No automobile or vehicle shall be permitted to be standing or
parked on the premises other than those used by the employees in
the direct or indirect operation of the automobile service
establishment. This shall not prohibit the temporary parking of
automobiles actually serviced on the premises, including the
overnight parking of a maximum of two vehicles per service bay.
§ 198-124 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-124
1:530
§ 198-125. Dry-cleaning establishments.
(10) All fuel pumps or dispensers shall be located a minimum of 25 feet
from any street right-of-way or property line and shall be manned
and operated by an attendant during operating hours. All fuels
shall be stored underground.
(11) Not more than two vending machines, whether or not coinoperated,
shall be located outside the principal building. These
machines shall be subject to the bulk requirements of the zone
district in which the use is located.
(12) Accessory goods for sale, if located outside the principal building,
shall be located either on the fuel pump island or the building
island. The outdoor display of oil cans and/or antifreeze and similar
products shall be permitted on these islands only if contained
within suitable metal stands or racks. Tires shall only be stored
inside the principal building or in the waste materials area.
(13) Any outdoor storage of waste materials or supplies shall be in a
shielded location but suitable for containerized collection and
within an area screened adjacent to the building or fenced to a
height of not less than six feet. The area of this enclosure shall not
exceed 120 square feet and shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet
from any residentially zoned property or street right-of-way line
opposite a residential zone.
(14)No waste material whatsoever shall be discharged into any
watercourse or storm drainage system unless specifically
permitted by a state or federal permit.
D. Special considerations.
(1) In its evaluation and review of the site plan, the Planning Board
shall consider the impact of the structure upon the established
character of the surrounding neighborhood in respect to size,
location, building materials, architectural style and massing.
(2) The Planning Board shall review means of access and egress,
internal traffic patterns, placement of accessways and projected
traffic volumes to determine the impacts on streets serving the
automobile service station.
A. Permitted areas of use. Dry-cleaning establishments are prohibited
from operating in an area within 500 feet of any residential structure or
of any establishment which sells, prepares, dispenses, stores or handles
food in any manner.
B. Discharge of toxic wastes. No toxic waste material from a dry-cleaning
establishment shall be discharged into any watercourse or any sanitary
sewer line except in accordance with existing state, county or municipal
requirements and regulations.
§ 198-124 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-125
1:531
§ 198-126. Amusement devices.
C. Right to inspect the premises. The City of Brigantine, at its discretion,
shall have the right to inspect the premises of a dry-cleaning
establishment for compliance with toxic waste regulations.
A. Purpose. The purpose and intent of this section of this chapter is to
regulate and control amusement devices which are operated for the
purpose of making a profit so as to prevent nuisances to patrons and the
public, safety hazards from overcrowding and poor access to premises
where amusement devices are located and to discourage the promotion
of gambling and loitering or the creation of an unhealthy atmosphere
for the youth of the community or other foreseeable, undesirable effect
from such devices.
B. Permitted zone districts. Any business offering the use of amusement
devices to the public shall be prohibited in all zone districts, except
that such use shall be permitted as a conditional use within the B-6
Zone District.
C. Additional site plan requirements. In addition to compliance with all
area and bulk requirements for the applicable zone district and the
requirements for site plan approval as provided herein, an applicant
who wishes to operate such a business shall submit plans and
specifications, prepared and certified by a licensed professional
engineer or architect of the State of New Jersey, which show proposed
improvements to both the interior and exterior of the premises and, in
addition, drawings of the exterior elevation of that part of the premises
accessible to the public. Such plans and drawings shall provide
sufficient details to demonstrate compliance with the following
requirements:
(1) All amusement devices shall be permitted only on the first floor of
the premises, and the plans shall show the proposed number, type
and location of each amusement device.
(2) Each amusement device shall be located so as to provide a threefoot
perimeter of open space around the three linear borders of
each device.
(3) A five-foot-wide aisle shall be located between each row of
amusement devices.
(4) No amusement device shall be located within 10 feet of any
entrance to the premises.
(5) There shall not be permitted more than one amusement device for
each 100 square feet of net floor area in the premises.
(6) Sufficient window area shall be provided on the exterior frontage of
that portion of the premises accessible to the public so as to permit
§ 198-125 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-126
1:532
§ 198-127. Wind energy conservation systems.
a view through such windows of all mechanical devices operated
within the premises.
D. Location of amusement device businesses. No business offering the use
of amusement devices to the public shall be permitted within any zone
district if such premises are located within 250 feet of any residential
property or within 500 feet of any church or public or private school. In
addition, no such business shall be permitted within 800 feet of any
other business offering amusement devices to the public.
E. Accessory uses. No other principal or accessory uses shall be permitted
within the same premises as a business offering use of amusement
devices to the public.
F. Parking requirements. There shall be one vehicle parking space
provided for each four amusement devices to be provided on the
premises, and, in addition, two bicycle parking spaces shall be provided
for each five proposed amusement devices. The applicant shall be
required to provide a bicycle parking facility which shall be
permanently affixed to the ground and constructed of steel pipe in a
manner approved by the City Engineer.
G. Hours of operation. No business offering the use of amusement devices
to the public shall be permitted to operate between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 9:00 a.m.
H. Supervision of premises. During hours of operation, such businesses
must be supervised at all times by at least one adult who shall be
employed by the applicant and who shall be responsible for supervision,
maintenance and operation of the premises. At least one such individual
shall be present on the premises during all hours of operation.
I. Rest room facilities. A minimum of two rest rooms shall be provided
within the premises, one to be designated for each gender.
A. Permitted areas of use. Wind energy conservation systems (WECS) shall
be permitted in any residential and business zone district where the
general criteria of Subsection D are met.
B. Site plan requirements. Building permit applications for a wind energy
conservation system shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn in
sufficient detail to clearly show the following information:
(1) Property lines and lot dimensions.
(2) Location, dimension and type of existing structures and uses on the
site.
(3) Location and elevation of the proposed wind energy conservation
system.
§ 198-126 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-127
1:533
(4) Location of all aboveground utility lines on-site within one radius of
the total height of the wind energy conservation system.
(5) Zoning designation of the adjacent properties within a twohundred-
foot radius of the subject property.
C. Building permit requirements. Building permit applications shall be
accompanied by standard drawings of the structural components of the
wind energy conservation system, including support structures, tower,
base and foundation. Drawings shall be signed and sealed by a
professional engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey.
D. General criteria.
(1) Each wind energy conservation system shall be equipped with both
manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the
blade below the design limits of the rotor.
(2) The maximum level of noise generated by a wind energy
conservation system shall not exceed 50 decibels, as measured on
the DBA scale, measured at the nearest property line.
(3) The wind energy conservation system shall be located in the rear
yard only and shall be set back a minimum of one rotor radius plus
five feet from any property line.
(4) A wind energy conservation system shall have a minimum
allowable height of 40 feet and a maximum allowable height of 80
feet, unless otherwise prohibited by any applicable state or federal
statute. The minimum distance between the ground and any part of
the rotor or blade of the wind energy conservation system shall be
a minimum of 20 feet, as measured from the lowest point of the arc
of the blade.
(5) The following items shall be certified by the manufacturer in
writing:
(a) That the wind energy conservation system has operated safely
in atmospheric conditions for a period of not less than three
months.
(b) That the wind energy conservation system has a minimum
survival wind speed of 90 miles per hour.
(c) That the wind energy conservation system has provided energy
not less than the equivalent of 25% of the predicted annual
energy output under a 12 miles per hour annual wind regime.
(d) That the wind energy conservation system and all
accompanying electrical equipment conforms to the 1981
National Electrical Code.
§ 198-127 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-127
1:534
ARTICLE XVII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 198-128. Zoning Officer.
A. Power of enforcement. The duty of administering and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter shall be conferred upon the Zoning Officer
upon the adoption of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall have such
powers as specifically conferred upon him by this chapter and those
powers as may be reasonably implied from this chapter, or otherwise
conferred by law.
B. Appointment. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the City
Manager and receive such compensation as the Council shall
determine.
C. Review for conformance. The Zoning Officer, or his duly authorized
assistants, shall review, examine or inspect any plans, buildings,
structures or premises in order to determine that they are not in
violation of this chapter.
D. Right of entry. The Zoning Officer shall have the right to enter any
building or premises during the daytime or during the normal hours of
operation in the course of executing his duties.
E. Notice of violation and appeal. Where the Zoning Officer, in the course
of his duties, determines that any plans, buildings, structures or
premises are in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he shall order
the responsible party in writing to remedy such conditions. Said written
order shall specify the nature of the violation found to exist, the remedy
order and the time permitted for such action, the penalties and
remedies which may be invoked by the City and the violator's right of
appeal; all as provided for by this chapter as well as the laws of the
State of New Jersey. See § 198-15A.
F. Loss of zoning permit. On the serving of notice by the Zoning Officer to
the owner of any violation of any provisions of this chapter, the zoning
permit for such building or use shall be held null and void. A new zoning
permit shall be required for any further or continued use of such
building or premises.
G. Maintenance of records. The Zoning Officer shall maintain a permanent
record of all matters considered and all action taken by him. Such
records shall form a part of the records of his office and shall be
available for the use of the City Council and other officials of the City,
county and state.
H. Application files. The Zoning Officer shall establish an individual
permanent file for each application for a permit provided for by this
chapter at the time of making the application. This file shall contain one
copy of the application and all supporting documents, maps and plans;
notations regarding pertinent dates, fees paid, notes, etc., one copy of
§ 198-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-128
1:535
§ 198-129. Jurisdiction.
The Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine, or such other court of record
of this state as shall be designated by the Supreme Court of the State
of New Jersey, shall have jurisdiction to hear complaints or citations for
violations committed under this chapter.
§ 198-130. Violations and penalties.
§ 198-131. Cease-and-desist orders.
The Zoning Officer shall first direct the offending party to cease and desist
from carrying out activities in violation of this chapter. Such notice shall
be sent by certified and regular United States mail to the owner of the
premises listed on the tax assessment rolls of the City of Brigantine and may
be sent to any other person known to the Zoning Officer to be an offending
party. Each day such violation continues after the cease-and-desist order
shall constitute grounds for a separate complaint. Upon the failure of the
offending party or the owner of the premises, or either of them, to cease
and desist such activity as is described in the notice and within the time
limit specified in such notice, the Zoning Officer may cause to be sworn
out appropriate complaints and/or citations for prosecution in any court
having jurisdiction over offenses committed under this chapter, and such
complaint and/or citation, as the case may be, shall be prosecuted by the
Municipal Prosecutor of the City of Brigantine or other appropriate legal
representation.
the decision and resolution of the Planning Board and the date the
permit applied for was either issued or denied by the Zoning Officer.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter, as amended and
supplemented, upon conviction for a first offense, shall subject the
offender to pay a fine not to exceed $500. Upon conviction for a second
or subsequent offense within two years of the date of the first
conviction, such person or entity being convicted shall pay a fine not to
exceed $1,000, and such person or entity being convicted shall be
subject to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days, or both, in
the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
B. Each day of offense may be treated as a separate offense. Each day of
offense subsequent to the cease-and-desist notice described in
§ 198-131 shall be treated as a separate offense.
C. If any applicant receives site plan or subdivision approval and does not
comply with any of the conditions imposed by the Planning Board as
part of said site plan or subdivision approval, said applicant or any
successor in title will be in violation of this chapter and subsection A
and B above will be applicable.
§ 198-128 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-132
1:536
§ 198-132. Additional costs and expenses.
In addition to the fines and/or penalties specified by this chapter, the
offending party may be required to pay all costs and expenses incurred by
the City of Brigantine in enforcing the terms and conditions of this chapter,
including but not limited to publication costs, postage, legal fees, court
costs and any other costs. Failure to pay over to the City of Brigantine
such amounts, on demand, shall entitle the City to commence appropriate
collection actions, and any additional costs or expenses so incurred shall
also be charged against the offending party.
§ 198-132 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-132
1:537

ARTICLE XVIII
Permits and Certificates
§ 198-133. Purpose and intent.
The certificates and permits herein are hereby established for the equitable
enforcement and administration of the provision of this chapter.
§ 198-134. Zoning permit
The Zoning Officer is hereby empowered to issue a zoning permit for any
plans regarding the construction or alteration of any building or part of
any building, or the change in the use of any land or building or part
thereof, where he shall determine that such plans are not in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 198-135. Temporary use permit.
Upon written direction of the Planning Board, the Zoning Officer is hereby
empowered to issue a temporary use permit. A temporary use permit shall
only be effective for a period not to exceed six months; such permit may be
extended by the Zoning Board not more than once for a period not to exceed
six months.
§ 198-136. (Reserved)
§ 198-137. Conditional certificate of occupancy.
(Reserved)
§ 198-138. Application procedures.
A. Procedures for a zoning permit. All applications for zoning permits shall
be made to the Zoning Officer in such detail as described in Article III,
Development Application Review and Approval Procedures. Where the
proposed use does not require site plan review by the Planning Board,
the Zoning Officer shall carefully consider the application and
supporting documents for compliance with this chapter and either issue
or deny the zoning permit applied for. When the application is for a use
for which site plan review is required, the Zoning Officer shall, prior to
the issuance of any permit, refer one copy of such plans, drawings and
statements to the Planning Board and one copy to the Municipal
Engineer for their review and recommendations.
B. Procedures for temporary use permits and conditional use permits. All
applications for temporary use permits and conditional use permits
shall be made to the Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer, after
determining that an application is in the proper form, shall transmit one
copy of the application and all supporting documents to the Secretary
of the Planning Board for referral to the Board for action thereon in
accord with § 198-9, Application procedure.
§ 198-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-138
1:539
§ 198-139. Severability
If any section or part of this chapter is deemed to be invalid or illegal in any
court of competent jurisdiction, then said part is severable from this chapter
as a whole and the remaining sections or parts of this chapter shall remain
in full force and effect.
§ 198-140. Repealer.
All ordinances or portions thereof inconsistent with this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of said inconsistency.
C. Procedures for a certificate of occupancy. Following the completion of
the construction, reconstruction or alteration of any building, or for any
change in the use of the structure the applicant shall transmit by
registered mail to the Zoning Officer a letter stating that such
construction has been completed or that a new use has been proposed.
Within seven days of the receipt of this letter, the Zoning Officer shall
make all necessary inspections of the completed structure and
proposed use to determine the conformance with this chapter. A
certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Construction Official only
if the Zoning Officer finds that the construction and proposed use
comply with all the requirements and provisions of this chapter or the
approval granted to the applicant.
§ 198-138 BRIGANTINE CODE § 198-140
1:540
Chapter 202
LASER POINTERS
§ 202-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall have the following meanings as used in this
chapter:
HANDHELD LASER POINTER, LASER POINTER, LASER DEVICE OR
LASER POINTER DEVICE — Any device that emits light amplified by the
simulated emission of radiation that is visible to the human eye.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, roadway, highway,
cul-de-sac, beach, bay, sidewalk or playground, or public building.
§ 202-2. Unlawful possession.
It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years old to possess a laser
pointer within the City of Brigantine.
§ 202-3. Prohibited use.
It is unlawful for any person in the City of Brigantine to focus, point or shine
a laser beam directly or indirectly onto another person in such a manner as
to harass, annoy or injure said person.
§ 202-4. Illumination of certain personnel prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner
that the laser beam illuminates a uniformed law enforcement officer,
firefighter or emergency services personnel within the City of Brigantine.
§ 202-5. Illumination of vehicle operator prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in such a manner
that the laser beam illuminates the operator of a motor vehicle within the
City of Brigantine.
§ 202-6. Use in public places prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a laser pointer in any public place
within the City of Brigantine.
§ 202-7. Sale to minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to sell or give away as
a prize, gift or bonus a laser device to any person under the age of 18 years
of age in the City of Brigantine.
§ 198-140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-8
1:541
§ 202-8. State law takes precedence.
If any state law is adopted which is contrary to any provisions of this chapter
to the extent of any inconsistency, the state law shall govern and take
precedence.
§ 202-9. Lawful employment.
Nothing in this chapter shall make the use of laser devices illegal if used as
part of a lawful business, profession or other lawful employment.
§ 202-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person guilty of a violation of this chapter may be subject up to a $1,000
fine, 90 days community service or up to 90 days in jail, all as determined in
the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
Chapter 204
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Boats — See Ch. 111.
Brush, weeds and other debris — See Ch. 115.
Use of rubbish disposal facilities during
construction — See Ch. 143, Art. II.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 187.
Mercantile businesses — See Ch. 210.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Recycling — See Ch. 242.
§ 202-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 202-10
1:542
ARTICLE I
Littering Prohibited; Distribution of Handbills
[Adopted 12-1-1965 by Ord. No. 17-1965]
§ 204-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Anti-Litter Ordinance
of the City of Brigantine."
§ 204-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular
number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
B. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used
or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft"
shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle.
CITY — The City of Brigantine.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any
other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter
of literature which:
(1) Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
(2)
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an
admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit;
but the terms of this definition shall not apply where an admission
fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of
defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the
same is held, given or takes place in connection with the
dissemination of information which is not restricted under the
ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and
good order, provided that nothing contained in this definition shall
be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind,
(3)
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-2
1:543
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, pollutants, refuse, rubbish and balloons, as defined
herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as
herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and
welfare.[Amended 12-19-1990 by Ord. No. 20-1990]
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by
general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or
regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording
officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, shall mean
and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published
with not fewer than four issues per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper,
magazine, paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced
original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the
aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, boardwalk, beach, recreation
center or any other public area in the City, owned or used by the City
and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
POLLUTANT — Any material as defined in New Jersey law, or
regulations promulgated thereunder, of chemical, petroleum, sanitary
or other waste, or by-products thereof, as hazardous
substances.[Added 12-19-1990 by Ord. No. 20-1990]
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other
structure, designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private
residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant
to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, beaches, boardwalks,
boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks,
squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
without a license, where such license is or may be required by any
law of this state or under any ordinance of this city; or
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and
gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
(4)
§ 204-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 204-2
1:544
§ 204-3. Littering prohibited. 153 [Amended 12-19-1990 by Ord. No.
20-1990]
No person shall throw, discharge, release or deposit litter in or upon any
street, sidewalk, beach, boardwalk, waterway, sanitary or storm sewer or
the atmosphere or other public place within the City except in authorized
private receptacles for collection or in official city or county collection sites.
§ 204-4. Placement of litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 204-5. Sweeping litter into gutters; maintenance of sidewalks.154
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
A. Sweeping litter into gutters or other places prohibited.
(1) No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the City the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
(2) Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of their premises free of litter.
B. Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.
(1) No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into
or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the City
the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway.
(2) Persons owning or occupying places of business within the City
shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of
litter.
153. Editor's Note: See also § 204-31, Littering prohibited, of this chapter.
154. Editor's Note: See also § 204-35, Duty of owner or lessee to maintain premises free of
litter, of this chapter.
§ 204-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-6
1:545
§ 204-6. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the City or upon private
property.
§ 204-7. Vehicle loads to be secure.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the City
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place, nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the City, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 204-8. Littering in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the City except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park
or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided
herein.
§ 204-9. Littering in fountains and bodies of water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, ocean, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the City.
§ 204-10. Distribution of handbills in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City,
nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill
in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any
sidewalk, street or other public place within the City for any person to hand
out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial
handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 204-11. Handbills on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without
charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 204-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 204-12
1:546
§ 204-12. Handbills on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 204-13. Distribution of handbills prohibited where posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No
Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar
notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not
desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any
such handbills left upon such premises.
§ 204-14. Distribution of handbills on private premises; exception.
§ 204-15. Litter or handbills dropped from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the City any
litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 204-16. Posting of notices.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except
as may be authorized or required by law.
A. No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are
inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such
private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted, as provided in this article, such person,
unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place
or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises,
if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such
handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks,
streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so
used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined herein), except that
newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to
prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
§ 204-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-17
1:547
§ 204-17. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the City, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner
or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon any private property.
§ 204-18. Maintenance of private property.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 204-19. Litter on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the City, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 204-20. Removal of litter by City.
A. Notice to remove. The Health Department is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
within the City or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter
located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health,
safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail, addressed to
said owner at his last known address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after receipt of written
notice provided for in Subsection A above or within 15 days after the
date of such notice in the event that the same is returned to the City
Post Office Department because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
provided that the same was properly addressed to the last known
address of such owner or agent, the Health Department is hereby
authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to
order its disposal by the City.
C. Charge included in tax bill. When the City has effected the removal of
such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost
thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date
of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior thereto,
shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax
bill forwarded to such owner by the City, and said charge shall be due
and payable by said owner at the time of payment of such bill.
D. Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the
City is not paid by such owner within 30 days after the disposal of such
§ 204-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 204-20
1:548
§ 204-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of Brigantine, be punished for each
offense by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for any term
not exceeding 90 days in the county jail or in any place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners, or both. The Municipal Court
Judge before whom any person is convicted of violating this article shall
have power to impose any fine or term of imprisonment not exceeding the
maximum fixed in this article.
litter, as provided for in Subsections A and B above, then, and in that
case, the Health Department shall cause to be recorded in the Tax
Collector's office of the City a sworn statement showing the cost and
expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the
location of the property on which said work was done. The recordation
of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the
property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due
on principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection,
until final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and,
further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 8% in the event that
the same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which
said charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded
in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence
that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work
has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to
every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest,
constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in
the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by
law.
§ 204-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-21
1:549

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Vehicles
[Adopted 9-4-1968 by Ord. No. 8-1968]
§ 204-22. Storage of abandoned vehicles regulated. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
No person, firm or corporation shall within the limits of the City of
Brigantine:
§ 204-23. Complaints; investigation; written report.
Upon complaint of any resident or property owner of the City of Brigantine
or any employee of said City, or, upon their own motion, the Health Officer,
Police Chief, Building Inspector or their designated agents, shall make an
investigation of the condition complained of and report thereon, in writing,
to the City Clerk for the City of Brigantine.
§ 204-24. Notification of violation.
Upon receiving said report, if the land in question about which the
complaint was made is found to be in such condition that a violation of one
or more of the provisions of § 204-22 hereof exist on said land, the City
Clerk shall notify the owner and possessor of said lands complained of, in
writing, either personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to take such steps as will effectively remove said violation from
said land, within 10 days after receipt of said notice.
A. Throw, dump, cast or deposit automobile parts, junk, wrecked or
abandoned boats or unlicensed motor vehicles not carrying current
New Jersey inspection approval tags upon open fields, woods or private
property or upon or along any public street, highway or other public
place, provided that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the
placing of such materials as are removed from the City by persons,
partnerships or corporations authorized to collect garbage and other
waste materials when the same are placed in suitable containers for
that purpose.
B. Keep, store, abandon or leave upon any parcel of land, street, road,
alleyway or parkway in the City any motor vehicle not currently used for
transportation and not being licensed for the current year or which
cannot be readily operated under its own power; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall be determined to prohibit the
placing, keeping, storing or abandonment of any such motor vehicle in a
garage or other building in the City or on the lands and premises of a
licensed service station operator where said motor vehicle is being or is
about to be repaired. However, said licensed service station operator
cannot allow any motor vehicle or motor vehicles to be parked on his
lands and premises without being under cover, or without repairs
thereon having been made, for a period exceeding 30 days.
§ 204-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-25
1:551
§ 204-25. Reinspection of lands previously in violation.
The Health Officer, Police Chief, Building Inspector or their designated
agents shall reinspect said lands after the ten-day period shall have expired
and shall report in writing to the City Clerk for the City of Brigantine
whether or not the unlawful condition complained of and previously found
to exist in violation of this article has been abated or remedied.
§ 204-26. Remedy of violation upon failure to comply.
In the event that the owner or possessor of said lands shall refuse or neglect
to abate or remedy the condition complained of and which constituted a
violation of this article, after said 10 days' notice, the City Clerk shall cause
the condition complained of to be abated and remedied.
§ 204-27. Cost of removal to become lien.
Upon removal of any of the materials prohibited to be stored or abandoned
on lands by this article by or under the direction of such officer or officers of
this City in cases where the owner or tenant shall have refused or neglected
to remove the same in the manner and within the time provided above,
such officer or officers shall certify the cost thereof to the City Clerk of the
City of Brigantine, who shall examine the certificate and, if found correct,
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands; the
amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall
be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon said lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as
taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the
same manner as taxes.
§ 204-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992]
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of any of the
provisions of this article shall either pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 or be
imprisoned in the City jail in the City of Brigantine for a term not exceeding
90 days, or both, for each offense and for each and every day said person
fails to comply with the notice beyond the date fixed for compliance, at the
discretion of the Judge before whom said conviction is had. The penalties
set forth in this section are separate and apart from the remedy provided
for in § 204-27 hereof and remedy provided by New Jersey statutes.
§ 204-25 BRIGANTINE CODE § 204-28
1:552
ARTICLE III
Clean Communities
[Adopted 7-20-1988 by Ord. No. 15-1988]
§ 204-29. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Clean Communities
Ordinance of the City of Brigantine."
§ 204-30. Definitions and word usage.
§ 204-31. Littering prohibited.155
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise place
litter of any nature upon any public or private property, other than a litter
receptacle.
§ 204-32. Use of litter receptacles.
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the municipality, including sidewalks used by
pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at a
minimum there shall be no single linear quarter mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings and railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all
street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;
gasoline service station islands; shopping centers; parking lots;
campgrounds and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations;
boat launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use;
A. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including but not limited to any bottle, jar or can, or any top,
cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette,
cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash,
refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn and garden waste,
newspaper, magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or
other packaging or construction material but does not include the
waste of the primary processes of mining or other extraction processes,
logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of
litter.
B. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
155. Editor's Note: See also § 204-3, Littering prohibited.
§ 204-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-32
1:553
beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public is
invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and festivals.
The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that adequate
containerization is available.
§ 204-33. Litter receptacles at construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or nonflyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 204-34. Open or overflowing waste disposal bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 204-35. Duty of owner or lessee to maintain premises free of
litter.156
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter and other offensive material. No person shall sweep into
or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or other public place any
accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free of litter. All sweepings shall be collected
and properly containerized for disposal.
156. Editor's Note: See also § 204-5, Sweeping litter into gutters; maintenance of sidewalks.
§ 204-32 BRIGANTINE CODE § 204-35
1:554
Chapter 210
MERCANTILE BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 87.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 91.
Amusement games — See Ch. 95.
Beach and dune protection — See Ch. 101.
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Boats — See Ch. 111.
Dogs — See Ch. 153.
Excavations — See Ch. 165.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Noise — See Ch. 216.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Parades and assemblies — See Ch. 230.
Parking lots — See Ch. 234.
Rental units; tenants — See Ch. 246.
Sewers — See Ch. 252.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
Moving of structures — See Ch. 264.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 270.
Municipal tennis courts — See Ch. 274.
Towing — See Ch. 278.
Water — See Ch. 290.
§ 204-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-35
1:555

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulation
[Adopted 6-1-1966 by Ord. No. 8-1966]
§ 210-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS — As used in both singular and plural sense, includes all kinds
of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, establishments and all
other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines,
vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for
private profit, or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in the
City of Brigantine, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and the acts amendatory
thereof and supplemental thereto.
CANVASSER and SOLICITOR — Any person traveling either by foot, wagon,
automotive vehicle or any type of conveyance from place to place or from
house to house carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, food
or other merchandise and offering and exposing the same for sale upon
invitation only at the consumer's home, business or other premises and
not for sale to the general public at locations within the public right-ofway.[
Amended 6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE — Any automatic vending machine used
for the sale of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco and/or matches, and controlled by
the insertion of a coin or coins.
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED-GOODS SALE — Sales held out in such a
manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer
goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE — A sale held in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that, upon the disposal of the stock
and goods on hand, the business will cease and be discontinued, including
but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's, adjustments, alterations,
assignee's, bankrupts', benefit-of-administrator's, benefit-of-creditors',
benefit-of-trustee's, building-coming-down, closing, creditor's-committee,
creditor's, executor's, final-days, forced-out, forced-out-of-business,
insolvent's, last-days, lease-expires, liquidation, loss-of-lease, mortgagesales,
receiver's, trustee's and quitting-business.
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Includes any person engaged in distributing
commercial or noncommercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed
to subscribers thereof, for himself or any other person, upon any of the
public and private streets, places and premises, other than his own
premises, in the City of Brigantine. This definition shall not prohibit sale
of newspapers, regularly published, through newsboys, newsmen or from
news store premises in the City of Brigantine.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-1
1:557
HANDBILLS —
INSIGNIA (or its singular number "insigne") — Any tag, plate, badge,
emblem, sticker or any other kind of device which may be required for any
use in connection with any license.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine operated
mechanically, electrically or otherwise which, upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as
a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score. It
shall include such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball,
mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions similar
thereto, under whatever name they may be included.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Includes any printed or written matter,
any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet
or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter or literature which:
(1) Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishments or other activity, for the purpose of either directly
or indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sale;
(2)
Directs attention to or advertises any show, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind, which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit;
(3)
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominately and essentially an advertisement and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes or for private benefit and
gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor; or
(4)
(5) Is not distributed on a regular basis.
A.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Includes any printed matter or
written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any letter or literature not included in
the aforesaid definition of a "commercial handbill."
B.
The aforegoing definitions of "commercial handbill" and
"noncommercial handbill" shall not include any newspaper of general
circulation as defined by general law or any periodical or current
magazine regularly published with not fewer than four issues a year
and sold to the public.
C.
§ 210-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-1
1:558
PEDDLER — Any person, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or
any other type of conveyance, from place to place and from street to
street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, foods or other
merchandise, offering and exposing the same for sale to the public at
locations within the public right-of-way and not at the consumer's home,
business or other premises. The term "peddler" shall include the terms
"hawker" and "huckster."[Amended 6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
PERSON — Includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups, or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PREMISES — Includes all land, structures and places, and also the
equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business,
and also any personal property which is either affixed to or is otherwise
used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale
will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the
stock and goods on hand and then move to and resume business at a new
location within the City of Brigantine or will then continue business from
other existing locations in said City.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR — Persons, corporations
or partnerships, whether principal or agent, who engage in a merchandising
business in the City of Brigantine, New Jersey, with intent to close out or
discontinue such business within one year from the date of commencement,
including those who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hire,
lease or occupy any building, structure or railroad car for the exhibition and
sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, but nothing in this definition
shall be construed to affect the sale of fruits, vegetables and farm products,
such as meat, poultry, butter and eggs.[Amended 6-16-1982 by Ord. No.
23-1982]
VENDING MACHINE — Includes any machine or device, whether automatic
or not, controlled by the insertion of a coin or coins, for the vending of
service, food, liquids, confections, goods, wares, merchandise or articles of
any type, kind or description.
§ 210-2. License required. [Amended 6-16-1982 by Ord. No.
23-1982]
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation, either
directly or indirectly, to conduct the business of peddling any goods, wares,
food or other merchandise within the City of Brigantine unless the
individual actively conducting such business holds a valid license to do so
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq. No additional license shall be required
from the City of Brigantine for the business of peddling to be actively
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:559
conducted by the holder of such a license. No other lawful business shall be
conducted within the City of Brigantine unless a license or permit therefor
is first procured and kept in effect at all such times as required by this
article or any other applicable ordinance of the City of Brigantine.
§ 210-3. Applicability.
For the purposes of this article, any person shall be deemed engaging in
business and subject to the provisions of this article when he does one act
of:
§ 210-4. Persons and groups responsible for compliance.
The agents, servants, employees or other representatives of corporations,
partnerships, resident or nonresident individual natural persons, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or unincorporated
groups shall be personally responsible for the compliance with this article
by their principals and by the businesses they represent.
§ 210-5. Prelicensing requirements of licensees for certain sales.
For a going-out-of-business sale or a removal-of-business sale or a fire or
other altered-goods sale, no person shall be granted a license unless:
§ 210-6. Restrictions placed on sales licenses.
In cases covered by § 210-5 preceding, the license shall:
A. Selling any goods or service.
B. Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire.
C. Acquiring or using any vehicle, machine, or device or any premises in
the City of Brigantine for business purposes.
A. He has been the owner of a business as described in the application for
a license hereunder for a period of at least six months prior to the date
of the proposed sale.
B. He has not held a similar sale, at the location stated in the application,
within one year last past from the date of such application.
C. The application applies to only one business and is not conducted or
advertised in cooperation or by participation with any other business.
D. He shall file with the licensing officer a complete inventory of goods
that are to be offered for sale.
A. Authorize only one type of sale described in the application at the
location named therein.
B. Authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory filed with
the licensing officer and shall forbid additions or replacements.
§ 210-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-6
1:560
§ 210-7. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 210-5 and 210-6 preceding shall not apply to or affect:
§ 210-7.1. Delinquent taxes. [Added 5-19-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
No mercantile license shall be issued to any person, corporation or other
entity seeking to operate any business which requires the issuance of such
a mercantile license, which is situated within the City of Brigantine, nor
shall any such mercantile license be renewed unless the applicant for said
mercantile license has submitted sufficient proof to the Mercantile Officer
of the City of Brigantine that there are no delinquent local real property
taxes outstanding concerning the land and/or premises upon which the
business is to be conducted which requires the applicant to apply for such
mercantile license.
§ 210-7.2. Delinquent water charges. [Added 5-19-1993 by Ord. No.
3-1993]
No mercantile license shall be issued to any person, corporation or other
entity seeking to operate any business which requires the issuance of such
a mercantile license, which is situated within the City of Brigantine, nor
shall any such mercantile license be renewed unless the applicant for
said mercantile license has submitted sufficient proof to the Mercantile
Officer of the City of Brigantine that there are no delinquent water charges
(including charges for excess water consumption) outstanding concerning
the land and/or premises upon which the business is to be conducted which
requires the applicant to apply for such mercantile license.
§ 210-7.3. Delinquent sewer charges. [Added 5-19-1993 by Ord. No.
3-1993]
No mercantile license shall be issued to any person, corporation or other
entity seeking to operate any business which requires the issuance of such
a mercantile license, which is situated within the City of Brigantine, nor
shall any such mercantile license be renewed unless the applicant for
said mercantile license has submitted sufficient proof to the Mercantile
Officer of the City of Brigantine that there are no delinquent sewer charges
outstanding concerning the land and/or premises upon which the business
is to be conducted which requires the applicant to apply for such mercantile
license.
C. Continue for a period not exceeding three months from the date of
granting of license and shall not be renewable, assignable or
transferable.
A. Any person acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
§ 210-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-7.4
1:561
§ 210-7.4. Effect on delinquency. [Added 5-19-1993 by Ord. No.
3-1993]
This ordinance157 is limited in its effect to mercantile licenses only and is
not intended to change, modify or alter in any fashion the definition of
delinquent real property taxes, water charges or sewer charges as stated
by other ordinances of the City of Brigantine, regulations, statutes or as
promulgated by any taxing authority or appropriate employees of the City
of Brigantine.
§ 210-8. Submission of license application. [Amended 6-20-1984 by
Ord. No. 16-1984]
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this
article shall submit an application for such license to the Mercantile License
Officer of the City of Brigantine at the City Hall, Brigantine, New Jersey,
which application shall be accompanied by the full amount of the fees
chargeable for the license applied for.
§ 210-9. Contents of license application.
Said application shall be a written statement upon the forms provided by
the City License Officer and shall contain the following:
A. The previous license history of the applicant and whether there is any
previous revocation or suspension and the reasons therefor.
B. A statement that the applicant is not violating Chapter 198, Land Use. If
the applicant occupies a nonconforming use, proof of date of occupancy
and operation must be given. If the applicant intends to operate any
business at or located in or on property not zoned for commercial
activities according to Chapter 198, Land Use, the applicant must first
obtain permission of the applicable zoning authorities of the City of
Brigantine to conduct such business. Failure to disclose the actual
location of any business premises or intended business use shall cause
the applicant to be subject to the penalty provisions of this article and of
Chapter 198, Land Use, as subsequently amended. Mercantile licenses
issued under this article to businesses having their principal place of
business without the boundaries of this City and claiming to only
operate equipment, vehicles or personnel within the boundaries of this
City shall not be issued a mercantile license under this article nor
maintain any place of business in the City of Brigantine, unless the
application shall show the location of such business within or without
the City of Brigantine and, further, if such location is claimed to be
within the City of Brigantine, that it shall be one permitted to be a
business location pursuant to Chapter 198, Land Use. [Amended
12-16-1987 by Ord. No. 25-1987; 4-20-1988 by Ord. No. 8-1988]
157. Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 3-1993, adopted 5-19-1993.
§ 210-7.4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-9
1:562
§ 210-10. Additional license application requirements. [Amended
6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982; 6-20-1984 by Ord. No. 16-1984;
11-10-1993 by Ord. No. 29-1993]
In addition to the requirements of § 210-9 preceding, persons applying for
licenses as transient merchants, itinerant vendors, solicitors, canvassers
or handbill distributors shall furnish this further information on their
respective applications or attach the same thereto:
C. A statement that the applicant is not in default under the provisions of
this article or indebted or obligated in any manner to the City of
Brigantine, except for current taxes.
D. The fingerprints of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business. [Amended 11-10-1993 by
Ord. No. 29-1993]
E. The name of the person to whom the license will be issued and his
residence address; if the applicant is not an individual, then the names,
positions and residence addresses of all officers and managers of the
applicant.
F. The premises at which the business is to be carried on and the name
and address of the owner of said premises.
A. A listing of all misdemeanors, felonies or violations of any municipal
ordinance for which the applicant has been convicted, the nature of the
offense and the punishment assessed therefor. If the applicant is not an
individual, these provisions shall apply to its officers and managers.
B. The place or places in the City of Brigantine where the applicant
proposes to conduct business, solicit, canvass or distribute and the
length of time it proposes to do so.
C. The place or places, within or without the City of Brigantine, where the
applicant, within two years next preceding the date of said application,
did conduct business, solicit, canvass or distribute.
D. A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, where manufactured and
located, and the proposed method of delivery.
E. A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or
proposed to be done in order to attract customers.
F. Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant
proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative.
G. Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the
person or persons having the management or supervision of the
applicant's business or the method or plan of doing such business as the
§ 210-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-10
1:563
§ 210-11. Good moral character required.
No license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued to a person not of good moral
character. If the applicant is not an individual, these provisions shall apply
to its officers and managers.
§ 210-12. Investigation of applicant.
Upon written request of the City License Officer or the City Clerk, the Chief
of Police shall ascertain if the applicant has any criminal record and report,
in writing, affirmatively or negatively thereon, within seven days after said
request is made, indicating in his report his approval or disapproval of the
granting of a license and giving his reason therefor.
§ 210-13. Approval or disapproval of application; appeal. [Amended
6-20-1984 by Ord. No. 16-1984]
After submission of the application and the required fees to the City
Mercantile License Officer, the Mercantile License Officer shall make any
investigation necessary and shall indicate his written approval or
disapproval of the license application within 30 days after the application
is filed. If approved, the license shall be issued forthwith. If disapproved,
the Mercantile License Officer shall forthwith notify the applicant and the
City Clerk in writing of such disapproval and the reasons therefor, and
the applicant shall have 10 days from receipt of notice of disapproval to
appeal from the decision of the Mercantile License Officer to the Board of
Commissioners of the City of Brigantine who, after due hearing, can affirm
or reverse the decision of the Mercantile License Officer.
§ 210-14. Procedure for renewal or transfer of license.
Applications for renewal or transfer of a license shall follow the same
procedure as is outlined in the preceding sections for an original
application.
City License Officer may deem proper to fulfill the purposes of this
article and the protection of the public good.
H. A photograph of the applicant, taken within 30 days immediately prior
to the date of filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches
by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner.
I. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the
license registration number or other means of identification.
J. A statement from a licensed physician of the State of New Jersey dated
not more than seven days prior to the submission of the application,
certifying the applicant to be free of infectious, contagious or
communicable diseases.
§ 210-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-15
1:564
§ 210-15. Bond requirements. [Amended 6-16-1982 by Ord. No.
23-1982; 11-10-1993 by Ord. No. 29-1993]
Before any license, as provided by this article, shall be issued for a transient
merchant, itinerant vendor or commercial handbill distributor, the applicant
for said license shall file with the City Clerk of the City of Brigantine a
bond running to the City of Brigantine in the sum of $2,000 executed by the
applicant as principal and issued by a surety company with a license to do
business in the State of New Jersey as surety, which bond is to be approved
as to form by the City Solicitor and conditioned as follows:
§ 210-16. (Reserved)158
§ 210-17. Due date of license fees; surcharge for late renewals.
[Amended 5-16-1979 by Ord. No. 11-1979; 6-20-1984 by Ord. No.
16-1984; 12-16-1987 by Ord. No. 25-1987]
A. The applicant shall comply fully with all the provisions of the
ordinances of the City of Brigantine and the statutes of the State of New
Jersey respecting the applicant's business.
B. The bond shall provide for payment of all judgments and costs rendered
against such applicant for any violation of said ordinances and statutes.
C. The bond shall provide for payment of all judgments and costs rendered
or recovered against the applicant or any of his agents, servants or
employees for damages growing out of any tort or crime committed by
the applicant or any of his agents or employees on any person in the
City of Brigantine, while engaged in business within the City, and for
damages growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced
on any person transacting such business with such applicant, whether
such misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practiced by the
applicant or by his servant, agent or employee, either at the time of
making the sale or through any advertisement of any character
whatsoever, printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares
and merchandise sold or any part thereof.
D. All money paid as a down payment will be accounted for and applied
according to the representation of the applicant, or his agents, servants
or employees, and further guarantee to any citizen or resident of the
City of Brigantine doing business with the said applicant, or his
servants, agents or employees, that the property purchased will be
delivered according to the representation of the applicant, or his
agents, servants or employees.
A. All license fees shall be due and payable to the collector of mercantile
license fees at his office on the first day of December in each year, and
158. Editor's Note: Former § 210-16, Additional fee for Tourist and Business Development
Commission, added 12-16-1987 by Ord. No. 25-1987, was repealed 2-6-2008 by Ord. No.
3-2008.
§ 210-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-17
1:565
§ 210-18. Transfer of licenses; transfer fee. [Amended 6-20-1984 by
Ord. No. 16-1984; 12-16-1987 by Ord. No. 25-1987; 12-28-1992 by
Ord. No. 28-1992]
On transfer of location of licensed businesses within the City of Brigantine
or on the sale of an existing business, licenses may be transferred, provided
that the annual license fee has been paid, and applicants shall pay a transfer
fee as set forth in Article II, Fees Schedule, of this chapter.
§ 210-19. Replacement of lost or destroyed licenses; fee. [Amended
6-20-1984 by Ord. No. 16-1984; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
A duplicate license may be issued by the Mercantile License Officer to
replace any license previously issued, which license has been lost, stolen,
defaced or destroyed, without any willful conduct on the part of the
licensee, upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit sworn to before a
notary public of the State of New Jersey attesting to such fact and the
payment to the Mercantile License Officer of a fee as set forth in Article II,
Fees Schedule, of this chapter.
§ 210-20. Rebate or refund not allowed.
No rebate or refund of any license fee or any part thereof shall be made
by reason of retirement of the licensee from business or by reason of the
nonuse of such license for all or any portion of the licensed year or by
reason of a change of location or business or by reason of fire or other
accident or other casualty rendering the use of such license ineffective.
§ 210-21. Information to appear on licenses.
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
all such licenses shall expire on the 30th day of November following
such payment. [Amended 5-19-1993 by Ord. No. 3-1993]
B. Renewal licenses not purchased prior to the first day of the month
following the expiration date, except in transition years 1988 to 1989
and 1989, shall be surcharged a fee as set forth in Article II, Fees
Schedule, of this chapter, per month, administrative late charge.
Nothing in this subsection limits or is intended to restrict, limit or alter
the penalty provisions of this article or of law. [Amended 12-28-1992
by Ord. No. 28-1992]
A. The name of the licensee and any other name under which such
business is to be conducted.
B. The kind and address of each business to be licensed.
C. The amount of license fee therefor.
D. The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
§ 210-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-21
1:566
§ 210-22. Requirements of licensee. [Amended 6-16-1982 by Ord.
No. 23-1982]
Each licensee under this article shall:
§ 210-23. License fees. [Amended 5-3-1978 by Ord. No. 7-1978;
6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982; 6-20-1984 by Ord. No. 16-1984]
E. Such other information as the City License Officer shall determine.
A. Permit all reasonable inspections of his business.
B. Permit access to the licensed premises at all reasonable times by the
City License Officer.
C. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations
applicable to such licensed business.
D. Avoid all forbidden, improper, unlawful or unnecessary practices,
businesses or conditions which do or may affect the public health,
morals or welfare.
E. Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on premises after
expiration of his license and during the period when his license is
revoked or suspended.
F. Post and maintain his license upon the licensed premises in a place
where it may be seen at all times. Moreover, in the case of cigarette
vending machines, jukeboxes, vending machines and mechanical
amusement devices, the license or licenses herein provided for shall be
posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine or
device in the premises wherein the same is to be operated, or
maintained to be operated, and shall have affixed thereto any insignia
delivered for use therewith upon the outside of the same so that it may
be seen at all times.
G. Carry and display, at all times, his license and identification to any
person requesting the same, if the licensee is a transient merchant,
itinerant vendor, solicitor, canvasser or handbill distributor.
H. Not loan, sell, give or assign to any other person, or allow any other
person to use and display or to destroy, damage or remove or to have in
his possession, except as authorized by the City License Officer or by
law, any license or insignia which has been issued to said licensee.
A. The licensee fees to be paid annually, unless otherwise specified, for
conducting the business or businesses herein named at the premises to
be designated in the license or licenses issued hereunder shall be as set
forth in Article II, Fees Schedule, of this chapter. [Amended
12-16-1987 by Ord. No. 25-1987; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992; 2-6-2008 by Ord. No. 3-2008]
§ 210-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-23
1:567
§ 210-24. Enforcement. [Amended 6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, the City License Officer and any
police officer of the City of Brigantine to examine all places of business
and all persons of the City of Brigantine to determine if this article has
been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this article against any
person found to be violating the same. Any transient merchant, itinerant
vendor, peddler, solicitor, canvasser or handbill distributor shall
prominently display on his person a currently valid license and shall
promptly produce the same for inspection upon request by any
representative of the City of Brigantine or any member of the general
public.
§ 210-25. Delivery of property purchased outside of City.
No license shall be required of any person for any mere delivery in the City
of Brigantine of any property purchased or acquired in good faith from such
person at his regular place of business outside of the City where no intent
by such person is shown to exist to evade the provisions of this article.
§ 210-26. Special permits for temporary nonprofit enterprises.
The Board of Commissioners of the City of Brigantine may authorize the
issuance of special permits, without the payment of any license fees or other
charge therefor, to any public, charitable, educational, literary, fraternal
or religious organization having its location in the City of Brigantine, for
the conduct or operation of a temporary nonprofit enterprise for a public,
charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious purpose. The
applicant, however, shall submit the usual application form in the manner as
hereinbefore required and shall operate, if granted, a permit in accordance
with the requirements of this article.
§ 210-27. Revocation of licenses.
Any permit or license granted or issued pursuant to this article may be
revoked by the Board of Commissioners, after notice and hearing, for any of
the following causes:
B. In case any person after having been duly licensed to conduct any of the
businesses herein required to be licensed desires to add to such
licensed business, and conduct therewith any other business not
included in any classification for which his existing license was issued,
he shall pay an additional fee in the amount prescribed by Article II,
Fees Schedule, of this chapter, for the business so added and be entitled
to and receive thereupon a new certificate including the new business.
No such person shall conduct any such additional business without
having first secured such license as herein provided for.
A. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
§ 210-23 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-27
1:568
§ 210-28. Notice of hearing for revocation of license.
Notice of hearing for revocation of license, under § 210-27 preceding, shall
be given in writing by the City Clerk or the City license inspector, setting
forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, by certified mail, to the licensee at his
address indicated on his license application at least five days prior to the
date set forth for the hearing.
§ 210-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992]
In addition to the provisions for revocation, the City License Officer, the
Chief of Police, any police officer of the City of Brigantine or any taxpayer
or resident of the City may make complaint in the Municipal Court of the
City of Brigantine for any violation of this article, or any section, paragraph
or provision thereof. Upon conviction in such case, for each and every
violation, the person committing, taking part in or assisting in such violation
or violations shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or be
imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both,
at the discretion of the City Judge. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 210-30. Places where peddling permitted. [Added 6-16-1982 by
Ord. No. 23-1982]
No business of peddling shall be conducted within the City of Brigantine
except within those zoning districts permitting commercial or business
activity pursuant to Chapter 198, Land Use, as amended. Within such areas,
no business of peddling shall be conducted except within the public rightof-
way, and, within said business or commercial zoning districts, no such
business activity shall be conducted within 200 feet of the public beach,
any municipal building, church or school. In addition, any peddler lawfully
operating within the City of Brigantine shall maintain at all times a distance
of 200 feet from any other person engaging in such activity.
B. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise.
C. Any violation of this article.
D. Any conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude.
E. Any conduct of the business licensed under this article, through
applicant himself, or any of his agents, servants or employees, in any
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare
of the public.
§ 210-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-31
1:569
§ 210-31. Hours when peddling permitted; operation of wheeled
vehicles. [Added 6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
§ 210-32. Trash containers on peddlers' vehicles. [Added 6-16-1982
by Ord. No. 23-1982]
Any motor vehicle, wagon, cart or other wheeled device operated by a
lawfully licensed peddler shall have prominently located thereon a
container for the deposit of trash and other refuse. No peddler shall cause
any trash or refuse to be deposited elsewhere, either by himself or his
customers.
§ 210-33. Placement of materials on peddlers' vehicles. [Added
6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
No peddler shall permit any material to be placed anywhere except on or
within the motor vehicle, wagon, cart or wheeled device used by him in the
conduct of his business.
§ 210-34. Peddlers prohibited to sell to persons in motor vehicles.
[Added 6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
No peddler shall sell or offer to sell any goods, wares, food or merchandise
to any person occupying a motor vehicle, standing or moving on the public
streets or highways.
§ 210-35. Peddlers' vehicles not to be left unattended. [Added
6-16-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
No motor vehicle, cart, wagon or other wheeled device operated by a
peddler shall be left unattended during business hours, and any such motor
vehicle, wagon, cart or other wheeled device left unattended overnight shall
be confiscated by the City of Brigantine.
A. No person shall engage in the business of peddling within the City of
Brigantine before the hour of 9:00 a.m., nor after dusk in the evening.
B. Any person lawfully licensed to conduct the business of peddling
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq. may do so within the City of
Brigantine as long as such business is conducted from a licensed motor
vehicle or a cart, wagon or other wheeled vehicle or device which may
be readily moved. Any such motor vehicle shall park only in areas where
vehicles are permitted, and any cart, wagon or other wheeled device
shall be located only within that portion of the public right-of-way
reserved for pedestrian traffic and shall be placed in a manner so as not
to impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No motor vehicle, cart, wagon
or other wheeled device shall be permitted to do business at a fixed
location, and every peddler shall be required to move continuously his
motor vehicle, wagon, cart or other wheeled device without stopping at
a fixed location for more than five minutes unless a sale is actively being
conducted at that location.
§ 210-31 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-36
1:570
§ 210-36. County license and proof of health inspection required of
peddlers; access to facilities for inspection. [Added 6-16-1982 by
Ord. No. 23-1982]
Prior to conducting the business of peddling within the City of Brigantine,
every person shall present to the City Clerk a copy of a currently valid
license issued to him by the Atlantic County Clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A.
45:24-9 et seq., as well as a copy of the application to the Atlantic County
Clerk on the basis of which such license was issued. In addition, any peddler
who proposes to sell food to the public shall also present to the City Clerk
proof of a current inspection by the Atlantic County Health Department of
all facilities used in the preparation and sale of such food. No peddler shall
engage in the sale of any goods, wares, food or merchandise other than
those items set forth on a license presented to the City Clerk. Any peddler
engaging in the business of selling food to the general public within the
City of Brigantine shall provide representatives of the Police Department
and the local and County Boards of Health with access to his facilities for
the preparation and sale of such food during normal business hours for the
purpose of determining compliance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 24:1-1
et seq. and N.J.A.C. 8:21-1.1.
§ 210-36.1. Insurance requirements for contractors. [Added
9-15-2001 by Ord. No. 18-2001]
A. For the purpose of this section, a "contractor" is defined as any person,
individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other
business entity which engages in the business of constructing, erecting,
altering, repairing, remodeling, restoring, re-roofing, residing, moving
or demolishing the whole or any part of any building or structure or
engages in the construction and installation of swimming pools, or
engages in the business of erecting or altering signs, and because of
engaging in said business is required to obtain a mercantile license by
the City of Brigantine.
B. No mercantile license shall be issued to any contractor in the City of
Brigantine unless said contractor provides to the Mercantile Officer a
valid, in effect, paid insurance policy or certificate evidencing purchase
of said policy in the name of the person, individual, partnership, limited
liability company, corporation or other business entity which said policy
provides general liability insurance in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000 and said insurance covers both property damage and
personal injury. All such policies of insurance must further clearly show
that the City of Brigantine has been named as an additional insured;
and, further, must contain language which is clearly visible and
readable by the Mercantile Officer that the City of Brigantine must be
noticed at least 45 days in advance of any lack of renewal or
cancellation of said insurance policy.
§ 210-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-36.1
1:571

ARTICLE II
Fees Schedule
[Adopted 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 29-1992; amended in its entirety
1-5-2011 by Ord. No. 29-2010]
§ 210-37. Fees enumerated. [Amended 9-7-2011 by Ord. No.
20-2011; 12-21-2011 by Ord. No. 29-2011; 5-15-2013 by Ord. No.
5-2013; 3-19-2014 by Ord. No. 3-2014; 5-7-2014 by Ord. No. 7-2014;
2-4-2015 by Ord. No. 1-2015; 3-18-2015 by Ord. No. 4-2015;
11-4-2015 by Ord. No. 15-2015; 3-2-2016 by Ord. No. 5-2016;
4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 16-2017; 10-18-2017 by Ord. No. 23-2017;
12-6-2017 by Ord. No. 25-2017; 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 4-2019;
12-18-2019 by Ord. No. 24-2019]
The fees and charges for licenses, permits and services provided by the City
of Brigantine, except for fees set by the Uniform Construction Code in the
Construction Official's office and the Uniform Fire Code, are as set forth
below:
License, Permit or Service Fee
Advertising agency (mercantile license) $50
Advertising bill, circular and sample distributors
(mercantile license)
$25 per day
Advertising and demonstrating bus, wagon or
vehicle (mercantile license)
$25 per day
Advertising or demonstration store (mercantile
license)
$50
Alcoholic beverage licenses
Club license $150
Plenary retail consumption license $1,750
Plenary retail distribution license $900
Amusements
Arcade or group (mercantile license)
Up to 5 types $500
Over 5 types $75 for each
additional type
Radio, fortune, keno, po-keno, bingo, skill bingo
and similar games (mercantile license)
Up to 75 chairs $700
Each additional chair over $10
75 chairs
Other group games having fewer than 10
chairs or no seating capacity
$150
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:573
License, Permit or Service Fee
Amusement games
Category and certification No. 1 games $150 per game
Category and certification No. 2 games
Arcades with 50 machines or fewer $400
Arcades with over 50 machines $400 additional for
each 50 machines or
fewer
Category and certification No. 3 games $150 per game
Category and certification No. 4 games
Up to 200 seats $600
201 to 350 seats $800
Over 350 seats $1,200
Category and certification No. 5 games $150 per game
Category and certification No. 6 games $150 per game
Category and certification No. 7 games $150 per game
Any game not listed above $150 per game
NOTE: For a specific description of each category
of game see Chapter 95 of the Code of the City of
Brigantine
Amusement rides (mercantile license) $100 per each ride or
amusement
Antique shop (mercantile license) $50
Art, needlework or yard shop (mercantile license) $50
Assessment search (by City Clerk) $15
Auction (mercantile permit fee) $50
Auction house (mercantile license) $200
Automatic slot amusement machine (mercantile
license)
$10 each
Automatic filling or dispensing machine (mercantile
license)
$20 each
Automatic weighing machine (mercantile license) $10 each
Automobile accessory and parts store (mercantile
license)
$50
Automobile agency or showroom (mercantile
license)
$150
Automobile garage (mercantile license) $50
Automobile service station (mercantile license) $50
Awning, blind or shade shop (mercantile license) $50
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:574
License, Permit or Service Fee
Bait, fishing and tackle shop (mercantile license) $50
Bakery or pastry shop (mercantile license) $50
Barber shop (mercantile license) $50
Bathhouse or bathing establishment (mercantile
license)
$50, plus $1 for each
locker
Beach chair rental fee (mercantile license) $50, plus $1 for each
chair
Beach sailboat permit $150
Beach tag fee
Daily $10
Weekly $15
Seasonal badges purchased prior to June 1 $15
Seasonal badges purchased on or subsequent to
June 1
$20
Seasonal badges for individuals 60 to 64 years of
age purchased prior to June 1
$8
Seasonal badges for individuals 65 years or
older or veterans or active military families of
the Armed Forces of the United States of
America
$0
Seasonal badges for persons in active military
service in the Armed Forces of the United States
of America or their spouse or dependant
children over the age of 12 years who reside in
the same residence
$0
Special Christmas badge (includes holiday box) $25
Beach vehicle, four-wheel drive permit
Permit issued to an honorably discharged
veteran of the United States Military or his or
her spouse
$0
Permit purchased in December for the following
year through April 30 of the current year
$200
Permit for the current year purchased from May
1 to December 31
$300
Permit purchased in December, for the
subsequent year, through February by a senior
citizen or individual who is designated
permanently disabled pursuant to federal social
security regulations
$80
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:575
License, Permit or Service Fee
Permit purchased by a senior citizen or
individual who is designated permanently
disabled pursuant to federal social security
regulations in March through December for the
current year
$85
Permits for the subsequent year may be
purchased in the month of December of the
preceding year
Replace lost or stolen permit $30
Special event permit $10
Beach waverunner/jet ski launching $125
Beauty parlor (mercantile license) $50
Bicycle sales and repairs (mercantile license) $50
Billiard parlor (mercantile license) $50, plus $20 per
billiard table
Bingo license $10 per day
Birth certificate $10
Boat agency or salesroom and accessories $50
Boat ramp permit
Daily $25
Weekly $35
Seasonal, prior to June 1 $80
Seasonal, after June 1 $130
Replacement of lost or stolen permit $30
Annual charge to marina $500
Boatyard or marina (mercantile license)
1 to 5 boats $20
Over 5 boats $2 per additional
boat
1 to 5 slips $20
Over 5 slips $4 per additional slip
Boats for charter (mercantile license) $50
Bookstore (mercantile license) $50
Book sales and soliciting agents (mercantile
license)
$50
Bottler or distributor of beverages or agent or
representative thereof (mercantile license)
$75
Bowling alley (mercantile license) $20 per lane
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:576
License, Permit or Service Fee
Bus terminal (mercantile license) $150
Canvassers (mercantile license) $50
Carnival $1,500
Carpet store, furniture and furnishings (mercantile
license)
$50
Catamaran beach permit (see also beach sailboats) $150
Cat license $7
Certificate of carbon monoxide, smoke detector
alarm, and portable fire extinguisher compliance
When application is submitted 11 or more
business days prior to settlement
$35
When application is submitted between 4 and 10
business days prior to settlement
$70
When application is submitted less than 4 days
prior to settlement
$125
Certificate of land use compliance $50
Charter boat (mercantile license) $50
Cigarette vending machine (mercantile license) $10 each
Cigar, cigarette, tobacco, candy and sundries -
wholesale (mercantile license)
$75 each
Cigars and tobacco - retail (mercantile license) $50
Circus (mercantile license) $1,500
Civil union license $28
Civil union certified copy $10
Cleaning, pressing or dyeing (mercantile license) $50
Clothing, haberdashery (mercantile license) $50
Cold-storage plant with public service (mercantile
license)
$75
Commercial sign makers (mercantile license) $50
Community center
Group A: Municipal government and municipal
sponsored/co-sponsored groups, 501(c)3
charitable organizations and other similar
organizations as determined by the Director of
the CER
Dining room No charge
Multipurpose room No charge
Gym/auditorium No charge
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:577
License, Permit or Service Fee
Use of kitchen No charge
Activity room No charge
Conference room No charge
Community art room No charge
Group B: Any profit-making individuals/
organizations and nonprofit organizations
charging fees to the public
Dining room $100 per hour
Multipurpose room $100 per hour
Gym/auditorium $100 per hour
Use of kitchen $100 per event
Activity room $50 per hour
Conference room $50 per hour
Community art room $50 per hour
Community education and recreation (CER)
activities
The Recreation
Director and City
Manager will be
responsible for
establishing as
necessary the fees
for CER programs
and activities.
Confectioner (mercantile license)
Retail $50
Wholesale, retail and manufacturing $75
Council on Affordable Housing development fees
Residential development 1/2 of 1% of the
equalized assessed
value of the property
Nonresidential development 2.5% of the equalized
assessed value
Residential and nonresidential development
when a “D” variance has been granted
Refer to Ch. 150
Dairy products store (mercantile license) $50
Dance hall (mercantile license) $250
Dance academy or studio (mercantile license) $50
Death certificate $10
Delicatessen without luncheonette or restaurant
(mercantile license)
$50
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:578
License, Permit or Service Fee
Delivery or collecting vehicle engaging in retail
trade not connected with an otherwise licensed
business in the City of Brigantine (mercantile
license)
$50
Detail charges: police, fire public works See "personnel
detail"
Department store (mercantile license)
Up to 5,000 square feet of sales area $50
From 5,000 square feet to 7,500 square feet of
sales area
$75
Over 7,500 square feet of sales area $150
Discovery in municipal court and other court
matters
Up to first 10 pages, per page $0.75
For pages 11-20, per page $0.50
For pages 21 and continuing, per page $0.25
Additional fee for tapes and other media Cost of production
Dog license
Neutered $7
Unneutered $10
Vicious $700
Dog park card
Prior to June 1 $25
On or after June 1 $35
Weekly card (7 consecutive days) $10
Replacement fee $7
Domestic partnership license $28
Domestic partnership certified copy $10
Driving school (mercantile license) $20 each vehicle
Drugstore (mercantile license) $50
Dry goods store (mercantile license) $50
Dumpster or portable storage unit
First thirty-day period $35
Each fifteen-day renewal period $20
Dumpster required as condition of construction
permit
When construction permit is valued at $250 or
greater
$50
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:579
License, Permit or Service Fee
All others $25
Dumpsters, off-site
First thirty-day period $75
Each fifteen-day renewal period $50
Electrical appliance and supply store (mercantile
license)
$50
Equipment usage Based on FEMA
Schedule of
Equipment Rates
Excavations, commercial; pursuant to Ch. 165 As charged by the
Construction Official
up to a maximum of
$50
Brigantine Farmers Market
Application fee $20
Vendor participation fee for first space
If paid by January 31, 2018 $300
If paid after January 31, 2018, but before
February 28, 2018
$350
If paid after February 28, 2018 $400
Second 10 x 10 space $150
Third 10 x 10 space $100
Pop-up space, per week $35
Gold sponsor $750
Silver sponsor $250
Other sponsors $50 to $100
Fire and other altered goods sale (mercantile
license)
$10 per day
Fire prevention fees As established
pursuant to the
Uniform Fire Code
and shall be available
in the Brigantine Fire
Department
Firearms purchaser identification cards $5
Five- and ten-cent store or similar establishments
(mercantile license)
Up to 5,000 square feet of sales area $50
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:580
License, Permit or Service Fee
From 5,000 square feet to 7,500 square feet
of sales area
$75
Over 7,500 square feet of sales area $100
Flower and plant store (mercantile license) $50
Food store, grocery store or market (mercantile
license)
Up to 3,000 square feet of sales area $50
From 3,000 square feet to 4,000 square feet of
sales area
$75
From 4,001 square feet to 5,000 square feet of
sales area
$125
From 5,001 square feet to 7,000 square feet of
sales area
$225
Over 7,000 square feet of sales area $375
Freight terminal (mercantile license) $75
Fuel pump not connected with a garage or service
station (mercantile license)
$10 per pump
Furnishings, furniture or carpeting (mercantile
license)
$50
Furniture store, retail (mercantile license)
Up to 5,000 square feet of sales area $50
5,001 square feet to 7,500 square feet of sales
area
$75
Over 7,500 square feet of sales area $125
Furs and fur storage (mercantile license) $50
Games of chance
Pull-tab raffles As allowed by state
On-premises 50/50 draw As allowed by state
Off-premises draw As allowed by state
Garage sale or yard sale $12
General business establishment not otherwise
classified in this fee schedule (mercantile license)
$50
Golf course (mercantile license)
Standard rates for play at the municipally owned
Brigantine Golf Links
No more than $90
and no less than $20
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:581
License, Permit or Service Fee
Rates may be adjusted at various times
throughout the year recognizing seasonal
fluctuations and weather conditions. Current
applicable rates shall be prominently
displayed within the clubhouse
Residents and taxpayers shall be entitled to a
discount of 20% upon presentation of a valid
Brigantine Golf Links identification card.
Brigantine Golf Links identification cards shall
be issued at a location to be determined by the
City Manager. A fee of $5 shall be imposed for
the issuance of said identification cards.
Resident and taxpayer discounts shall apply to
league play but will not apply to special events
Annual membership rates shall be as follows.
Cart fees are not included in membership rates.
Family membership
2 adults and up to 2 children $3,500
Each additional family member $700
Signature (single) membership $2,400
Weekday membership (Monday through
Thursday)
$1,350
Weekend membership (Friday, Saturday,
Sunday)
$2,000
Jr. membership (includes clinics)
[Note: Jr. membership participants must be
accompanied by an adult during play.]
$400
Jr. clinics only $250
Trial/new resident (includes cart fees) $2,400
The aforementioned resident/taxpayer
discount shall apply to membership rates as
well.
Going-out-of-business sale (mercantile license) $7 per each day
Greenhouse, hothouse, flowers (mercantile license) $50
Groceries, wholesale (mercantile license) $75
Grocery store, food store and market (mercantile
license)
Up to 3,000 square feet of sales area $50
From 3,000 square feet to 4,000 square feet of
sales area
$75
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:582
License, Permit or Service Fee
From 4,001 square feet to 5,000 square feet of
sales area
$125
From 5,001 square feet to 7,000 square feet of
sales area
$225
Over 7,000 square feet of sales area $375
Handgun, permit to purchase $2
Hardware, china and glassware (mercantile
license)
$50
Hazardous material cleanup $250
Horseback riding permit $100
Hothouse, greenhouse, flowers or plants
(mercantile license)
$50
Hucksters (mercantile license) $75
Ice business (mercantile license) $50
Ice cream manufacturers and distributors
(mercantile license)
Retail $50
Wholesale $75
Ice cream parlor (mercantile license) $50
Ice cream sale on beach $100
Ice machines (mercantile license) $15 each
Impound lot storage by City $15 per day per
vehicle; $25 per day
per vehicle after 30
days
Indoor tennis
Court reservations
Regular rate
1 hour $28
1 1/2 hours $42
2 hours $54
Senior rate
1 hour $24
1 1/2 hours $36
2 hours $48
Seasonal: 25-week contract
Regular rate
1 hour $500
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:583
License, Permit or Service Fee
1 1/2 hours $750
2 hours $1,000
Senior rate
1 hour $480
1 1/2 hours $720
2 hours $960
Seasonal: 10-week contract
Regular rate
1 hour $250
1 1/2 hours $375
2 hours $500
Senior rate
1 hour $240
1 1/2 hours $360
2 hours $480
Itinerant merchants (mercantile license) $30 per day
Itinerant vendors (mercantile license) $30 per day
Jet ski beach launching $125
Jewelry and jewelry novelties (mercantile license) $50
Jukebox (mercantile license) $10 each
Junk collectors by wagon or truck $150 each vehicle
Land use See "planning and
zoning"
Laundry (mercantile license)
Machine-operated self-service $20, plus $5 for each
washing machine or
drying machine
Other than self-service $50
Laundry - collecting and distribution (mercantile
license)
$50
Linen and towel supply service (mercantile license) $50
Liquor license See "alcoholic
beverage license"
Limo (mercantile license)
Each vehicle $50 per year; $10 per
year
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:584
License, Permit or Service Fee
List of property owners within 200 feet, from Tax
Assessor
$10
Lumberyard, hardware store (mercantile license) $50
Manufacturing place or device (mercantile license) $50
Marriage license $28
Marriage license, certified copy $10
Marina or boatyard (mercantile license)
1 to 5 boats $20
Over 5 boats $2 per boat
1 to 5 slips $20
Over 5 slips $4 per slip
Map, Zoning $15
Meats or poultry, wholesale (mercantile license) $75
Mechanical amusement device (mercantile license) $10 each
Mercantile licenses
For all classifications not listed herein $50
Late charge $7 per month
Transfer of license charge $12
Replacement of lost, stolen, defaced or
destroyed mercantile license
$15 per license
Amount to be paid to Tourism and Business
Development Commission for each and every
mercantile license issued in the City of
Brigantine
$10
Meters and meter readings See "water meters"
Millinery (mercantile license) $50
Miniature golf
Per person per round $5
Per person per round for groups of 10 or more
scheduled at least 48 hours in advance
$4
Motel and hotel (mercantile license) $20, plus $10 for
each unit with
kitchen facilities and
$5 for each sleeping
room unit
Motorcycle sale or rental (mercantile license) $75
Musical instruments, music or records (mercantile
license)
$50
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:585
License, Permit or Service Fee
Newspaper publishers (mercantile license) $50
Newsstand not connected with any other licensed
business (mercantile license)
$50
Noise: variance from ordinance requirement $150
Notary seal $2 per page or
signature
Optical goods (mercantile license) $50
Paint stores, paint supply stores and hardware
stores (mercantile license)
$50
Parades and assemblies $50
Parking lots
Municipal parking lots $25
Municipal parking lots (daily) $8
Designated municipal commercial parking lots
(yearly)
$210
Designated municipal commercial parking lots
(daily)
$35
Temporary storage of modular homes on
municipal parking lots
See "storage"
Permit to purchase handgun $2
Personnel detail
Police Department
Police officer $100 per hour
(minimum 2 hours)
Fire Department
Captain $80 per hour
(minimum 2 hours)
Lieutenant $75 per hour
(minimum 2 hours)
Fire Official $75 per hour
(minimum 2 hours)
Firefighter $70 per hour
(minimum 2 hours)
Public Works
Laborer, operator, driver $65 per hour
(minimum 2 hours)
Laborer $60 per hour
(minimum 2 hours)
Hazardous material cleanup fee $250
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:586
License, Permit or Service Fee
Photocopies/OPRA request Maximum allowable
pursuant to statute
Photograph gallery or shop (mercantile license) $50
Pile driving, bulkheads and pier $50, plus water
usage and permit
Pinball or similar machine (mercantile license) $50 each
Ping-Pong™ (mercantile license) $10 each table
Planning and zoning
Subdivisions
Minor preliminary and final
Application fee $200
Escrow fee $700
Major/sketch plat $200
Major preliminary plat
Application fee $400, plus $50 per
lot
Escrow fee $800, plus $250 per
lot
Major final plat
Application fee $300, plus $25 per
lot
Escrow fee 100% of original
escrow for
preliminary approval
Extension of preliminary approval
Application fee $100
Escrow fee 20% of original
escrow deposit
Extension of final approval
Application fee $100
Escrow fee 20% of original
escrow deposit, plus
$25 per lot
Site plans
Minor commercial
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:587
License, Permit or Service Fee
Application fee $150, plus $75 for
each 1,000 square
feet of building area
up to 5,000 square
feet, then $50 for
each 5,000 square
feet thereafter
Escrow fee $800, plus $250 per
1,000 square feet
Minor residential
Application fee $100, plus $25 per
dwelling unit
Escrow fee $800, plus $250 per
dwelling unit
Preliminary major commercial
Application fee $250, plus $100 for
each 1,000 square
feet of building area
up to 5,000 square
feet, then $25 for
each 5,000 square
feet thereafter
Escrow fee $750, plus $200 per
1,000 square feet
Preliminary major residential
Application fee $250, plus $100 per
dwelling unit
Escrow fee $750, plus $200 per
dwelling unit
Final major commerical
Application fee $500
Escrow fee $750, plus $100 per
1,000 square feet
Final major residential
Application fee $500
Escrow fee $750, plus $100 per
dwelling unit
Variances
Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a $150, plus an escrow
fee of $200 for
professionals
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:588
License, Permit or Service Fee
Interpretations pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b
$150, plus an escrow
fee of $200 for
professionals if
applicable
Hardships pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c $150
Use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d
Application fee $400
Escrow fee $800 up to 2 units,
$100 per additional
unit
Temporary use permit $150
Conditional use permit $150
Publication of final decision $50, plus direct cost
of publication, which
is paid directly to the
newspaper
Construction and sand moving permit $500, plus an
inspection fee of 5%
of the construction
costs
The application fees stated above are
nonrefundable.
The escrow fees shall be paid to the City and
shall be held in escrow to cover the costs of
professional services and board review,
including engineering, planning and legal or
other incidental costs.
The applicant will be billed additional escrow
when needed. This amount must be paid prior to
final resolution being provided.
Escrow funds not used shall be returned to the
applicant upon completion of the project.
The applicant, as a condition of submission, shall
agree, in writing, to pay all reasonable and
necessary costs for professional review of the
application and for other professional and
secretarial services required by the application.
Plumbing, steamfitting, gas-fitting supplies
(mercantile license)
Retail $50
Wholesale $75
Preemployment application fee Not to exceed $75
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:589
License, Permit or Service Fee
Print shop (mercantile license) $25
Professional office (mercantile license) $50
Radio and television supplies (mercantile license) $50
Rental registration/inspection fees
Initial rental registration inspection $150 per unit for all
units
Reinspection due to failed initial inspection $25
Reinspection due to failed reinspection $90 per unit for all
units
Reinspection due to change in tenancy $105 per unit for all
units
Non-life-hazard inspection $60
Restaurant, luncheon and diner (mercantile license) $50, plus $1 per seat
Returned payment (electronic fund transfer and
check)
$30
Sailboat, beach permit $150
Sewer
Sewerage rental service fees
Service to single-family residential dwellings
and for each unit of any multifamily residence
or apartment house
$185 semiannually;
yearly total $370
Service to a motel/hotel or similar
establishment for first unit
$160 from January 1
to June 30 and $160
from July 1 to
December 31 (total
$320)
For each additional unit in a motel/hotel or
similar establishment
$80 from January 1
to June 30 and $80
from July 1 to
December 31 (total
$160 for each
additional unit)
For sewer service to any other establishment
providing sewerage facilities for public use,
per year for each unit or store, plus an
amount for each additional toilet fixture,
payable as follows
$80 from January 1
to June 30 and $80
from July 1 to
December 31 (total
$160 per unit)
For all other services not described above,
based upon the number of persons using the
property, per year, payable as follows:
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:590
License, Permit or Service Fee
1 to 25 persons $160 from January 1
to June 30 and $160
from July 1 to
December 31 (total
$320)
26 to 100 persons $540 from January 1
to June 30 and $540
from July 1 to
December 31 (total
$1,080)
Over 100 persons $860 from January 1
to June 30 and $860
from July 1 to
December 31 (total
$1,720)
[Note: Other than any connection fee as may
be required by applicable rules and
regulations, service payments authorized by
this section of the Code of the City of
Brigantine shall commence upon the
activation of water service or the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy, whichever
occurs first. No temporary connection shall
be allowed for any reason.]
Sewer service connection charges
From City main to curbline $1,000
Additional charge for restoration of streets
where excavation is necessary:
FABC paving $2,500
Dirt areas $700
Sewing machine store (mercantile license) $50
Shoe sales and repairs (mercantile license) $50
Shooting gallery (mercantile license) $500
Shows and other open-air amusements (mercantile
license)
$300
Sidewalks, streets and curbs See "streets, curbs
and sidewalks" below
Site plan See "planning and
zoning"
Skating rink (mercantile license) $75
Smoke detector, carbon monoxide alarm and
portable fire extinguisher compliance, certificate of
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:591
License, Permit or Service Fee
When application is submitted 11 or more
business days prior to settlement
$35
When application is submitted between 4 and 10
business days prior to settlement
$70
When application is submitted less than 4 days
prior to settlement
$125
Special events
Special events in recreational areas: beaches,
parks, 26th Street Complex, 42nd Street
Complex, Park on Golf Course Drive, North End
Observation Deck, parades and assemblies
20 guests and under $25
20 to 50 guests $50
50 to 100 guests $125
Over 100 guests $250
Commercials/films $350 up to 3 days;
$200 each additional
day
Professional photo sessions $50 per day
Rental of beach patrol equipment (boats/
stands)
$175 per day
(includes Public
Works setup)
NOTE: Special events with over 100 guests
will not be allowed after 6:00 p.m. unless
approved by the Deputy City Manager
Stationery, book, magazine and/or novelty store
(mercantile license)
$25
Storage (temporary) of modular homes on
municipal parking lots
$50 per day
Streets, curbs and sidewalks: permit application $100
Street openings
Permit $150
Guarantee or bond $1,000
Storage warehouse (mercantile license) $100
Store order or catalog store (mercantile license) $25
Stores or businesses not otherwise classified
herein (mercantile license)
$25
Structures
Permit for moving structure $500
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:592
License, Permit or Service Fee
Employee services, per hour, with a minimum of
2 police officers and 2 Public Works employees
required, as well as any appropriate equipment
as determined by the Department of Public
Works
See "personnel
detail"
Additional employee services, per hour, per
police officer or Public Works employee,
including any employees necessary for Police
Department notification along route and any
additional services or labor which must be
provided
See "Personnel
detail"
Any costs, losses or damages incurred, plus City
employee time required for repairs
Actual cost
Escrow fee $5,000
Subdivision "See planning and
zoning"
Tailor or clothes repair (mercantile license) $50
Tax Assessor's list of properties within 200 feet $10
Taxicabs
Taxicab owner's license $50 per taxicab per
year
Taxicab driver's license $35 per year
Administrative transfer fee for transfer of
taxicab owner's license
$100 per license
Administrative fee for issuance of an owner's
license for a vehicle, replacing a lost, stolen or
damaged license
$35 per license
Administrative fee for issuance of a taxicab
driver's license to replace a lost, stolen or
damaged taxicab driver's license
$35 per license
Temporary New Year's Eve license $25
Tax redemption calculations fee after two free
redemption calculations in one calendar year
Not to exceed $50
Tax sale certificate of redemption $25 per certificate
Tax sale certificate replacement $100
Tax search export $1,500 per year
Tax search fee $10
Tennis court rental $8 per 60 minutes of
play per court
Senior citizen tennis players 60 years of age or
over
$6 per 60 minutes of
play per court
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:593
License, Permit or Service Fee
Theater, cinema or playhouse (mercantile license) $125
Trampoline (mercantile license) $50, plus $5 for each
trampoline
Transient merchant or itinerant vendor $50 per day
Trash can (advertisement) (per can)
The north end beach to 3rd Street North $200
From 2nd Street North to 2nd Street South $300
3rd Street South to 12th Street South $200
13th Street South to 17th Street South $400
18th Street South to 33rd Street South $200
34th Street South to 40th Street South $300
41st Street to the beginning of the 4 Wheel
Drive Beach
$200
4 Wheel Drive Beach to the jetty $400
Cans in the public parking lots and beach
entrances
$400
Upholsterer (mercantile license) $50
Variance See "planning and
zoning"
Variety store See "five- and tencent
store"
Vehicles, each vehicle being used for the following
purposes, except where the owner thereof is paying
a license fee pursuant to this section of the Code of
the City of Brigantine for the purpose for which the
vehicle is being used.
Sale and/or delivery of milk, ice, bread or bakery
products
$25 per vehicle
Sale, solicitation or delivery of materials in
conjunction with fumigation or extermination of
rodents or pests
$50 per vehicle
Sale, solicitation, delivery and performing
landscaping, gardening or nursery service
$50 per vehicle
Sale, solicitation, delivery, merchandising or
performing services not otherwise classified
$50 per vehicle
Vehicles: storage at City impound lot $15 per day
Vending machine (mercantile license) $20 per machine
Vicious dog license $700
Water charges
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:594
License, Permit or Service Fee
Schedule of minimum semiannual charges
Three-quarter-inch meter with an annual
allowance of 80,000 gallons
$140
One-inch meter with an annual allowance of
90,000 gallons
$170
One-and-one-half-inch meter with an annual
allowance of 110,000 gallons
$220
Two-inch meter with an annual allowance of
170,000 gallons
$310
Four-inch meter with an annual allowance of
400,000 gallons
$600
Six-inch meter with an annual allowance of
1,500,000 gallons
$2,200
Rates for excess water consumed per 1,000
gallons
First excess 40,000 gallons $1.45
Next excess 60,000 gallons $1.65
Next excess 100,000 gallons $1.85
Next excess 200,000 gallons $2.05
Next excess 400,000 gallons $2.25
Next excess 600,000 gallons $2.45
Next excess 800,000 gallons $2.65
Turning off of water connections at any time in
case of an emergency caused by leak or
otherwise
$150 per each
connection
Connection charge from City main to curbline $1,000
Additional charge for restoration of streets
where excavation is necessary (unless
performed at same time as sewer lateral)
FABC paving $2,500
Dirt areas $700
Connection for private fire-protection facilities,
for each connection to be used exclusively for
the extinguishment of fire
$125 per quarter
Hydrant permit for foundation cement mixing,
the jetting of pilings and any other use
$350, plus water to
be metered and
charged based on
usage
§ 210-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-37
1:595
License, Permit or Service Fee
Deposit to be paid whenever a hydrant permit is
obtained
$750 per permit
Water meter connections
3/4-inch water meter plus parts $520
1-inch plus parts $675
Larger than 1-inch water meter Market value
Water meter reading by Tax Collector's office at
time of sale of property
$60
Waverunner See "jet ski"
Yard sale or garage sale $12
Zoning book $60
Zoning Map $15
Zoning and planning See "planning and
zoning"
Zoning permits $40
§ 210-37 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-37
1:596
ARTICLE III
No-Soliciting Signs
[Adopted 11-10-1993 as part of Ord. No. 29-1993]
§ 210-38. Purpose.
The purpose of this article of the Code of the City of Brigantine as it
relates to canvassers, solicitors and noncommercial handbill solicitors who
go from door to door is to advance the interests of the City of Brigantine
in attempting to control crime within said City and to protect the privacy
of the citizens of the City of Brigantine, including the peaceful and quiet
enjoyment of activities within their homes. Any organizations which feel
aggrieved by this article should contact the City of Brigantine concerning
alternative channels of communication which can be used to communicate
any speech protected by the United States Constitution.
§ 210-39. No-soliciting signs permitted; adherence by canvassers
and solicitors.
Any resident of the City of Brigantine is entitled to place a no-soliciting or
other type sign on or in its property in a place where said sign is visible and
can be read by any potential solicitor, canvasser or other person traveling
from door to door within the City of Brigantine. Any such canvasser, solicitor
or other such person traveling from door to door within the City of
Brigantine shall, upon seeing any such no-soliciting sign, immediately
refrain from entering upon the property where said sign is posted and from
attempting to contact, at said person's property, the owner or resident of
said property for the purposes of canvassing, soliciting or other activity
conducted from door to door within the City of Brigantine.
§ 210-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-39
1:597

ARTICLE IV
Sale of Merchandise on Sidewalks
[Adopted 7-18-2001 by Ord. No. 12-2001]
§ 210-40. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the City Council of the City of Brigantine in
enacting this article to:
§ 210-41. Definitions.
When used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases and their
derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
GOODS, WARES AND MERCHANDISE — Shall include but not be limited
to food stuffs, plants, flowers, wearing apparel, jewelry, ornaments, art
work, cosmetics and beauty aides, health products and household needs or
furnishings.
SIDEWALK — All that area legally open to the public use as a pedestrian
public way between the curbline and the legal building line of the abutting
property and any City right-of-way associated therewith.
STREET — All that area legally open to the public use as public streets, culsde-
sac, roadways, boulevards, avenues, highways, parkways, alleys or any
other area used for vehicular traffic.
A. Serve, protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of residents
and visitors to the City of Brigantine.
B. Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations that are fair and
equitable concerning the display of goods, wares and merchandise for
sale on sidewalks within the City of Brigantine.
C. Promote economic development opportunities for businesses within the
City of Brigantine by allowing the display of goods, wares and
merchandise on sidewalks within the City of Brigantine.
D. Develop a regulatory system that will allow the sale of such goods,
wares and merchandise on sidewalks in the City of Brigantine while
ensuring and enhancing the overall appearance and environment along
public sidewalks.
E. Promote a festive atmosphere and enrich the City's ambiance by
allowing the sale of goods, wares and merchandise on sidewalks within
the City of Brigantine.
F. Ensure and enhance pedestrian traffic and travel along the sidewalks of
the City of Brigantine.
§ 210-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-42
1:599
§ 210-42. Health requirements.
Nothing in this article is meant to be contrary to or in any way negate the
need to comply with any and all requirements of the Atlantic County Board
of Health or any and all other health agencies with jurisdiction concerning
any items which may be sold or displayed pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
§ 210-43. Permitted display of goods, wares and merchandise on
City sidewalks.
Any individual or business entity who is the owner or leases as a tenant any
commercial establishment located within the City of Brigantine which is a
validly existing permitted commercial use and has received prior approval
from the City of Brigantine to conduct said commercial use in said zone
shall be allowed to display goods, wares and merchandise on the sidewalks
of the City of Brigantine pursuant to the regulations established by this
article.
§ 210-44. Mercantile license.
No person, business or business entity may display goods, wares or
merchandise for sale pursuant to this article unless they have applied for
and received a mercantile license from the City of Brigantine.
§ 210-45. Hours of operation.
The display of goods, wares and merchandise on the sidewalks within the
City of Brigantine shall only occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00
p.m. No such sale shall be permitted in any fashion other than on the days
and hours listed above, and any person or other entity displaying goods,
wares or merchandise for sale other than during the permitted days and
hours shall be in violation of this article. No such display shall be allowed at
any time unless the commercial establishment is open for business.
§ 210-46. Littering and trash removal.
Any person or business entity who is displaying goods, wares or
merchandise pursuant to this article shall at all times keep the sidewalks,
roadways and other spaces adjacent to their display sites free and clean
of all paper, peelings and refuse of any kind generated from the operation
of said business. Any and all trash or debris accumulating of any nature
whether originating from said individual or business entity or otherwise
which lands or is located in the front of the business which is displaying
goods, wares or merchandise must be cleaned and deposited in a trash
container by said person or business entity.
§ 210-42 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-47
1:600
§ 210-47. Restrictions.
No person or business entity shall be permitted to do the following in
conjunction with the display of goods, wares or merchandise on sidewalks
within the City of Brigantine:
§ 210-48. Prohibited conduct.
No person or business entity, if allowed to display any goods, wares or
merchandise for sale, shall take any action which shall result in any of the
following:
A. Have any pushcart or other movable conveyance which cannot be
placed inside of the building or store where such goods, wares or
merchandise are sold as part of the internal display within said store.
B. Display any goods, wares or merchandise within 15 feet of any street.
C. Display any goods, wares or merchandise within 10 feet of any
driveway, loading zone or bus stop.
D. Display any goods, wares or merchandise within five feet of another
store or commercial establishment or in any location other than the
front of the store or commercial establishment owned or leased by the
individual or business entity displaying said goods, wares or
merchandise.
E. Not allow at least a minimum of 15 feet from the curbline for the
unobstructed passage of pedestrians.
F. Place any display of goods, wares or merchandise on any median strip,
divided roadway or other area.
G. Place any display of goods, wares or merchandise within 20 feet of any
fire hydrant or fire escape.
H. Place any display of goods, wares or merchandise within 20 feet of any
parking space or access ramp designated for persons with disabilities.
I. To display any goods, wares, or merchandise which cumulatively would
be greater than 20 linear feet for any single store. [Added 8-7-2002 by
Ord. No. 12-2002]
A. Unduly obstructing any pedestrian or motor vehicle traffic flow of any
nature.
B. Obstructing any traffic signals, traffic signs or other regulatory signs or
signs erected by the City of Brigantine or other appropriate
governmental authority.
C. Stop, stand or park any vehicle, push cart or other means of conveyance
in violation of any statutes or ordinances of the City of Brigantine or in
any way that would block a sidewalk or any portion thereof.
§ 210-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-48
1:601
§ 210-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a
fine of up to $1,000, jail term of up to 90 days, or both, in the discretion
of the Municipal Court Judge. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate violation and a separate summons may be issued for
each such violation on each day.
D. Leave any goods, wares or merchandise unattended at any time or
leave any goods, wares or merchandise outdoor in a public space
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
E. Erect any stand or other fixed location, structure or items that cannot
be removed each night from the sidewalk where any such goods, wares
or merchandise is displayed.
F. Go to any car, bicycle or other means of transportation parked in the
street in front of said store to sell any goods, wares or merchandise.
G. Use any loudspeaker, bell, whistle or other sound or light device that in
any way advertises or draws to the attention of the public the goods,
wares or merchandise for sale or is in any way considered loud, raucous
or used to attract public attention.
H. Display any goods, wares or merchandise in such a way as to restrict or
interfere with the ingress or egress of abutting property owners or
otherwise create a nuisance, increase traffic congestion or delay or
constitute a hazard to person or property.
I. Take any action in the display of goods, wares or merchandise which
would obstruct adequate access to any commercial establishment by
any police or emergency vehicles.
§ 210-48 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-49
1:602
ARTICLE V
Single-Use Carryout Bags
[Adopted 9-5-2018 by Ord. No. 21-2018]
§ 210-50. Definitions.
The following words, phrases and terms, as used in this article, are hereby
defined for the purpose thereof as follows:
CARRYOUT BAG — A bag, sheet, or receptacle produced or manufactured
from material commonly known as "plastic" or "polyethylene" provided by a
commercial establishment at the point of sale for customers to carry their
goods and/or products out of the premises.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any business required to obtain a
mercantile license pursuant to Chapter 210. This includes, but is not limited
to, drug stores, pharmacies, grocery stores, supermarkets, convenience
food stores, food marts or restaurants that provide carryout bags to
consumers in which to place items purchased or obtained at such
establishment.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag that is designed and manufactured to withstand
repeated uses over a period of time, is machine washable or made from
a material that can be cleaned and disinfected regularly, is at least 2.25
mil thick if made from cotton or polyester or other fabric, has a minimum
lifetime of 75 uses, and is capable of carrying a minimum of 18 pounds.
SINGLE-USE CARRYOUT BAG — Any carryout bag that is not a reusable
carryout bag, except that "single-use carryout bag" shall not include any
nonhandled bag intended to separate and prevent an item from damaging
or contaminating another item.
§ 210-51. Single-use carryout bags prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any commercial establishment to provide single-use
carryout bags to any customer or individual for the purpose of transporting
products or goods out of the business or store, except as otherwise provided
in this article.
§ 210-52. Exceptions to prohibition.
Single-use carryout bags may be provided by a commercial establishment
in the following circumstances:
A. Any single-use carryout bag which is a maximum of 11 inches by 17
inches, without handles, provided for the customer to:
(1) Transport produce, bulk food, meat, or seafood from a produce,
bulk food, meat or seafood department within a store to the point of
sale; or
(2) Hold prescription medication dispensed from a pharmacy.
§ 210-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-52
1:603
§ 210-53. Enforcement.
The City Licensing Officer shall have the authority to enforce the provisions
of this article.
§ 210-54. Violations and penalties.
Any commercial establishment who violates any provision of this article
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $5 and not more than $500 for each
individual violation.
B. Any single-use carryout bag provided for the purposes of transporting
any live or previously live and now frozen substance used to attract and
catch fish and/or crabs.
C. A forty-inch dry cleaner poly garment bag.
§ 210-52 BRIGANTINE CODE § 210-54
1:604
Chapter 214
NEWSPAPER VENDING MACHINES
§ 214-1. Placement prohibited in certain areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or other entity, including any agent, servant or employee
thereof, to place or locate a newspaper vending machine on the public rightof-
way or sidewalk of the City of Brigantine when the placement of the
same, in the determination of the City Manager of the City of Brigantine or
his designee:
§ 214-2. Securing to public property prohibited.
The chaining, locking or otherwise securing of newspaper vending
machines to public property is hereby prohibited. For purposes of this
section, "public property" is defined as all public buildings and structures
owned by the City of Brigantine and all street signs, stop signs, trash
receptacles, utility poles and other similar devices which exist on any street,
sidewalk or right-of-way, whether or not the same are owned by the City of
Brigantine.
§ 214-3. Standards for newspaper vending machines.
Any newspaper vending machine located in the City of Brigantine shall
comply with the following standards:
A. Endangers the safety of persons or property;
B. Interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicle traffic,
including any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
C. Interferes with the ingress or egress from any residence or place of
business; or
D. Interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or mailboxes
permitted at or near said location.
A. Each newspaper vending machine shall be equipped with a coin return
mechanism to permit a person using the newspaper vending machine to
secure an immediate refund in the event that the person is unable to
receive the publication paid for. Such coin return mechanism shall be
maintained in good working order.
B. Each newspaper vending machine shall have affixed to it, in a readily
visible place so as to be seen by anyone using it, a notice setting forth
the name and address of the owner and distributor or other applicable
number to call to report a malfunction or secure a refund in the event of
a malfunction of the coin return mechanism.
§ 210-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-3
1:605
§ 214-4. Placement limited to commercial zones.
No newspaper vending machine may be located in any zone in the City of
Brigantine unless said zone is designated as a commercial zone.
§ 214-5. Registration; indemnification agreement.
C. Each newspaper vending machine shall be maintained in a neat and
clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without
limitation, each newspaper vending machine shall be serviced and
maintained so that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereof.
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof through which the
publications are viewed shall be unbroken or reasonably free of
cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations.
(4) The paper or cardboard parts thereof shall be reasonably free of
tears, peeling or fading.
A. Each newspaper vending machine shall be registered through the office
of the City Clerk. Such registration shall be in writing and on the
approved form as provided by said Clerk.
B. The following information shall be given:
(1) The name and address of newspaper vending machine owner.
(2) The name and address of person responsible for the machine, if
different from the owner.
(3) The specific location where the newspaper vending machine shall
be located.
(4) A description of the newspaper vending machine, which shall
include:
(a) External dimensions.
(b) The name of the publication to be sold or distributed in the
newspaper vending machine.
C. Each person or entity who registers a newspaper vending machine
must sign an indemnification and hold-harmless agreement in favor of
the City of Brigantine concerning any personal injury, death or property
damage caused or in any way associated with said newspaper vending
machine.
§ 214-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 214-6
1:606
§ 214-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person or other entity who is found guilty of a violation of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days or a period of community service for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination of the above, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge.
Chapter 216
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 87.
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Boats — See Ch. 111.
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 153.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 270.
Towing — See Ch. 278.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 284.
§ 214-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 214-6
1:607

ARTICLE I
Mobile Sources
[Adopted 1-21-1987 by Ord. No. 31-1986]
§ 216-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
dBA — The abbreviation designating both the unit of measured sound level
(the decibel) and the mode of measurement that uses the A-weighting of a
sound-level meter.
DECIBEL (dB) — The practical unit of measurement for sound-pressure
level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of the measured
sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20 micropascals);
abbreviated "dB."
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
services, including but not limited to repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone and sewer facilities and public transportation, removing fallen
trees on public rights-of-way or abating life-threatening conditions.
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR) — The values specified by the
manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single
motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the
gross combination weight rating ("GCWR"), which is the value specified
by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the
combination vehicle, shall be used.
MOTOR CARRIER VEHICLE ENGAGED IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE —
Any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to Section 18 of the
Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-547), as amended, pertaining to
motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce.
MOTORCYCLE — An unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the
use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground,
including but not limited to motor scooters, mopeds and minibikes.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an
engine or motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, trucktrailers,
semitrailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on
land, dune buggies or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles.
MUFFLER — A sound-dissipative device or system for abating the sound of
escaping gases of an internal-combustion engine.
NOISE — Any sounds of such level and duration as to be or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the state or
in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee
relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a
place of employment.
§ 216-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-1
1:609
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An officially designated employee of the
municipality, or a group of municipalities, or of the county, trained in the
measurement of sound and empowered to issue a summons for violations of
this article.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership, joint-stock company, the state or any political subdivision,
agency or instrumentality of the state.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place that is leased, owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned
or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — The imaginary line, including its vertical
extension, that separates one parcel of real property from another.
RECREATIONAL MOTORIZED VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle used off
public roads for recreational purposes.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A group of residential properties and the abutting
public rights-of-way and public spaces.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property used for human habitation.
SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level measured in decibels with a
sound-level meter set for A-weighting; sound level is expressed in dBA.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels as specified in N.J.A.C. 7:29B.
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The level of a sound measured in decibel
units with a sound-level meter which has a uniform response over the band
of frequencies measured.
§ 216-2. Administration and enforcement; noise control officer.
§ 216-3. Motor vehicle maximum permissible sound levels.
A. The noise control program established by this article shall be
administered by the Police Department.
B. The Police Department shall be empowered to stop any motor vehicle or
motorcycle operated on a public right-of-way or public space,
reasonably suspected of violating any provisions of this article.
C. The noise control officer must be qualified according to N.J.A.C.
7:29B-1.11.
D. Noise measurements made by the noise control officer must be taken
according to procedures specified by N.J.A.C. 7:29B.
A. Motor vehicles and motorcycles on public rights-of-way. No person shall
cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of a public or private motor
§ 216-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 216-3
1:610
vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a
manner that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle
exceeds the level set forth in Table I.
Table I
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels From
Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles
(Measured according to Department of Transportation, Bureau
of Motor Carrier Safety Regulations for Enforcement of Motor
Carrier Noise Emission Standards, Title 49 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, Chapter II, Part 325, as amended and
supplemented)
Sound Level at 50 Feet (15 Meters)
From Center Line of Vehicle Travel
Vehicle Class
Speed Limit
35 mph or
Less
(dBA)
Speed Limit
Over 35
mph
(dBA)
Stationary
Run-Up
(dBA)
Motor carrier vehicle
engaged in interstate
commerce of GVWR or
GCWR of 10,000 pounds or
more
86 90 88
All other motor vehicles of
GVWR or GCWR of 10,000
pounds or more
86 90 --
Any motorcycle 82 86 --
Any other motor vehicle or
any combination of
vehicles towed by any
motor vehicle
76 82 --
Sound Level on Fast Setting at 15 Feet
From the Edge of the Lane of Vehicle
Vehicle Class
Travel
Speed
Limit 35
mph or
Less
(dBA)
Any motor vehicle or motorcycle with a GVWR less than
10,000 pounds [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
80
§ 216-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-3
1:611
§ 216-4. Adequate mufflers required.
§ 216-5. Horns and other signaling devices.
The following acts and the causing thereof are declared to be in violation of
this article:
B. Recreational motorized vehicles operating off public rights-of-way. No
person shall operate or cause to be operated any recreational motorized
vehicle in such a manner that the sound level emitted therefrom
exceeds the limits set forth in Table II at either a distance of 50 feet (15
meters) or more from the path of the vehicle when operated on a public
space or at or across a real property line when operated on private
property. This section shall apply to all recreational motorized vehicles,
whether or not duly licensed or registered.
Table II
Maximum Permissible Sound Level for
Recreational Motorized Vehicles Operated Off Public
Rights-of-Way
Vehicle Type
Sound Level
(dBA)
Motorcycle
Unit manufactured before 1975 86
Unit manufactured after 1975 84
Any other vehicle
Unit manufactured before 1975 84
Unit manufactured after 1975 80
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operation of any
motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with the original muffler and
other components or equivalent replacement in good working order and
in constant operation, regardless of sound level produced.
B. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair
or replacement, any muffler or other exhaust component on a motor
vehicle or motorcycle.
A. The sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device in any
motor vehicle or motorcycle on any public right-of-way or public space,
except as a warning of danger.
B. The sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device that
produces a sound level in excess of 100 dBA at 25 feet (7.5 meters).
§ 216-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 216-6
1:612
§ 216-6. Sound reproductive devices.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the operating or playing of
any radio, tape player or similar device that reproduces or amplifies sound
in such a manner as to create noise at 50 feet (15 meters) from such device,
when operating in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public
space.
§ 216-7. Standing motor vehicles.
No person shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle or
any auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle for a period longer than
three minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other
than traffic congestion or emergency work on a public right-of-way or public
space within 150 feet (46 meters) of a residential area between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day.
§ 216-8. Exception.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the emission of sound for the
purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency.
§ 216-9. Summons to be issued.
Violation of any provision of this article shall be cause for a summons to be
issued by the noise control officer.
§ 216-10. Revocation of summons for repaired exhaust system.
If a summons is given for violation of § 216-4 of this article, the summons
may be revoked by the Police Department if the offending vehicle's exhaust
system is repaired within five days. The vehicle must be brought to the
police station for an inspection of the exhaust system.
§ 216-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992]
§ 216-12. Other remedies.
No provision of this article shall be construed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this article or from other law.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
a penalty for each offense of a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or more.
B. Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this
article shall be subject to a penalty for each offense of a sum not less
than $25 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90
days, or both.
§ 216-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-12
1:613

ARTICLE II
Stationary Sources
[Adopted 1-21-1987 by Ord. No. 33-1986]
§ 216-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL AREA — A group of commercial facilities and the abutting
public rights-of-way and public spaces.
COMMERCIAL FACILITY — Any premises, property or facility involving
traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit, including but not
limited to:
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition of buildings or
structures.
dBA — The abbreviation designating both the unit of measured sound level
(the decibel) and the mode of measurement that uses the A-weighting of a
sound-level meter.
DECIBEL (dB) — The practical unit of measurement for sound-pressure
level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of the measured
sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20 micropascals);
abbreviated "db."
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
buildings or structures.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
services, including but not limited to repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone or sewer facilities or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way or abating life-threatening conditions.
A. Banking and other financial institutions.
B. Dining establishments.
C. Establishments for providing retail service.
D. Establishments for providing wholesale services.
E. Establishments for recreation and entertainment.
F. Office buildings.
G. Transportation.
H. Warehouses.
§ 216-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-13
1:615
INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — Any activity and its related premises, property,
facilities or equipment, involving the fabrication, manufacture or production
of durable or nondurable goods.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an
engine or motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, trucktrailers,
semitrailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on
land, dune buggies or racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles.
MUFFLER — A sound-dissipative device or system for abating the sound of
escaping gases of an internal-combustion engine.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building wherein there are two
or more dwelling units.
NOISE — Any sounds of such level and duration as to be or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the state or
in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee
relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a
place of employment.
NOISE CONTROL ADMINISTRATOR — The noise control officer designated
as the official liaison with all municipal departments, empowered to grant
permits for variances.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An officially designated employee of the
municipality, or a group of municipalities, or of the county, trained in the
measurement of sound and empowered to issue a summons for violations of
this article.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound that endangers the safety or health
of any person, disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or
endangers personal or real property.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, society, firm,
partnership, joint-stock company, the state or any political subdivision,
agency or instrumentality of the state.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place that is leased, owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned
or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE —
The imaginary line, including its vertical extension, that separates one
parcel of real property from another; or
A.
The vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is one in a
multi-dwelling-unit building or structure. [Added 7-20-1988 by Ord.
No. 16-1988]
B.
§ 216-13 BRIGANTINE CODE § 216-13
1:616
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A group of residential properties and the abutting
public rights-of-way and public spaces.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Property used for human habitation, including
but not limited to:
SOUND LEVEL — The sound-pressure level measured in decibels with a
sound-level meter set for A-weighting; sound level is expressed in dBA.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels as specified in N.J.A.C. 7:29B.
SOUND-PRESSURE LEVEL — The level of a sound measured in decibel
units with a sound-level meter which has a uniform response over the band
of frequencies measured.
WEEKDAY — Any day, Monday through Friday, that is not a legal holiday.
§ 216-14. (Reserved)159
§ 216-15. (Reserved)160
§ 216-16. Exemptions. [Amended 10-20-2004 by Ord. No. 31-2004]
The following are exemptions to the Noise Ordinance of the City of
Brigantine.
A. Private property used for human habitation.
Commercial living accommodations and commercial property used for
human habitation.
B.
C. Recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation.
D. Community service property used for human habitation.
A. Noise from domestic power tools, lawn mowers and agricultural
equipment when operated with a muffler between the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekends
and legal holidays.
B. Sounds from church bells and church chimes when a part of a religious
observance or service.
C. Noise from construction activity, provided that all motorized equipment
used in such activity is equipped with functioning mufflers.
D. Noise from snowblowers, snow throwers and snowplows when operated
with a muffler for the purpose of snow removal.
159. Editor's Note: Former § 216-14, Administration and enforcement; noise control officer, was
repealed 10-20-2004 by Ord. No. 31-2004.
160. Editor's Note: Former § 216-15, Cooperation of and compliance by other departments, was
repealed 10-20-2004 by Ord. No. 31-2004.
§ 216-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-16
1:617
§ 216-17. Prohibited acts.
E. Noise from stationary, emergency signaling devices that conform to the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 7:29.
F. Noise from an exterior burglar alarm of any building or motor vehicle,
provided that such burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within 15
minutes after it has been activated.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be made verbally or
mechanically any noise disturbance. Noncommercial public speaking
and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public
right-of-way shall be exempt from the operation of this section.
B. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the following acts:
(1) Animals and birds: owning, possessing or harboring any pet animal
or pet bird that frequently, or for continued duration, makes sounds
that create a noise disturbance across a residential real property
line. For the purpose of this section, a "noise disturbance from a
barking dog" shall be defined as that created by a dog barking
continually for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes unless
provoked.
(2) Construction and demolition. Operating or permitting the
operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, drilling,
earthmoving, excavating or demolition work between the hours of
6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays or 6:00 p.m.
through 8:00 a.m. on weekends or legal holidays, provided that
such equipment is equipped with a functioning muffler except for:
[Amended 10-20-2004 by Ord. No. 31-2004]
(a) Emergency work.
(b) Work performed by variance issued pursuant to § 216-19.
(3) Loading and unloading: loading, unloading, opening, closing or
other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials,
liquids, garbage cans, refuse or similar objects, or the pneumatic or
pumped loading or unloading of bulk materials in liquid, gaseous,
powder or pellet form, or the compacting of refuse by persons
engaged in the business of scavenging or garbage collection,
whether private or municipal, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. the following day when the latter is a weekday and
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day
when the latter is a legal holiday or a weekend day, except by
permit, when the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance
across a residential real property line.
(4) Loudspeakers and public-address systems: using or operating of
any loudspeaker, public-address system or similar device between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day, such that
§ 216-16 BRIGANTINE CODE § 216-17
1:618
§ 216-18. Exceptions.
§ 216-19. Variances.
the sound therefrom creates a noise disturbance across a
residential real property line.
(5) Sound reproduction systems: operating, playing or permitting the
operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph or similar
device that reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to
create a noise disturbance for any person other than the operator
of the device.
(6) Standing motor vehicles: operating or permitting the operation of
any motor vehicle whose manufacturer's gross weight is in excess
of 10,000 pounds, or any auxiliary equipment attached to such a
vehicle, for a period of longer than five minutes in any hour while
the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion or
emergency work, on a public right-of-way or public space within
150 feet (46 meters) of a residential area between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of the following day.
A. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the emission of sound:
(1) For the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an
emergency except as provided in § 216-16C(5) or (6).
(2) In the performance of emergency work.
(3) In situations within the jurisdiction of the Federal Occupational
Safety and Health Act.
B. Noise from municipally sponsored or approved celebrations or events
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.
A. Application requirements.
(1) Any person who owns or operates any stationary noise source may
apply to the Noise Control Administrator for a variance from one or
more of the provisions of this article. Applications for a permit of
variance shall supply information, including but not limited to:
(a) The nature and location of the noise source for which such
application is made.
(b) The reason for which the permit of variance is requested,
including the hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her
client or the public if the permit of variance is not granted.
(c) The nature and intensity of noise that will occur during the
period of the variance.
§ 216-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-19
1:619
(d) The section or sections of this article for which the permit of
variance shall apply.
(e) A description of interim noise control measures to be taken by
the applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring
therefrom.
(f) A specific schedule of the noise control measures which shall
be taken to bring the source into compliance with this article
within a reasonable time.
(2) Failure to supply the information required by the Noise Control
Administrator shall be cause for rejection of the application.
(3) A copy of the permit of variance must be kept on file by the
Municipal Clerk for public inspection.
B. The Noise Control Administrator may charge the applicant a fee as set
forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule,
to cover expenses resulting from the processing of the permit of
variance application. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
C. The Noise Control Administrator may, at his/her discretion, limit the
duration of the permit of variance, which shall be no longer than one
year. Any person holding a permit of variance and requesting an
extension of time shall apply for a new permit of variance under the
provisions of this section.
D. No variance shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate
proof that:
(1) Noise levels occurring during the period of the variance will not
constitute a danger to public health; and
(2) Compliance with this article would impose an arbitrary or
unreasonable hardship upon the applicant without equal or greater
benefits to the public.
E. In making the determination on granting a variance, the Noise Control
Administrator shall consider:
(1) The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the
health and welfare or the reasonable use of property which is
caused or threatened to be caused.
(2) The social and economic value of the activity for which the variance
is sought
(3) The ability of the applicant to apply the best practical noise control
measures.
F. The permit of variance may be revoked by the Noise Control
Administrator if the terms of the permit of variance are violated.
§ 216-19 BRIGANTINE CODE § 216-19
1:620
§ 216-20. Summons to be issued.
Violation of any provision of this article shall be cause for a summons to be
issued by the noise control officer.
§ 216-21. Abatement orders.
§ 216-22. Violations and penalties.
§ 216-23. Other remedies.
No provision of this article shall be construed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this article or from other law.
G. A variance may be revoked by the Noise Control Administrator if there
is:
(1) Violation of one or more conditions of the variance;
(2) Material misrepresentation of fact in the variance application; or
(3) Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the
Noise Control Administrator in granting the variance.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B, in lieu of issuing a summons as
provided in § 216-20, the noise control officer may issue an order
requiring abatement of any source of sound alleged to be in violation of
this article within a reasonable time period and according to guidelines
which the Noise Control Administrator may prescribe.
B. An abatement order shall not be issued if:
(1) Any person willfully or knowingly violates any provisions of this
article.
(2) The noise control officer has reason to believe that there will not be
compliance with the abatement order.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
a penalty for each offense of a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, except as provided in
Subsection B. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
B. Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this
article shall be subject to a penalty for each offense of a sum of not less
than $25 and not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or both. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
C. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
occurs shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct offense.
§ 216-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-23
1:621
Chapter 220
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 87.
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Brush, weeds and other debris — See Ch. 115.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 123.
Use of rubbish disposal facilities during
construction — See Ch. 143, Art II.
Dogs and other animals-- See Ch. 153.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 187.
Laser pointers — See Ch. 202.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Fees schedule — See Ch. 210, Art. II.
Noise — See Ch. 216.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Recycling — See Ch. 242.
Rental property — Ch. 246.
Abandoned shopping carts — See Ch. 254.
§ 216-23 BRIGANTINE CODE § 216-23
1:622
ARTICLE I
Sand Removal
[Adopted 4-5-1950 by Ord. No. 1-1950]
§ 220-1. Sand declared a nuisance.
Sand is hereby declared to be a nuisance on land or on any lot or lots situate
in Brigantine.
§ 220-2. Enforcement; abatement of nuisance; fee. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
§ 220-3. Lien. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
Upon the making of a report by the Building Inspector, and the approval,
filing and recording thereof as provided by law, the cost and expense of the
abating of the nuisance, including all legal expenses, shall be a lien on the
land or the lot or lots whereon the nuisance is abated.
A. The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the officer having
charge of abating any such nuisance, and he is hereby authorized to
take such action as may be reasonable and necessary to abate any such
nuisance. The Building Inspector is authorized to order the removal of
sand from private property.
B. For taking such action, he shall be entitled to a fee as set forth in
Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, which
shall be deemed to be a part of the cost and expense of the abating of
the nuisance.
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-3
1:623

ARTICLE II
Burying of Bushes and Similar Matter
[Adopted 8-21-1957 by Ord. No. 8-1957]
§ 220-4. Burying of vegetable matter declared a nuisance.
The burying of bushes, logs, branches, foliage or any other vegetable
matter, within the limits of the City of Brigantine, is declared to be a
nuisance and is prohibited.
§ 220-5. Enforcement; abatement of nuisance; fee.
§ 220-6. Lien.
Upon the making of a written report by the Building Inspector, and the
approval, filing and recording thereof as provided by law, the cost and
expense of abating the nuisance shall be a lien on the land or the lot or lots
wherein the nuisance is abated.
§ 220-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
Anyone violating the provisions of this article and creating or maintaining
upon lands or lot or lots such nuisance shall, upon conviction thereof, be
fined a sum not more than $1,000 or be imprisoned for not more than 90
days, or both.
§ 220-8. Exception for designated areas.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the burial of
vegetable matter or any other refuse in any area specifically designated for
disposal of such matter by the City.
A. The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the officer having
charge of abating any such nuisance, and he is hereby authorized to
take such action as may be reasonable and necessary to abate such
nuisance.
B. For taking such action, he should be entitled to a fee as set forth in
Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, which
shall be deemed to be part of the cost and expense of the abating of the
nuisance. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
§ 220-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-8
1:625

ARTICLE III
Prohibited Nuisances
[Adopted 12-1-1965 by Ord. No. 16-1965]
§ 220-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — Includes the Health Officer or other official
authorized by the Board of Health to enforce this article.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association, society or
partnership and their agents or employees.
§ 220-10. Nuisances enumerated and prohibited.
A. The following matters, things, conditions or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this municipality:
(1) Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become
detrimental or a menace to the health of the inhabitants of this
municipality.
(2) Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become an
annoyance or interfere with the comfort or general well-being of
the inhabitants of this municipality.
(3) Pollution, or existence of a condition or conditions which cause or
threaten pollution, of any waters in this municipality in such
manner as to cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of
this municipality either in their health, comfort or property.
(4) The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air, or from any fire into the open air of such
quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists or gases as
to cause injury, detriment or annoyance to the inhabitants of this
municipality or endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety.
(5) The growth, existence or presence of ragweed on any plot of land,
lot, highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place.
(6) The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy within 20 feet of
any property line.
(7) The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
(8) The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or animal or vegetable matter, which may attract flies and
to which flies may have access, or in which fly larvae or pupae
breed or exist.
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-10
1:627
§ 220-11. Heat to be supplied.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners who have agreed to supply heat
to any building designed to be occupied or occupied as a residence by more
than two families to fail to supply heat from the first day of October in each
year to the first day of May of the succeeding year in such manner that the
temperature of said building where one or more persons reside shall always
be kept at 68º F. or above between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
§ 220-12. Noise.161
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or suffer or permit to be
made or caused upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him or
it or upon any public street, alley or thoroughfare in this municipality any
unnecessary noises or sounds by means of the human voice or by any other
means or methods which are physically annoying to persons or which are so
harsh or so prolonged or unnatural or unusual in their use, time and place
as to occasion physical discomfort or which are injurious to the lives, health,
peace and comfort of the inhabitants of this municipality or any number
thereof.
§ 220-13. Unlawful conditions of residential buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, lease or otherwise permit the
occupancy of any building as a residence, or for any person to reside in any
building as its owner which:
(9) Depositing, accumulating or maintaining any matter or thing which
serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may have
access or which serves or constitutes a breeding place or
harborage for insects or rodents in or on any land, premises,
building or other place.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit, maintain or
allow any nuisance, as declared and described in this section.
A. Is not adequately and properly ventilated.
B. Fails to provide potable water at sufficient pressure and quantity for
each family unit from a public supply approved by the State Department
of Health or a private supply approved by the enforcing official.
C. Does not have plumbing features consisting of a kitchen sink, bathtub
or shower, lavatory and flush toilet, connected to the potable water
supply.
D. Does not have facilities for the discharge of all household liquid wastes
into a public sewerage system approved by the State Department of
Health or into a private sewerage system approved by the enforcing
official.
161. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 216, Noise.
§ 220-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 220-14
1:628
§ 220-14. Spitting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to spit upon any public sidewalk or
upon any part of the interior or exterior of any public building or public
conveyance.
§ 220-15. Inspections; obstruction prohibited.
§ 220-16. Notice; abatement of nuisance; failure to comply.
A. All places and premises in this municipality shall be subject to
inspection by the Board of Health or the enforcing official if the Board
or that official has reason to believe that any section of this article is
being violated.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or
prevent the Board of Health or the enforcing official from having full
access to any place or premises upon which a violation of this article is
believed to exist.
A. Whenever a nuisance as declared by § 220-10 of this article is found on
any plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place,
notice in writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate
the same within such time as shall be specified therein but not less than
five days from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the notice shall
be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the premises or
place. If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be so notified
speedily, such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the
tenant or occupant thereof or posted on the premises, and such action
shall be considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant
thereof.
B. Whenever a nuisance as declared by § 220-10 of this article is found on
any public property or on any highway or any other public premises or
place, notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to
remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein.
If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the Board of Health may remove or abate such nuisance in the
manner as hereinafter provided in the case of a like condition existing
on a private premises or place.
C. If the owner, tenant or occupant upon being notified as provided by this
section shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Board of Health
shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or
abated in a summary manner by such means as said Board of Health
shall deem proper.
§ 220-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-17
1:629
§ 220-17. Recovery of costs.
The Board of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred
by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance as declared by § 210-10 of
this article from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance
to exist, or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who, after notice
and notification as herein provided, shall fail to remove and abate the same
within the time specified in such notice.
§ 220-18. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Board of Health or its
enforcing official.
§ 220-19. Violations and penalties. [Added 3-2-1966 by Ord. No.
4-1966; amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be liable, upon
conviction thereof, to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment in
the City or county jail for a term of not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 220-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 220-19
1:630
ARTICLE IV
Clotheslines in Front Yards
[Adopted 2-5-1997 by Ord. No. 4-1997]
§ 220-20. Prohibition.
No clotheslines, wires or other similar devices used for the hanging of
clothes whether the same are attached to poles, fences or otherwise shall
be allowed or maintained in any front yards in the City of Brigantine and the
same are hereby strictly prohibited.
§ 220-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FRONT YARD — Includes all of the area from one side property line to the
other side property line on a line running parallel with the front wall of the
structure and extending to the street on which the property is situate.
§ 220-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article may be subject to a fine of up to $1,000,
imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or community service for up to 90 days
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 220-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-22
1:631

ARTICLE V
Dumping of Debris in Catch Basins
[Adopted 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 14-2000]
§ 220-23. Purpose. [Amended 10-16-2016 by Ord. No. 10-2016]
The purpose of this article is to prevent the dumping or depositing of any
solid objects or other debris in the catch basins, drainage ditches, and/
or channels within the City of Brigantine which will thereby increase the
effectiveness and efficiencies of said drainage systems and reduce water
flow in times of heavy rain or flooding.
§ 220-24. Dumping illegal. [Amended 10-16-2016 by Ord. No.
10-2016]
It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit or otherwise cause any trash,
landscape debris, shopping carts or other solid materials or debris to be
placed in any of the drainage systems within the City of Brigantine.
§ 220-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article may be subject to a fine of up to 1,000,
imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or community service for up to 90 days
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 220-26. Enforcement.
Any person seeing anyone violating this article should contact the
Supervisor of the Department of Public Works at said Department of Public
Works. The Supervisor of the Department of Public Works or his designee
and the Brigantine Police Department are hereby authorized to issue a
summons to any person who violates this article.
§ 220-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-26
1:633

ARTICLE VI
Late-Night Deliveries
[Adopted 12-4-2002 by Ord. No. 19-2002]
§ 220-27. Late-night deliveries prohibited; exceptions. [Amended
10-15-2003 by Ord. No. 16-2003]
It shall be unlawful to load or unload, open, close or otherwise handle any
boxes, crates, containers, building materials, liquids, or to pneumaticly or
pump-load or unload bulk materials in liquid, gaseous, powder or pellet
form between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day
in any business zone which is adjacent to or across the street from any
residential zone or in any business zone wherein any type of residential use
is a permitted use. This section shall specifically not apply to the delivery
of newspapers in bulk or individually, or deliveries consisting only of bread,
pastries, rolls or doughnuts, or any delivery of any nature made in an
eighteen-foot cargo step van or smaller vehicle.
§ 220-28. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this article may be subject to a fine of up to $1,000,
imprisonment for up to 90 days and/or community service for up to 90 days
in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 220-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-28
1:635

ARTICLE VII
Release of Balloons
[Adopted 4-19-2017 by Ord. No. 17-2017]
§ 220-29. Purpose and intent.
This article is adopted in order to protect the environment, particularly the
wildlife, and the health, safety and well-being of persons and property by
prohibiting the release of helium balloons into the atmosphere, including
latex and Mylar, as it has been determined that the release of balloons
inflated with lighter-than-air gases poses a danger and nuisance to the
environment, particularly to wildlife and marine animals so as to constitute
a public nuisance and may pose a threat to the safety of its inhabitants and
their property.
§ 220-30. Prohibited releases; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to intentionally
release, organize the release, or intentionally cause to be released balloons
inflated with a gas that is lighter than air with the City of Brigantine limits
except for:
§ 220-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation is guilty of a noncriminal infraction punishable
by a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.
A. Balloon released by a person on behalf of a government agency or
pursuant to a governmental contract for scientific or meteorological
purposes.
B. Hot air balloons that are recovered after launching.
C. Balloons released indoors.
§ 220-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-31
1:637
Chapter 224
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY
§ 224-1. Display of street number required.
All improved properties situate in the City of Brigantine shall hereafter be
required to have clearly designated thereon the street number on which
such properties are located.
§ 224-2. Number to correspond with Official Tax Map.
The number shall correspond with that number for the property shown on
the Official Tax Map of the City of Brigantine in the office of the Assessor.
§ 224-3. Size and placement of number.
The individual numbers and the street number shall be not less than two
inches high or more than five inches high and shall be painted on or affixed
to the building on the side thereof facing the street or affixed independently
of the building to a sign, where permitted.
§ 224-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
Any person or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine, be punished for
each offense by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or both, and each day on which said violation exists shall be
considered a separate offense.
Chapter 230
PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mercantile businesses — See Ch. 210.
§ 230-1. Authority.
There is hereby assigned to the Director of Public Safety sole jurisdiction in
the matter of issuing permits for the purpose of assembling and parading
on the sidewalks, streets, highways and other public places in the City of
Brigantine.
§ 220-31 BRIGANTINE CODE § 230-2
1:638
§ 230-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to assemble or parade on
the sidewalks, streets, highways and other public places of the City of
Brigantine without first having obtained a permit from the Director of Public
Safety for so doing.
§ 230-3. Department of Public Safety to grant permits.
There be and is hereby vested in the Department of Public Safety sole
discretion as to the granting of or refusal to grant a permit for the purpose
of assembling or parading upon the sidewalks, streets, highways or other
public places of the City of Brigantine.
§ 230-4. Permit issuance to be at Department's discretion.
The Department of Public Safety shall have the power to grant such permit,
upon condition or otherwise, upon application to such Department not less
than five days before the effective date of such permit, which permit may
specify the time for which the same shall be in effect, and the streets,
sidewalks, highways or other public places of the City of Brigantine that
may be used, which may be specified in the permit issued for such purpose.
The Director of Public Safety may, in his discretion, refuse to issue a permit,
or revoke a permit granted by him, when, in his judgment, it is necessary
or proper for the good government, order and protection of persons and
property and for the preservation of the public health, safety and prosperity
of its inhabitants and visitors, or when the permit has been or will, in
his judgment, be used in violation of any lawful statute of this state or
ordinance of the municipality, or for any unlawful purpose. The Director of
Public Safety may require the applicant for, or the recipient of, a permit
to answer, in writing and under oath, any and all questions that may be
necessary or advisable in order to determine whether a permit should be
granted or revoked. A permit may be revoked if it appears that the applicant
has made false representations or answers in response thereto.
§ 230-5. Fee. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
There shall be a charge as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses,
Article II, Fees Schedule, for each permit issued by the Director of Public
Safety, which shall be used by the City to cover the expenses attached to the
issuance of the permit and the regulation of the parade; provided, however,
that no charge shall be made for a permit issued to an nonprofit civic or
community organization.
§ 230-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 230-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-6
1:639
PERSON — Includes any individual, society, fraternity, organization or
corporation and shall apply to the plural as well as to the singular and to
the feminine as well as the masculine.
§ 230-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 234
PARKING LOTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Boats — See Ch. 111.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 284.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed $1,000
or by imprisonment for any term not to exceed 90 days in the County jail
or in any place provided by the municipality for the detention of
prisoners, or both. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
B. Any person who aids, assists or abets in the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties herein
provided for.
§ 230-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 230-7
1:640
ARTICLE I
Municipal Parking Lots
[Adopted 4-4-1956 by Ord. No. 7-1956]
§ 234-1. Registration and identification tag required. [Amended
9-5-2001 by Ord. No. 17-2001]
A. No person shall park any vehicle in any of the ocean front parking areas
owned and maintained by the City of Brigantine for the time period
beginning with the Friday of Memorial Day weekend and ending with
the Monday of Labor Day weekend unless such vehicle is registered
with and bears an identification tag issued by the City of Brigantine as
hereinafter provided. During the time period from Memorial Day
weekend to Labor Day weekend when permit parking is required, no
permit shall be necessary to park in ocean front municipal lots between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth above, no vehicle
may be parked in any municipal parking area between 6:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. for a period of time in excess of four hours. No oversized
vehicle that occupies more than one parking space or extends further
then the length of any parking space is permitted to be parked in any
municipal parking area. Nothing herein shall apply to any vehicles
owned by the City of Brigantine and used in conjunction with official
business of the City of Brigantine. The City Manager of the City of
Brigantine may authorize parking of said oversized vehicles in
emergency or other situations. [Added 8-7-2002 by Ord. No.
11-2002]
C. No person shall park any vehicle in the municipal parking lot located at
13th Street and Brigantine Avenue for a consecutive time period in
excess of two hours. [Added 8-20-2003 by Ord. No. 11-2003]
D. No commercial vehicle or trailers of any type may be parked at the
municipal parking lot located at 14th Street with the exception of
jitneys which have been assigned a space at said municipal lot. [Added
8-20-2003 by Ord. No. 11-2003]
E. There is hereby established municipal parking lots at Block 4102, Lot 2
(501 Casa Drive), and Block 4703, Lot 16 (530 Casa Drive). No
commercial vehicle or trailers of any type shall be parked at these
municipal parking lots. No oversize vehicle that occupies more than one
parking space or extends farther than the length of any parking space is
permitted to be parked in these municipal parking lots. No person or
other entity shall park any vehicle for a consecutive time period in
excess of 24 hours at these municipal parking lots. [Added 8-4-2004
by Ord. No. 25-2004]
§ 234-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-2
1:641
§ 234-2. Sale of identification tags. [Amended 6-19-1985 by Ord.
No. 11-1985; 4-16-1986 by Ord. No. 10-1986]
Identification tags shall be sold by the Fire Department or the Beach Patrol
Office of the City of Brigantine. Identification tags shall be sold commencing
the first business day of each year.
§ 234-3. Designation and expiration of identification tags; fees.
[Amended 6-19-1985 by Ord. No. 11-1985; 12-16-1987 by Ord. No.
22-1987; 6-3-1992 by Ord. No. 14-1992; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992; 4-5-1995 by Ord. No. 5-1995]
The identification tags shall be such tags as are designated by the Director
of Public Safety. Identification tags will expire on December 31 of the
year in which they are issued, and the registration fee shall be as set
forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule,
per annum, when purchased prior to June 1 and as set forth in Chapter
210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, per annum, when
purchased on or subsequent to June 1. Daily permits shall be as set forth in
Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule. All parking
shall be available on a first come first served basis.
§ 234-4. Enforcement; Handicapped Parking. [Amended 2-19-1964
by Ord. No. 3-1964; 8-19-2009 by Ord. No. 16-2009]
§ 234-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-19-1964 by Ord. No.
3-1964; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
hereof shall be punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
A. This article shall be enforced by members of the Police Department,
auxiliary police and the Beach Patrol of the City of Brigantine.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, any vehicle
with a legally issued and displayed handicap license plate or emblem
shall be allowed to park in the designated handicap spaces in any
municipal parking lot or parking area without paying for and obtaining
a municipal identification tag or parking permit.
§ 234-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 234-5
1:642
ARTICLE II
Commercial Parking Lots
[Adopted 7-15-1987 by Ord. No. 10-1987]
§ 234-6. (Reserved)162
§ 234-7. Limitations on permanent and temporary parking.
[Amended 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 6-2004]
Permanent vehicle parking shall be limited only to the owner, lessee, tenant
or occupant of a residence or dwelling in the City of Brigantine, residing in
such zones where the parking of such vehicles, except during the course of
the activity for which they are customarily used, is prohibited. Temporary
vehicle parking shall be limited to those vehicles or pieces of equipment
being utilized in the City of Brigantine, on a temporary basis and only for
the term of such work. Permanent parking is limited to one vehicle. The lot
shall be for the parking of commercial vehicles, and the parking of boats
and/or boat trailers on said lot shall be prohibited.
§ 234-8. Issuance of identification tags; fees; expiration. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992; 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 6-2004]
Identification tags shall be issued only to those persons who have completed
an application form as established by the City Manager or his designee
and have made payment of a fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fee Schedule. Temporary identification tags may be
issued upon completion of the appropriate application and payment of fee
and may not be used in lieu of permanent tags. All permits shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which they were issued, and no individual or
entity shall be entitled to a pro rata reimbursement for any portion of the
calendar year.
§ 234-9. Issuing authority; application requirements. [Amended
3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 6-2004]
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his designee shall
be the issuing authority for the tags described above. Application shall be
made on a form designated for such purpose and shall require the applicant
to provide necessary information, including the name, address, birthdate,
social security or employer identification number and telephone number of
applicant. In addition, proof of current registration, inspection and general
liability insurance shall be provided. Where such vehicle is to be used by
the employees of the applicant, proof of current worker's compensation
insurance shall also be required.
162. Editor’s Note: Former § 234-6, Creation of parking lot; location and vehicle specifications,
was repealed 8-7-2019 by Ord. No. 14-2019.
§ 234-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-10
1:643
§ 234-10. Liability; condition of vehicles.
Persons making application and parking such vehicles shall agree, further,
to hold the City of Brigantine harmless and free of loss and expense for
damage to any vehicle or other property contained therein. In addition,
applicants shall hold the City harmless as to damage, loss or expense arising
out of use of the City's premises or the operation of the vehicle. Persons
using the City's premises shall keep their vehicles in a clean and serviceable
condition and shall store no equipment or property on the City's grounds,
other than that which is fully enclosed and secured within or on the vehicle.
Vehicles shall not be used for the storage of hazardous substances or
materials or for the accumulation of waste. Open vehicles shall not contain
any materials, other than equipment items properly secured thereon. Upon
request, the City's representative shall be supplied with a set of operable
keys for the vehicle, to be kept in the City's possession during the term of
storage or parking on the City's premises. The City, however, will assume
no responsibility for the movement or safekeeping of vehicles, and it is the
responsibility of the applicant to remove such vehicles in the event of storm
or other natural calamity.
§ 234-11. Denial of application; notice to remove vehicle. [Amended
3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 6-2004]
The City may deny any application based upon failure to comply with the
application requirements or based upon the City's need for space in the
municipal parking facility. A request to remove such vehicle for violation will
be made, upon written or telephonic notice to the applicant at the address
listed on the application, and in normal cases the owner shall be given five
working days to remove the vehicle. In an emergent situation, the City may
request immediate removal of the vehicle. Placement of a notice to remove
the vehicle or parking citation shall be deemed proper notice to the owner,
where the owner does not respond to the direct notice given in the fashion
stated in this section.
§ 234-12. Removal of vehicles by City. [Amended 3-3-2004 by Ord.
No. 6-2004]
Failure to remove vehicles, upon the expiration of permission as granted
by this application, or upon expiration of current registration, shall entitle
the City to have such vehicle removed at the expense of the owner, and the
owner shall pay all costs, including storage fees. An owner may be cited for
any other violation of this article or for any violations of the ordinances or
regulations in effect in the City of Brigantine.
§ 234-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord.
No. 28-1992; 3-3-2004 by Ord. No. 6-2004]
In addition to the cost of removal, the owner of such vehicle may be charged
with violation of this article and, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of
at least $25 per day, but not more than $1,250 or be imprisoned for a
§ 234-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 234-13
1:644
term not to exceed 90 days, or both in the discretion of the Municipal
Court Judge. Each day of noncompliance can be considered an additional
violation. In addition, the Municipal Court can award costs payable to the
City of Brigantine for any costs incurred by the City of Brigantine in the
enforcement of this article or for the moving, storage or securing of any
vehicle by the City of Brigantine pursuant hereto.
§ 234-14. Parking prohibited in municipal streets. [Added 3-3-2004
by Ord. No. 6-2004]
The parking of any trucks, box trucks, motor homes, or other commercial
vehicles of any kind having a gross weight in excess of 8,100 pounds or
a cargo capacity in excess of one ton, net, shall be prohibited from being
parked on the streets of the City of Brigantine between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless being actively used in commercial activity or
emergency during said time. This section shall not apply to any jitneys,
the owners of which have entered into an agreement with the City of
Brigantine to help provide evacuation services in the case of flooding or
other emergency or natural disaster.
§ 234-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-14
1:645
Chapter 235
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 234-14 BRIGANTINE CODE § 234-14
1:646
ARTICLE I
Charitable Roadway Solicitations
[Adopted 2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 5-2012]
§ 235-1. Solicitations permitted.
The City of Brigantine shall permit charitable organizations as defined in
N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20 to solicit contributions along roadways within the City of
Brigantine pursuant to the procedures as set forth herein.
§ 235-2. Application.
Any charitable organization as defined above who desires to solicit
contributions in the City of Brigantine shall file an application for a permit
allowing such solicitation. Such application shall be submitted to the City
Manager or her designee and shall contain the following information:
§ 235-3. Intersections where solicitations permitted; hours.
Solicitation may occur within the City of Brigantine at intersections as
approved by the City Manager along Brigantine Avenue/Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard and may only occur during daylight hours.
§ 235-4. Permission from county required.
Since the only location where solicitation is permitted within the City of
Brigantine is on a county road, prior to the date of any such solicitation, the
applicant must show proof to the City Manager or her designee pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-60 and any county resolution or ordinance adopted pursuant
thereto that the County of Atlantic has granted permission and approval for
such solicitation.
§ 235-5. Number of solicitations permitted.
Solicitation by charitable organizations as set forth in this article shall be
limited to one solicitation per year per organization.
A. The name of the applicant organization.
B. The address of applicant organization.
C. The telephone number of applicant organization.
D. The contact person of applicant organization.
E. The date and times of proposed charitable solicitation.
F. A general description as to the manner in which the solicitation of
motorists will be conducted and the procedures to be used to insure the
safety of participants and members of the motoring public.
§ 235-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-6
1:647
§ 235-6. Required age of solicitor.
No person acting on behalf of a charitable organization seeking to solicit
contributions pursuant to this article shall be under the age of 18 years,
and no one shall actually seek such contributions or be allowed by said
organization to seek such contributions if said individual is under the age of
18 years of age.
§ 235-7. Safety vest required.
Any and all persons soliciting contributions on behalf of the charitable
organization pursuant to this article must wear an orange or other type
safety vest so that their presence is clearly denoted on the roadways during
such solicitation.
§ 235-8. Interference with traffic prohibited.
No person seeking solicitation of contributions on behalf of charitable
organizations pursuant to this article will be allowed to stop, impede, hinder
or delay traffic in any fashion, and such solicitation may only be performed
if and when said traffic is stopped pursuant to the traffic signal controlling
said intersection.
§ 235-9. Sign required; location.
§ 235-10. Solicitation limited to coin drop or boot drop.
The only solicitation allowed by charitable organizations are coin-drop or
boot-drop-type solicitations, and no charitable organization, under any
circumstances, shall permit, for the purposes of soliciting charitable
contributions, selling, giving or distributing in any way any goods,
merchandise, tickets, coupons, flyers, or any such similar items.
§ 235-11. Use of alcohol or illegal substance by solicitor prohibited.
No person shall act on behalf of any charitable organization in soliciting
funds pursuant to this article who has consumed alcoholic beverages or any
illegal substances during or immediately prior to the time said person would
be soliciting funds on behalf of said charitable organization.
A. The charitable organization must show a type of temporary sign
containing the following language:
"Caution – Coin Drop Sponsored By __________ located ahead."
B. Such sign must be shown to the Chief of Police of the City of Brigantine
or his designee as part of the application process and said Police Chief
or his designee shall indicate where said sign shall be located on the
date of such solicitation by a charitable organization. Any such sign
must always be located so that the same will not cause any traffic
congestion or hazard.
§ 235-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 235-12
1:648
§ 235-12. Violations and penalties.
Any individual and/or charitable organization found guilty of violating this
article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100. In addition, if any
charitable organization, or member thereof, is found guilty of violating
this article, the City Manager may, in her discretion, refuse to grant the
application of said charitable organization to solicit contributions pursuant
to this article in the succeeding year following the conviction of violation of
this article.
§ 235-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-12
1:649
Chapter 236
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Contracts — See Ch. 12. Ethics — See Ch. 25.
§ 236-1. Adoption of standards.
The City will hereafter adhere and incorporate into Chapter 236 the state
standards codified in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1 et seq.
consisting of:
§ 236-2. Filing.
A copy of this chapter shall be filed with the New Jersey Secretary of State.
§ 236-3. Severability.
In the event that any clause, section, paragraph or sentence of this chapter
is deemed to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, then the City
Council hereby declares its intent that the balance of the chapter not
affected by said invalidity shall remain in full force and effect to the extent
that it allows the City to meet the goals of the chapter.
Chapter 237
PROPERTY, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 123.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 204, Art. II.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
Abandoned shopping carts — See Ch. 254.
A. Fair and open processes in public contracting;
B. The state campaign contribution limits and reporting requirements;
and
C. All other pertinent statutory standards contained therein.
§ 235-12 BRIGANTINE CODE § 236-3
1:650
ARTICLE I
Identification
[Adopted 10-17-2013 by Ord. No. 12-2013]
§ 237-1. Identification of designated public officer.
The public officer charged with the responsibility for identifying abandoned
properties and giving notice as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 shall be that
officer designated by the City Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-80.
§ 237-2. Duties of public officer.
§ 237-3. Additional duties; notice.
A. The public officer shall identify all properties within the municipality
which are deemed abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.
B. Each item of abandoned property shall be identified by tax block and lot
number, the name of the owner of record (if known), and the street
address of the lot.
C. Upon identification of abandoned property, the public officer shall
create and maintain a list of such property to be called the "Abandoned
Property List." Properties may be added to the list at any time or
deleted from the list at any time the public officer finds that the
property no longer meets the definition of an abandoned property. An
interested party may request that a property be included on the
abandoned property list following the procedure set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-105.
D. An abandoned property shall not be included on the Abandoned
Property List if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of the
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the municipality has purchased or taken
assignment from the municipality of a tax sale certificate, which has
been place on the Abandoned Property List, may be removed from the
list in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
A. The public officer, within 10 days of the establishment of the abandoned
property list, or any additions thereto, shall send a notice, by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, to the owner of
record of every property included on the list and shall cause the list to
be published in the official newspaper of the municipality, which
publication shall constitute public notice. The published and mailed
notices shall identify the property determined to be abandoned setting
forth the owner of record (if known), the tax lot and block number, and
street address. The public officer, in consultation with the Tax Collector,
shall also send out a notice by regular mail to any mortgagee, servicing
organization, or property tax processing organization that receives a
duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to Subsection d of N.J.S.A.
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-3
1:651
§ 237-4. Power of municipality.
The City of Brigantine, through its appropriate officials, including, but
not limited to, the public officer, shall have all powers afforded to the
municipality, and its agents, servants and employees, under the Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78, including, but not limited
to, the power to transfer possession and control of an abandoned property
in need of rehabilitation to a municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84,
subject, nevertheless, to the procedural requirements for same set forth
in said Act; the power to enter, secure, stabilize, repair or inspect the
property under N.J.S.A. 55:19-86; the power to exercise its rights to further
rehabilitation and re-use of the property under N.J.S.A. 55:19-90 et seq.;
the power to impose liens upon, undertake improvements to, and borrow
funds to facilitate powers delegated to municipalities under said Act, in
accordance with said Act; and all such powers and authority delegated to
municipalities under said Act, all of which statutes are incorporated herein
and made a part hereof by reference.
§ 237-5. Rights of owner and parties of interest.
The owner of the property and the parties of interest shall have all rights
afforded to them under the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act,
N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., including, but not limited to, all defenses to a
complaint filed by the City of Brigantine pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-87; the
right to petition for reinstatement of control and possession pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-92 provided that the owner satisfies all requirements and
obligation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-93 and N.J.S.A. 55:19-94; and all such
rights delegated to the owner of the property and parties of interest under
said Act, all of which statutes are incorporated herein and made a part
hereof by reference.
54:4-64. When the owner of record is not known for a particular
property and cannot be ascertained by the exercise of reasonable
diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be mailed but instead
shall be posted on the property in the manner provided in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall indicate the factual basis for the
public officer's finding that the property is abandoned property as
that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, specifying the information relied upon in
making such finding. In all cases, a copy of the mailed or posted notice
shall also be filed by the public officer in the office of the Atlantic
County Clerk. This filing shall have the same force and effect as a notice
of lis pendens under N.J.S.A 2A:15-6.
B. The public officer shall seek reimbursement for the postage costs and
search fees associated with providing notice in accordance with
Subsection A of this section from the Authority (as defined in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.4) or its subsidiaries in accordance with procedures and rules
promulgated by the Department of Community Affairs.
§ 237-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 237-6
1:652
§ 237-6. Rights of mortgage or lien holder.
The mortgage holder or lien holder shall have all rights the property and
the parties of interest shall have all rights afforded to them under the
Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.
including, but not limited to, the right to seek to be designated in possession
of the property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-89; and all such rights delegated
to the mortgage holder or lien holder under said Act, all of which statutes
are incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference.
§ 237-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-6
1:653

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Property List
[Adopted 1-20-2016 by Ord. No. 2-2016]
§ 237-7. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the City of Brigantine to establish a process
to address the deterioration and blight of City of Brigantine neighborhoods
caused by an increasing amount of abandoned, foreclosed or distressed real
property located within the City of Brigantine, and to identify, regulate, limit
and reduce the number of abandoned properties located within the City
of Brigantine. It is the City of Brigantine's further intent to participate in
the County-wide registration program established by the Atlantic County
Improvement Authority and administered by Community Champions
Corporation as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming
blighted due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned
and foreclosed properties.
§ 237-8. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY — Any real property located in the City of
Brigantine, whether vacant or occupied, that is in default on a mortgage,
has had a lis pendens filed against it by the lender holding a mortgage on
the property, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by the lender, is
subject to an application for a tax deed or pending tax assessor's lien sale,
or has been transferred to the lender under a deed in lieu of foreclosure.
The designation of a property as "abandoned" shall remain in place until
such time as the property is sold or transferred to a new owner, the
foreclosure action has been dismissed, and any default on the mortgage has
been cured.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure that
is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior
space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE CODES — To include, but not be limited to, the City of
Brigantine's Zoning Code, the City of Brigantine's Code of Ordinances
("Brigantine Code"), and the New Jersey Building Code.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY —
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors,
walls, or roofs which create hazardous conditions and encourage
trespassing; or
A.
§ 237-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-8
1:655
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement officer, Building Official,
Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Inspector or Building
Inspector, public officer, or other person authorized by the City of
Brigantine to enforce the applicable codes.
OWNER — Any person, legal entity or other party having any ownership
interest, whether legal or equitable, in real property. This term shall also
apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible for the construction,
maintenance or operation of the property involved.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance of abandoned real property.
VACANT — Any building or structure that is not legally occupied.
§ 237-9. Applicability.
These sections shall be considered cumulative and not superseding or
subject to any other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional
remedy available to the City of Brigantine above and beyond any other
state, county or local provisions for same.
§ 237-10. Establishment of registry.
Pursuant to the provisions of §§ 237-1 et seq., the City of Brigantine shall
participate in the county-wide registration program established by the
Atlantic County Improvement Authority and administered by Community
Champions Corporation cataloging each abandoned property within the
City of Brigantine, containing the information required by this article.
§ 237-11. Registration of abandoned real property.
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties causing a decrease in
value of the neighboring properties; or
B.
Properties cited for a public nuisance pursuant to the Brigantine Code;
or
C.
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are dilapidated, deteriorated,
or violate minimum health and safety standards or lacks maintenance
as required by the Brigantine City and Zoning Codes.
D.
A. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the City of Brigantine shall perform an inspection of the property to
determine vacancy or occupancy, upon default by the mortgagor. The
mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property
with the Division of Code Enforcement, or designee, on forms or
website access provided by the City of Brigantine, and indicate whether
the property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required
for each property, whether it is found to be vacant or occupied.
§ 237-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 237-11
1:656
§ 237-12. Maintenance requirements.
B. If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be inspected
by the mortgagee or his designee monthly until:
(1) The mortgagor or other party remedies the default; or
(2) It is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time
it is deemed abandoned, and the mortgagee shall, within 10 days of
that inspection, update the property registration to a vacancy
status on forms provided by the City of Brigantine.
C. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of the
mortgagee and the server, the direct mailing address of the mortgagee
and the server, a direct contact name and telephone number for both
parties, facsimile number and e-mail address for both parties, the folio
or tax number, and the name and twenty-four-hour contact telephone
number of the property management company responsible for the
security and maintenance of the property.
D. A nonrefundable annual registration fee in the amount of $300 per
property shall accompany the registration form or website registration.
E. All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee, servicer,
trustee, or owner. Third-party registration fees are not allowed without
the consent of the City of Brigantine and/or its authorized designee.
F. This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of
a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred
under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
G. Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and maintenance
standards of this section as long as they remain vacant or in default.
H. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
I. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to modify
the registration form from time to time to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this article is a violation of the article and
shall be subject to enforcement.
J. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and determination
that any property is in violation of this article, the City of Brigantine
may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a
lien on the property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the
property and bring it into compliance.
A. Properties subject to this article shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown
brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
§ 237-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-12
1:657
§ 237-13. Security requirements.
accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those
required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items,
including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material or any other items that give the
appearance that the property is abandoned.
B. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by
removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the
color of the exterior structure.
C. Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be maintained
in accordance with the applicable codes at the time registration was
required.
D. Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or
bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential
installation. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall
not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
E. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation,
cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and removal
of all trimmings.
F. Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear
of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in the applicable codes.
G. Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the
property may result in a violation of the applicable codes and issuance
of a citation or Notice of Violation in accordance with Chapter 237 of
the Code of the City of Brigantine. Pursuant to a finding and
determination by the City of Brigantine's Public Officer or a court of
competent jurisdiction, the City of Brigantine may take the necessary
action to ensure compliance with this section.
H. In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the applicable codes.
A. Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure.
Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure must be
repaired. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing of the window.
§ 237-12 BRIGANTINE CODE § 237-13
1:658
§ 237-14. Public nuisance.
All abandoned real property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the City of
Brigantine.
§ 237-15. Penalties; schedule of civil penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article may be cited
and fined as provided in Chapter 237 of the Brigantine Code and N.J.S.A.
55:19-78 et seq. The following table shows violations of these sections, as
may be amended from time to time, which may be enforced pursuant to
the provisions of this regulation; and the dollar amount of civil penalty for
the violation of these sections as it may be amended. The descriptions of
violations below are for informational purposes only and are not meant
to limit or define the nature of the violations or the subject matter of
the Brigantine Code sections, except to the extent that different types of
violations of the Brigantine Code section may carry different civil penalties.
For each Brigantine Code section listed in the schedule of civil penalties,
the entirety of the section may be enforced by the mechanism provided in
this section, regardless of whether all activities prescribed or required are
described in the "Description of Violation" column. To determine whether
a particular activity is prescribed or required by this Code, the relevant
Brigantine Code sections shall be examined.
Description of Violation Civil Penalty
Failure to register abandoned real
property on annual basis and/or any
violation of the sections stated within
$500
§ 237-16. Inspections for violations.
Adherence to this article does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent
from any other obligations set forth in any applicable codes which may
apply to the property. Upon sale or transfer of title to the property, the
owner shall be responsible for all violations of the applicable codes, and the
owner shall be responsible for meeting with the City's Code Enforcement
Division within 45 days for a final courtesy inspection report.
§ 237-17. Additional authority.
C. If a mortgage on a property is in default, and the property has become
vacant or abandoned, a property manager shall be designated by the
mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring the property into
compliance with the applicable codes, and the property manager must
perform regular inspections to verify compliance with the requirements
of this article, and any other applicable laws.
§ 237-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-17
1:659
§ 237-18. Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty.
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcement officer or any
person authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as
provided in this article shall be punishable as provided in the applicable
codes or a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 237-19. Immunity of enforcement officer.
Any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the City of Brigantine
to enforce the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil
or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the
discharge of duties imposed by this article.
A. If the enforcement officer has reason to believe that a property subject
to the provisions of this article is posing a serious threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, the Code Enforcement Officer may
temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee and/or
owner, and may bring the violations before the City's public officer as
soon as possible to address the conditions of the property.
B. The public officer shall have the authority to require the mortgagee
and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section to
implement additional maintenance and/or security measures, including,
but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other
openings, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures
as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the
property.
C. If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a serious
threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the public officer
may direct the City to abate the violations and charge the mortgagee
with the cost of the abatement.
D. If the mortgagee does not reimburse the City of Brigantine for the cost
of temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by
the public officer, within 30 days of the City of Brigantine sending the
mortgagee the invoice, then the City of Brigantine may lien the
property with such cost, along with an administrative fee of $500 to
recover the administrative personnel services.
§ 237-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 237-19
1:660
Chapter 238
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds and other debris — See Ch. 115.
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 123.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Rental property — See Ch. 246.
Moving of structures — See Ch. 264.
§ 237-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-19
1:661

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 11-6-1991 by Ord. No. 19-1991163; amended in its entirety
12-20-2017 by Ord. No. 26-2017]
§ 238-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
International Property Maintenance Code/2018 is hereby adopted, marked
and designated as the existing property maintenance code of the City of
Brigantine, and each of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions
and terms of said International Property Maintenance Code/2018 are
hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set forth in
this article with the exception of the additions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 238-3 of this article.
§ 238-2. Copies to be kept on file.
Three copies of the aforementioned code are to be placed in the files of the
Clerk of the City of Brigantine with additional copies on file in the office of
the Construction Official, and the Fire Department.
§ 238-3. Amendments to code.
International Property Maintenance Code/2018 is hereby amended and
revised in the following respects:
A. Section 101.1 is hereby amended to insert "the City of Brigantine."
B. Section 103.5 is hereby amended to reflect the current fee schedule in
effect by the City of Brigantine.
C. Section 112.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: ". . . .shall be liable
to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,000."
D. Section 302.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: ". . . .shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches."
E. Section 304.14 is hereby amended to read as follows: "During the
period from April 1 to October 31, every door, window and other outside
opening required for ventilation. . . ."
F. Section 602.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: ". . . .shall supply
heat during the period from September 15 to June 1 to maintain a
minimum. . . ."
G. Section 602.4 is hereby amended to read as follows: ". . . . shall be
supplied with heat during the period from September 15 to June 1 to
maintain a minimum. . . ."
163. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. 169, Existing Structures,
adopted 4-20-1988 by Ord. No. 5-1988.
§ 238-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-3
1:663

ARTICLE II
Appeals
[Adopted 3-24-1993 by Ord. No. 1-1993; amended in its entirety
12-20-2017 by Ord. No. 26-2017]
§ 238-4. Appeals to be taken to the County Board of Appeals.
Any appeals of violations of the International Property Maintenance Code/
2018 may be filed with the Atlantic County Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 238-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 238-4
1:665
Chapter 241
RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 91.
Amusement games — See Ch. 95.
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Boats — See Ch. 111.
Curfew — See Ch. 147.
Miniature golf course — See Ch. 190.
Noise — See Ch. 216.
Parades and assemblies — See Ch. 230.
Roller skates, skateboards and
scooters — See Ch. 248.
Municipal tennis courts — See Ch. 274.
Personal watercraft — See Ch. 292.
§ 238-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 238-4
1:666
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 7-6-1994 by Ord. No. 19-1994]
§ 241-1. Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
No individual will be allowed to consume alcoholic beverages on, in or about
the various recreation facilities in the City of Brigantine. For the purposes of
this section, anyone who possesses an open container of alcoholic beverage
will be considered to have consumed the same.
§ 241-2. Basketball court hours.
§ 241-3. Tennis court hours.
The tennis courts at the 42nd Street Recreation Complex may be used from
7:00 a.m. to 10:30 p.m. Any person who plays on said courts prior to the
designated starting time or subsequent to the designated closing time shall
be considered in violation of this article.
§ 241-4. Certain activities prohibited.
No disorderly conduct, fighting, graffiti or other damage to property or
person shall be permitted at any of the recreational complexes within the
City of Brigantine.
§ 241-5. Foul or abusive language prohibited.
No foul or abusive language shall be permitted at any of the recreational
areas within the City of Brigantine.
§ 241-6. Sound devices prohibited.
No person shall cause, allow or permit the operating or playing of any
radio, tape player, "boom box," compact disc or other similar device at any
recreational facility located within the City of Brigantine.
A. The hours during which basketball may be played at the basketball
courts located at the 24th Street Recreation Complex are from 8:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m., with the exception of City-sponsored league play,
which may continue to 10:30 p.m. on nights regularly scheduled for
such play. Any person who plays on said basketball courts prior to the
designated starting time or subsequent to the designated closing time
shall be considered in violation of this article.
B. All other basketball courts owned by the City of Brigantine and located
in the City of Brigantine shall have designated hours beginning at 8:00
a.m. and ending at 10:30 p.m. Any person who plays on said basketball
courts prior to the designated starting time or subsequent to the
designated closing time shall be considered in violation of this article.
§ 241-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-7
1:667
§ 241-7. Skateboard park. [Added 9-4-1996 by Ord. No. 18-1996]
§ 241-7.1. Hockey facilities. [Added 8-20-2014 by Ord. No. 12-2014]
§ 241-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-4-1996 by Ord. No.
18-1996]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article I shall be
subject to a penalty for each offense of a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge and may be subject to removal from the Recreational
Complex for any violations thereof.
A. The skateboard park located at the 42nd Street Recreation Complex
may be used from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. during daylight saving time
and from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. during standard time. The City reserves
the right to close the park at an earlier hour or for any reason at the
City's discretion.
B. Any and all persons utilizing the skateboard park at 42nd Street will be
required to wear an authorized and approved safety helmet, elbow
pads, knee pads and wrist/palm pads. Anyone not wearing said safety
equipment will be in violation of this article and will be subject to
removal from said facility in addition to being liable for all violations as
set forth in the violations section of this article.
C. Certain other activities are prohibited at the skateboard park located at
the 42nd Street Recreational Complex, including but not limited to
bicycling, ball playing of any kind and all other prohibitive activities as
further listed in this article.
A. Hours. The hockey facilities located on 42nd Street may be used from
9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. during daylight saving time and from 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m. during standard time unless otherwise permitted. The City
reserves the right to close the park at an earlier hour or for any reason
at the City's discretion.
B. Permitted use. The hockey facilities located on 42nd Street are to be
used for hockey purposes only. Those playing hockey shall be required
to wear all necessary equipment, including, but not limited to, helmet,
gloves, elbow pads, mouth guard, shin guards, cups or pelvic
protection, etc.
C. Prohibited use: certain activities prohibited at the hockey facilities
located on 42nd Street, including, but not limited to, bicycling,
skateboarding, baseball, basketball, lacrosse, soccer, or any other ball
playing of any kind and all other prohibitive activities as further listed
in this article.
§ 241-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 241-8
1:668
ARTICLE II
Criminal History Background Checks
[Adopted 12-2-2009 by Ord. No. 27-2009]
§ 241-9. Definitions.
As used in this Article II, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL PANEL — A three-member panel consisting of the Chief of Police,
the City Manager and the Director of Recreation. The panel shall be
charged with review of all appeals by any employee or volunteer whose
criminal history background check reveals disqualifying criminal
conviction. Each member shall serve without compensation.
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination of whether
a person has a criminal record by cross referencing that person's name,
fingerprints, social security number and date of birth with those on file with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification (SBI) Division and/or the
State Bureau of Identification of the New Jersey State Police.
SPONSORED — Any youth program in the City of Brigantine which receives
funding, in whole or part, from the City.
§ 241-10. Responsibility for costs.
§ 241-11. Processing.
A. Criminal history background checks are to be borne by the volunteer,
unless supplemented through grants, fundraising, and the volunteer
organizations involved (i.e., football, baseball, hockey, etc.).
B. The City of Brigantine shall be responsible for all costs associated with
the original issuance of an identification card for all volunteers or
employees. If the original identification issued by the City of Brigantine
is lost, it shall be the responsibility of the volunteer or employee to pay
for a replacement card.
A. All City of Brigantine sponsored youth programs or activities shall
submit a list of names, addresses and a written consent form from all
the prospective and current volunteers to the Director of Recreation of
the City of Brigantine.
B. The Director of Recreation shall coordinate the criminal background
checks and digital photographs for the identification cards. The
recreation-issued identification card will show the digital picture of the
volunteer/employee as well as his/her name and youth activity
overseeing and an expiration date. If the volunteer/employee resigns or
is terminated, the recreation-issued identification card is to be returned
to the City of Brigantine Director of Recreation or his/her designee.
§ 241-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-11
1:669
§ 241-12. Conditions of disqualification.
A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
if that person's criminal history background check reveals a record of
conviction of any of the following crimes or disorderly person's offense:
§ 241-13. Notification of disqualification.
If a person is determined to be disqualified from serving as an employee or
volunteer from City-sponsored youth activities because the criminal history
background reveals a record of conviction as listed above:
C. The services of a third-party independent agency will conduct the
criminal history background checks authorized under this article and
submit same to the Volunteer Review Operation of the New Jersey State
Police Records and Identification Section, State Bureau of Identification
(SBI), Criminal Information Unit (CIU).
D. The New Jersey State Police Records and Identification Section will
notify the Director of Recreation under the Volunteer Review Operation
(VRO) of the applicant's approval or denial. No criminal background
information will be released to the Recreation Department.
A. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly offense:
(1) Involving danger to person, meaning those crimes and disorderly
persons' offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq. (criminal
homicide), N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq. (assaults, reckless endangering;
threats), N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq. (kidnapping and related offenses;
coercion), N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq. (sexual offenses), or N.J.S.A.
2C:15-1 et seq. (robbery);
(2) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those crimes
and disorderly persons' offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.
(offenses against the family, children and incompetents);
(3) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey statutes; or
(4) Involving any controlled dangerous substance analog as set forth in
Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the New Jersey statutes, except Paragraph
(4) of Subsection a of this section of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10 (possession
of 50 grams or less of marijuana).
B. In any other state of jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any crimes or disorderly persons offenses
described in Subsection A of this section.
A. A copy of the notification of disqualification will be sent directly to the
Office of the Attorney General, Department of Law and Public Safety,
Division of the State Police, or third-party agency, to the applicant, and
to the Director of the Recreation Department.
§ 241-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 241-13
1:670
§ 241-14. Youth protection program appeal panel.
In order to monitor and supervise the enforcement of this article as well as
hear appeals, a Youth Protection Program Appeal Panel shall be established,
whose composition shall be the Chief of Police, the City Manager, and the
Director of Recreation, or their designated representatives, who shall serve
without compensation.
§ 241-15. Process of appeal.
B. No entity within the process will be privy to specific details of the
applicant's criminal background other than the applicant. The applicant
may obtain a copy of the criminal history record directly from the New
Jersey State Police.
A. All current and prospective employees or volunteers may appeal the
disqualification determination by filing a written notice of appeal to the
Director of Recreation.
B. All appeal requests shall process in a hearing no later than 45 days
after receiving the notice of appeal before the Youth Protection
Program Appeal Panel, and a determination shall be made no later than
20 days thereafter.
C. At the hearing the employee or volunteer shall have the right to appear
and be heard, to be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in
his or her behalf, to cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a
permanent record made of the proceedings at his or her own expense.
§ 241-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-15
1:671

ARTICLE III
Community Recreation Center
[Adopted 2-1-2012 by Ord. No. 2-2012]
§ 241-16. Fees.
The fees for the use of the Community Recreation Center shall be as set
forth in § 210-37 of the Code of the City of Brigantine.
§ 241-17. Foul language prohibited.
No foul or abusive language shall be permitted at the Community
Recreation Center.
§ 241-18. Application.
§ 241-19. Deposits and payment.
A. Any individual or group seeking to use the Community Recreation
Center or any portion thereof must complete an application and pay any
and all required fees and charges as set forth herein.
B. The application shall be developed by the City Manager or his designee
and made available at the CER office.
C. The City of Brigantine and the Brigantine CER reserve the right to
reject any application.
D. No application for use of the facility or any portion thereof shall be
reviewed and processed until it is determined that said application has
been completed in full and all appropriate fees have been paid. Any
applicant will be notified as to the status of the application submitted
within a reasonable period of time after submitting the same to the City
of Brigantine.
E. No date shall be held available for any group or individual who has not
submitted a completed application form and all required fees and
deposits. No reservation shall be considered final until such time as the
applicant is notified, in writing, of the approved use of the facilities for
the date in question.
A. The payment of any deposit or fees as required by this article shall be
made by either check or money order.
B. All individuals or groups categorized as a Group B rental are required
to pay a nonrefundable deposit of $10 for an application processing fee.
C. All groups are required to pay the rental fee as set forth in § 210-37 of
the Code of the City of Brigantine.
§ 241-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-19
1:673
§ 241-20. No animals permitted.
No animals shall be permitted in the Community Recreation Center at any
time. This section shall not apply to service animals such as Seeing Eye
dogs.
§ 241-21. Indemnification.
All applicants for the use of the Community Recreation Center shall
complete an indemnification and hold harmless agreement as prepared
by the City Manager or his designee as part of the application process.
Said indemnification and hold harmless agreement shall indemnify and hold
harmless the City of Brigantine, the CER and any employees, agents or
officials acting on the behalf of the City of Brigantine or the CER unless any
D. All Group B organizations are required to pay a damage/compliance
deposit fee of $100 when seeking to use the dining room, gym or
kitchen at the facilities.
E. The above-referenced application fee must be paid at the time any
application is submitted for use of the facilities. The application fee
shall be returned if the rental request is denied. If the rental request is
granted, an appointment shall be set in order to sign and complete the
contract to use the facilities. At this meeting the total rental fee shall be
due and payable. Any money paid toward the application fee may be
applied to the rental fee at such time.
F. Any damage/compliance deposit fee which is required pursuant to this
article must be paid at the time of the meeting to complete the rental
contract. The fee is refundable if all conditions of the rental are met and
no damage has occurred at the facility.
G. The conditions which will lead to the withholding of part or all of the
damage/compliance deposit include, but are not limited to, the
following:
(1) Cleanup is not completed as outlined in the facility rules and
regulations or is not completed in a timely manner.
(2) Use of the room exceeds the scheduled rental time.
(3) The number of persons attending the event for which the rental
was granted exceeds the number of participants as set forth in the
agreement allowing the use of the facilities.
(4) Any equipment, furniture, fixture or any portion of the facility or
property contained therein is damaged during the rental period.
(5) There is an additional staff time charge which may be required for
special services or items not on the prepaid facility charges but
used by a renter during the rental period.
§ 241-19 BRIGANTINE CODE § 241-21
1:674
damage, injury or loss is caused exclusively by the negligence of the City of
Brigantine or any of its agents, officers or employees.
§ 241-22. Use restrictions.
To the extent that any group or individual rents a portion of the facility, the
members of said group using said facility shall remain in said portion of the
facility and shall not wander or travel to other portions of the facility which
are not in use or which are being used by other groups or entities.
§ 241-23. Rerental.
There shall be no assignment or rerental of any agreement to use the
facilities entered into with the City of Brigantine or the CER. Therefore, a
group or individual cannot enter into a contract to use the facilities and then
assign or try to sell or lease said contract to another group or individual.
§ 241-24. Inappropriate behavior.
The City of Brigantine, the CER and any employees or officials acting on
behalf of said entities reserve the right to immediately terminate an event
in progress at the Community Recreation Center, without refund of any
deposit or other payments, upon the happening of any of the following:
§ 241-25. Bicycles prohibited.
No bicycle, unicycle, moped, go ped, scooter, skateboard, roller skates,
roller blades or other mechanical item or vehicle used for transportation,
whether powered by motor or otherwise, shall be permitted in the facilities
unless the same has been preapproved in advance by representatives of the
CER. Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted as to prohibit
any wheelchairs, motorized devices or other similar devices used to assist
any individual with a physical or mental disability.
A. An individual or group using the facility violates the law of the State of
New Jersey or the ordinances, rules and regulations as established by
the City of Brigantine.
B. Any group or individuals within a group act in a manner that is obscene,
boisterous or conducted in such a fashion which is more offensive than
what is normally expected or anticipated from a similar group using the
facility.
C. Any individual, group or members within a group deliberately damage,
deface or otherwise damage the facilities or any equipment, furniture,
fixtures or other property contained therein.
D. Any individual, group or member of a group uses the kitchen facility in a
dangerous or unsafe manner.
§ 241-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 241-26
1:675
§ 241-26. Nudity.
No nudity shall occur during the use of the facilities.
§ 241-27. Rules and regulations.
The Director of the CER or his designee may establish any additional
rules and regulations for the use of the facility. To the extent that said
rules and regulations are promulgated, the same shall be made known to
any individual or group seeking to use the Community Recreation Center
facility. Any individual, group or member of said group shall be deemed to
have been made aware of said rules and regulations if the same are placed
in written form and given to the individual representing the group who
submits the application or if the rules and regulations are attached to any
acceptance letter authorizing the use of the facility.
§ 241-28. Violations and penalties.
In addition to having any use of the facilities terminated without a return
of any fees or deposit, any individual or group violating the terms and
conditions of this article will be subject to a fine of up to $1,000, community
service of up to 30 days, or both, in the discretion of the Municipal Court
Judge.
§ 241-26 BRIGANTINE CODE § 241-28
1:676
Chapter 242
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, weeds and other debris — See Ch. 115.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 187.
Littering — See Ch. 204.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
§ 242-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment used for commercial
purposes, such as bars, restaurants, private offices, fitness clubs, retail
stores, banks and financial institutions, supermarkets, auto and boat
dealerships, and other establishments with common business areas.
COMMINGLED — A combining of nonputrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Atlantic County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source separated for the purpose of recycling.
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax
machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display
or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four
inches, measured diagonally, and that contains one or more circuit boards,
including a television, and cell phones.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings, in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a.) and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest
houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under Subsection G of Section 3 of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (C.55: 13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be authorized to,
among other things; enforce the provisions of this chapter, and any rules
and regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the municipality of Brigantine.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
§ 241-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-1
1:677
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING —
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 242-2. Source separation; exemptions.
A single-family dwelling, including attached structures such as porches
and stoops; or
A.
A single-family dwelling unit in a structure that contains more than one
separate residential dwelling unit, and in which each such unit is used
or occupied, or intended to be used or occupied, in whole or in part, as
the home or residence of one or more persons.
B.
A. Mandatory source separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include, but not be limited to, retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the City to separate designated recyclable
materials from all solid waste. The following designated recyclable
materials are to be recycled at both residential dwellings and
commercial establishments: aerosol containers, aluminum cans,
antifreeze, asphalt, auto/truck bodies, batteries, bimetal cans, CFC
refrigerants, concrete, consumer electronics, corrugated cardboard,
ferrous scrap, glass containers, grass, HDPE/PETE plastic, magazines,
mixed paper, newsprint, nonferrous scrap, office paper, oil
contaminated soil, propane tanks, telephone books, textiles tires, tree
parts/yard trimmings, used motor oil and white goods. The following
designated recyclable materials are to be recycled at commercial
establishments: block, brick, fluorescent bulbs, oil filters and
polystyrene. These materials shall be deposited separate and apart
from other solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants
of such premises.
B. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of
a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the source
separation requirements of the ordinance which requires persons
generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to
source separate from the municipal solid waste stream the specified
recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this chapter, a commercial or institutional
§ 242-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 242-2
1:678
§ 242-3. Collection of recyclable materials.
The collection of recyclable material shall be in the manner prescribed as
follows:
§ 242-4. Residential dwelling compliance requirements.
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
chapter. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management, in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy.
§ 242-5. Nonresidential establishment compliance requirements.
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with
the municipal recycling coordinator on forms to be provided for this
purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following
information: the name of the commercial or institutional entity; the
street address location and lot and block designation; the name, official
title and phone number of the person making application on behalf
of the commercial or institutional entity; the name, address, official
contact person and telephone number of the facility which provides
the service of recycling those designated recyclable materials, and a
certification that the designated recyclable materials will be recycled,
and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service provider or
commercial/institutional generator shall provide written documentation
to the municipal recycling coordinator of the total number of tons
collected and recycled for each designated material.
A. All containers and recyclable materials shall be placed, prior to
collection, between the curb and the sidewalk, or in the absence of curb
and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to constitute a danger, where
such receptacles shall be readily accessible to the collector without
providing obstruction to pedestrians. The owner or occupant of the
premises shall keep all receptacles clean and in safe handling
condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of shall be placed
as noted above any time after 5:00 p.m. of the day immediately
preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m. of the day of
collection. After collection, any containers shall be removed from the
curbside by no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of collection.
B. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be kept clean and in a safe manner.
A. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 242-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-5
1:679
§ 242-6. New developments of multi-family residential units or
commercial, institutional, industrial properties.
B. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or their designee, unless the municipality provides for
the collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoors litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
C. Every business, institution, or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at their premises, including the
amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled
and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
D. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
A. Any application to the planning board of the City for subdivision or site
plan approval for the construction of multi-family dwellings of three or
more units, single-family developments of 50 or more units, or any
commercial, institutional, or industrial development for the utilization
of 1,000 square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This
plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
(1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
(2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.), as may be determined by the municipal recycling coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the City, the owner
of any new multi-family housing or commercial, institutional or
industrial development must supply a copy of a duly executed contract
with a hauling company for the purposes of collection and recycling of
source-separated recyclable materials, in those instances where the
municipality does not otherwise provide this service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the municipal engineer.
§ 242-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 242-7
1:680
§ 242-7. Prohibition of the collection of solid waste mixed with
recyclable materials.
§ 242-8. Designated recyclables.
The following are the designated recyclables for residential and commercial
entities (unless otherwise indicated) in the City of Brigantine: aerosol
containers, aluminum cans, antifreeze, asphalt, auto/truck bodies, batteries,
bimetal cans, block, brick, CFC refrigerants, concrete, consumer
electronics, corrugated cardboard, ferrous scrap, fluorescent bulbs, glass
containers, grass, HDPE/PETE plastic, magazines, mixed paper, newsprint,
nonferrous scrap, office paper, oil contaminated soil, oil filters, polystyrene,
propane tanks, telephone books, textiles tires, tree parts/yard trimmings,
used motor oil and white goods.
§ 242-9. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Official, the Department of Health, the Recycling
Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official, the Housing Officer, and the
Atlantic County Department of Health are hereby individually and severally
empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter. An inspection may
consist of sorting through containers and opening of solid waste bags to
detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.
§ 242-10. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with or contains visible signs of designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this chapter and the local sanitary
code.
C. Once placed in the location identified by this chapter, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove,
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
A. Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this chapter or any of the rules and
regulations promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine not less than $250, or more than $1000. Each day
for which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 242-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 242-10
1:681
Chapter 246
RENTAL PROPERTY
B. Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust
Fund.
§ 242-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 242-10
1:682
ARTICLE I
Rental Property Licensing Requirements
§ 246-1. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases when used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning:
AGENT or MANAGING AGENT — The individual or individuals designated
by the owner as the person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any
duty imposed upon the owner by this chapter, provided that in order to
be an agent or managing agent the individual designated must reside in
Atlantic County, New Jersey as set forth in N.J.S.A. 46:8-28(c). The term does
not include a licensed real estate broker or salesman of the State of New
Jersey as those terms are defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; unless such broker
or salesperson shall affirmatively consent to act as such agent or managing
agent.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow or other
dwelling unit consisting of one or more rooms occupying all or part of a
floor or floors in a building of one or more floors or stories, but not the
entire building, whether designed with or without housekeeping facilities
for dwelling purposes and notwithstanding whether the apartment be
designed for residence, for office, or the operation of any industry or
business, or for any other type of independent use.
BUILDING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used for human
habitation, use or occupancy and includes any accessory buildings and
appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. Consistent
with the definitions contained in the Uniform Construction Code (UCC)
and the Uniform Fire Code (UFC), "building" shall also mean a structure
enclosed with exterior walls or fire walls, built, erected and framed of
component structural parts, designed for the housing, shelter, enclosure
and support of individuals, animals or property of any kind. When used
herein, building and structure shall be interchangeable except where the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or rooms, or suite or apartment thereof,
whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied, or intended, arranged
or designed to be occupied, for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or
more persons, including but not limited to the owner thereof, or any of his
servants, agents or employees, and shall include all privileges, services,
furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities, and improvements connected
with use or occupancy thereof. This definition applies only to those dwelling
units, including single-family residences, which are available for lease or
rental purposes. Consistent with the definitions contained in the Uniform
Construction Code (UCC) and the Uniform Fire Code (UFC) the definition
shall also mean a single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons living as a single, housekeeping unit,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
§ 246-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-1
1:683
GUESTS — See definition of "visitors."
LANDLORD — See definition of "owner."
LICENSE or RENTAL LICENSE — The license issued by the City attesting
that the rental unit has been properly inspected and licensed at required
intervals in accordance with this chapter.
LICENSE YEAR — Shall be for a maximum term of 12 months as defined in
§ 246-13 of this chapter.
LICENSEE — The person to whom the license is issued pursuant to this
chapter. The term "licensee" includes within its definition the term "agent"
or "managing agent," where applicable.
LICENSING CLERK — The municipal official or employee designated to
receive rental license applications and registrations and to issue licenses
pursuant to this chapter.
MANAGING AGENT — See definition of "agent."
OCCUPANT — Person who resides in a rental unit, including, but not limited
to, the named tenant(s). The term shall include residents, overnight visitors
and children. The term shall not include those visitors or guests who are not
residing therein.
OWNER — The person who owns, purports to own or exercises control
over any building. Consistent with the definitions contained in the Uniform
Construction Code (UCC) and the Uniform Fire Code (UFC), "owner" shall
also mean the owner or owners in fee of the property or a lesser estate
therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an assignee of rents, receiver,
executor, trustee, lessee or any other person, firm or corporation, directly
or indirectly in control of a building, structure or real property and shall
include any subdivision thereof of the state.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
REALTOR — An individual who is licensed by the State of New Jersey as
a real estate salesperson, a real estate broker-salesperson, and/or a real
estate referral agent, as those terms are defined in the New Jersey Real
Estate Brokers and Salesmen Act ("Brokers Act"), N.J.S.A. 45:15-1 to -29.5.
RENTAL AGENT — The person who negotiates for the lease of the rental
unit on behalf of the owner. Such person shall be the holder of the required
license mandated by the State of New Jersey. The rental agent is not the
managing agent under the terms of this chapter unless the rental agent
should expressly consent to assume such duties or obligations.
RENTAL PROPERTY — A building or structure which contains one or more
rental units including, but not limited to, resort houses, which is rented,
leased, subleased or occupied by a tenant. The term "rental property" shall
not include any property covered by the New Jersey Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law. N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1, et seq.
§ 246-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-1
1:684
RENTAL UNIT — Collectively the term apartment or dwelling, building,
dwelling unit, as defined by this chapter. This definition shall not apply to
any single-family home which is not available for rental purposes.
RESORT HOUSE — A residentially styled structure that is used, maintained,
marketed, promoted and/or advertised as a destination location available
for rent, lease or sub-lease for a gathering of invited guests for functions
and special events, including, but not limited to, weddings, retreats, family
reunions, parties and meetings. A resort house is a commercial use
appropriate only in areas zoned for hotel/motel use and never has been
permitted as a legal use under existing ordinance standards. A resort
house is a commercial use and is not a traditional single-family residence
and requires more off-street parking in order to accommodate the number
of guests. Traditional seasonal rentals as defined in Chapter 246 or bed
and breakfast establishments, licensed by the City and intended to
accommodate not more than 18 persons shall not be considered to be resort
houses.
SEASONAL RENTAL — Shall have the same meaning as that of "short-term
rental" but, in addition thereto, shall encompass any rental between May 1
through September 30.
SHORT-TERM RENTAL — Any lease or tenancy, whether written or oral for
any term of less than 175 consecutive days where the tenant(s) has/have
a permanent place of residence elsewhere, and shall include any tenancy
between May 1 and September 30.
TENANT — Any person who occupies any rental unit, as a named lessee,
pursuant to the terms of a lease agreement, whether written or oral, or
who occupies a rental unit pursuant to permission or license of any kind
granted by an owner or owner's agent. The term shall be construed liberally
to include not only tenants but guests and occupants. The term shall also
include subtenants.
VISITOR(S) — A person or persons who, on a temporary or occasional basis,
visit(s) a rental unit at the express or implied invitation of the tenant(s)
but who does/do not reside there or sleep there. The term is the same as
"guests."
§ 246-2. Short title; scope and applicability.
This article shall be known as the "Rental License Regulations" of the City.
A. Introduction. All rental properties, or properties containing rental
units, including but not limited to resort houses, are subject to licensing
and inspection by the City. All such properties, in addition to the
requirement of being licensed and inspected by the City, are also
required to be registered pursuant to the Landlord Registration Act.
Registration applies to all rental properties, except those containing
one or two rental units which are owner-occupied. Multiple dwellings
containing three or more units, regardless or whether or not any of the
units are rentals, must be registered with the State of New Jersey.
§ 246-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-2
1:685
§ 246-3. Policy statement.
B. License requirements. This chapter is applicable to each and every
rental unit or rental property which shall include:
(1) A property with one or more rental units including owner-occupied
properties with one or more rental units; and including duplex and
triplex properties;
(2) Each condominium unit which is rented but excluding
condominium motels.
(3) Resort houses.
C. Registration requirements. In addition to the licensing requirements
imposed by this chapter, certain properties must also be registered with
either the City or the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Landlord
Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8-27 to 46:8-37. That law requires:
(1) Registration of all rental properties, except for owner-occupied
properties which contain one or two rental units in accordance with
the following:
(a) Properties containing less than three rental units, except for
owner-occupied properties containing one or two unit(s), must
be registered with the City Clerk or the designee of the City
Clerk.
(b) Those properties containing three or more rental units must be
registered with the State of New Jersey.
(c) All multiple dwellings containing three or more units,
regardless of whether or not any of the units are rentals, must
be registered with the state.
(2) This requirement is addressed further in § 246-4 of this chapter.
D. Inspection requirements. In addition to the licensing and registration
requirements applicable to rental properties, certain other properties,
even though they are not subject to the licensing requirements of
Chapter 246, are nonetheless subject to periodic inspection by the City
pursuant to Chapter 175 of the Brigantine City Code. The frequency of
such inspections is determined by New Jersey State Law.
A. It is the stated policy of the City that every property containing rental
unit(s) within the City, including one or two rental units that are owneroccupied,
shall be required to submit to inspection and be licensed in
order to be leased or occupied.
B. It is the opinion of the City Council, the legislative body of the City, that
such licensing is necessary for the protection of the public; to establish
the location of all such rental units in order to protect and promote the
enforcement of land use ordinances, such as zoning, site plan,
§ 246-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-3
1:686
§ 246-4. Dual responsibilities of owners of rental units.
The owner of rental unit(s) has a dual responsibility as follows:
subdivision, and other similar ordinances of the City; to provide
emergency response teams with adequate knowledge of the location
of such units within the City in order to assist in timely, efficient and
appropriate response in event of an emergency affecting such property
or the occupants thereof; for the purpose of assisting in the periodic
review and updating of the Municipal Master Plan; in order to assist
the City in providing adequate facilities involving sewer, water, fire
protection, solid waste disposal and the disposal of recyclable items
and materials and related services; and otherwise to promote the public
health, safety and welfare.
C. Moreover, as recognized by the New Jersey State Legislature in
enacting N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12(n) many municipalities in this state, and
the residents thereof, have experienced disturbances, damages and
public expense resulting from carelessly granted and inadequately
supervised rentals to irresponsible tenants by inept or indifferent
landlords. The stated purpose of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12(n) was to enable
municipal governing bodies to take effective action to assure that
excesses, when they occur, shall not be repeated, and that landlords be
held to sufficient standards of responsibility. Therefore, to preserve the
peace and tranquility of such communities, including the City
Brigantine, for permanent residents, and for other owner-occupants as
well as other tenants and vacationers, and to maintain viability as
vacation spots for citizens of New Jersey as well as other states and
counties it is necessary and desirable that those communities have
adequate means to curb and discourage those occasional excesses
arising from irresponsible rentals, including seasonal rentals.
D. The New Jersey Legislature, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1(n) specifically
authorized municipalities to license and regulate the "rental of real
property for a term of less than 175 consecutive days for residential
purposes by a person having a permanent place of residence
elsewhere."
E. Furthermore, most, if not all, such rental units are located within
residential neighborhoods in the City and abut owner-occupied homes
and residences and many such rental units have an immediate and
harmful negative impact upon the immediate neighbors and interfere
with the peace and tranquility that such neighbors have every right to
expect. Past experience indicates that such problems are especially
associated with "short-term rentals" that is, rentals of less than 175
days.
A. Each rental property containing one or more rental units must be
licensed and inspected, at least annually, by the City in accordance with
this chapter; and
§ 246-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-4
1:687
§ 246-5. License requirements for all rental properties.
§ 246-6. Procedure for obtaining license.
B. Each property containing one or more rental units must, in addition, be
registered in accordance with the Landlord Registration Act, N.J.S.A.
46:8-27 to 46:8-37 as follows:
(1) Owner-occupied one or two rental units: No registration is
required.
(2) Non-owner-occupied one or two rental units: Must be registered (in
addition to being licensed and inspected) with the Municipal Clerk
or designee.
(3) Properties containing three or more rental units must be registered
with the State of New Jersey.
C. As an accommodation to City owners, and to the extent permitted by
law, the application for a rental license shall contain the information
required by the Landlord Registration Act and, when completed and
filed by the owner, shall be indexed and made available for public
inspection as required by said law. This dual filing accommodation shall
not; however, relieve the owner of any other duty or responsibility
imposed by the Landlord Registration Act as the same may be amended
or supplemented.
A. All rental properties located within the City shall be required to be
inspected and licensed annually by the City. In addition, all such rental
properties shall also be registered with either the City Clerk (or
designee) or the State of New Jersey as required in § 246-4A(2). No
rental property or rental unit shall be leased or occupied unless a rental
license has been issued for the property or rental unit as provided in
this chapter. This provision does not apply to hotels or motels.
B. All rental units shall be licensed by the City. Application for a rental
license shall be made on forms which shall be provided for that purpose
by the City Licensing Clerk. Such licensing shall be required on an
annual basis; that is, at least once in every consecutive twelve-month
period or term as provided herein. An application form shall be
required for each rental unit and a rental license shall be required for
each individual rental unit.
A. The owner of a rental unit shall submit a license application together
with the required fee to the Licensing Clerk. Such application shall be
on forms supplied by the City. No inspection of the rental unit shall be
conducted by the City until such time as the application is deemed
complete by the City and the owner pays all required fees.
B. Upon the filing of an initial application for a rental license, the rental
unit shall be inspected prior to the issuance of the rental license and
§ 246-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-6
1:688
§ 246-7. Conditions for obtaining license.
In order to qualify for a rental license, the following requirements shall be
met by the applicant or applicant's agent:
§ 246-8. Denial of issuance or renewal of rental license.
§ 246-9. Grounds for denial of rental license or any renewal.
Any application for a rental license, including any renewal thereof, may be
denied and any rental license that has been issued pursuant to this chapter
may be revoked or suspended for any of the following causes:
such license shall be issued only in the event that the rental unit passes
such inspection in accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
A. An application on a form supplied by the City shall be completed and
shall contain all of the information, including any attachments which
may be required.
B. All municipal taxes, water and sewer charges and any other municipal
assessments are paid on a current basis, that is, paid through the tax
quarter immediately preceding the initial application or any renewal
thereof.
C. Prior to the issuance of a rental license, on either an initial application
or on any renewal application, the rental unit must first be inspected by
the City and pass such inspection. The procedure for the scheduling of
such inspections shall be in accord with the procedure set forth in
§ 246-16 of this chapter.
D. If the address of the record owner of the property for which a rental
license is sought is not located in Atlantic County, New Jersey, the
owner shall designate in writing an Agent or managing agent who
resides in Atlantic County who is authorized to accept notices to issue
receipts therefore and to accept service of process on behalf of the
record owner.
A. The City may deny the issuance of a license or may refuse to renew a
rental license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. A rental license shall not be issued for any property for which a rental
license has been suspended or revoked until the period of suspension or
revocation has expired, regardless of any change in ownership of the
property.
A. Any fraud, material misrepresentation, or false statement contained in
the application for license.
B. Any fraud, material misrepresentation, or false statement made in
connection with the leasing of any rental unit.
C. Any violation of this chapter.
§ 246-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-9
1:689
§ 246-10. Appeal.
§ 246-11. Notice of appeal; contents.
The notice of appeal to be filed with the City Clerk shall be in writing and
shall contain the following:
D. Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.
E. Failure of the applicant or licensee to comply with the conditions
required for the issuance of a rental license as set forth in this chapter.
F. Any grounds which would justify the revocation or suspension of a
rental license as specified in Article II of this chapter shall also be cause
for the denial or any renewal of a rental license.
A. Any Person who is denied the issuance of a rental license or any
renewal thereof, or who has had a rental license revoked or suspended
may appeal such determination administratively to a Hearing Officer
appointed by the City in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Article III of this chapter. Such appeal shall be filed not later than 45
days following notification of City action.
B. Such appeal shall be in writing, with the original filed with the City
Clerk, and a copy filed at the same time with the Licensing Clerk. Upon
receipt of such appeal, the City Clerk shall notify the Business
Administrator and the City Solicitor of such filing and the City Clerk
shall forward a copy of the appeal notice to the Hearing Officer, who
shall schedule a hearing on such appeal not sooner than 10 nor later
than 30 business days following filing. Following a hearing, the Hearing
Officer shall submit his/her findings and determination to the City
Council following the same general procedures outlined in Article III of
this chapter. The Hearing Officer shall transmit his findings of fact and
conclusions of law to the City Council within 15 days of the conclusion
of the hearing. City Council shall make the final determination by
resolution and may, in its discretion, accept, reject, or modify the
findings and recommendations of the Hearing Officer.
C. The Municipal Solicitor or his designee shall represent the City at the
hearing of the appeal.
A. Name, address, telephone number and email address of the person(s)
filing the appeal;
B. Name, address, telephone number and email address of the managing
agent, if any;
C. Location of the rental property specifying block, lot number and street
address;
§ 246-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-11
1:690
§ 246-12. Term.
D. Number of rental units at that location licensed or intended to be
licensed;
E. Specifying the specific grounds for the appeal.
A. The rental license term shall commence on the day that the property
passes inspection required by this chapter and shall expire the
following year on the last day of the month in which the initial
scheduled inspection was scheduled. For example, if the initial
scheduled inspection occurred on February 10 of a given year, the
rental license shall expire at the end of February of the following year.
The initial license term may be for less than 12 months depending upon
the date of submission of a completed application, the payment of all
fees and other charges and a passing inspection of the rental property
by the City.
B. Initial application. When the Licensing Clerk deems an application for a
rental license complete, the rental unit shall be inspected and the
owner shall be informed of the scheduled date for inspection, which
shall be the initial scheduled inspection date.
C. If the rental property passes such inspection, the rental license shall be
issued and dated as of the date the rental unit passes inspection but
shall expire the following year on the last day of the month in which the
initial scheduled inspection occurred as provided in Subsection B,
above.
D. If the rental unit fails inspection, a reinspection will be scheduled.
Additional reinspections may be scheduled as circumstances at the
rental unit may require. A rental license shall be issued and dated as of
the date the rental unit passes the required inspection but will
nevertheless expire the following year on the last day of the month in
which the initial scheduled inspection occurred.
E. Reinspection. Should the rental property fail inspection, either on an
initial application for licensing or upon a renewal application, the owner
shall be required to address to the City's satisfaction the reasons for the
failed inspection and the rental property will be reinspected before a
rental license is issued by the City and delivered to the owner or
owner's agent.
F. Possession of license required. No rental unit shall be occupied (other
than by the owner) until such time as a valid rental license is issued by
the City and in the possession of the owner or the owner's agent. On an
initial application for a rental license, or pending any renewal
application an owner, agent, or realtor may offer the rental unit for
lease and may negotiate for the lease thereof but the owner, agent or
realtor must condition all such negotiations and any lease agreement,
whether oral or written, on the owner's possession of a valid rental
§ 246-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-12
1:691
§ 246-13. Transferability.
In the event that a property containing one or more licensed rental units is
sold, assigned or transferred during the license year, the rental license shall
be transferable to the new owner.
§ 246-14. Inspection; frequency.
Each rental unit shall be inspected at least once in each license year.
§ 246-15. Additional inspections.
Rental units with an occupancy of 12 or more, as provided for in § 246-26,
may be inspected prior to a new tenant occupying the rental unit. The
owner shall provide notice to the City Licensing Official, not less than 48
hours prior to, of the new tenant move-in date. The rental unit may be
inspected pursuant to this chapter prior to the new tenant occupying the
rental unit to ensure the rental unit is complying with all ordinances and
state regulations. The owner shall be required to cure any violations of state
or municipal regulations identified by the City during the inspection prior to
the new tenant occupying the property.
§ 246-16. Nature of inspection.
Such inspection shall be carried out in accordance with the following:
license for the subject premises before any actual occupancy of the
rental unit may occur. If a rental unit fails the initial inspection and does
not pass a reinspection before the license expires, such rental unit may
not be occupied until such time as it passes inspection and the owner is
actually in possession of a valid, current rental license.
G. Expiration of rental licenses. All rental licenses shall expire on the last
day of the month of the initial scheduled inspection Date for renewal of
rental license.
A. All rental units, including those units inspected by the State of New
Jersey pursuant to the New Jersey Hotel and Multiple Dwellings Act,164
shall be cyclically inspected by the City's Bureau of Fire Prevention, the
Local Enforcing Agency (LEA) for the New Jersey Division of Fire Safety
to determine compliance with the Uniform Fire Safety Act of the State
of New Jersey and the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC)
to the extent that same has been adopted by the City, as well as any
other code or codes in effect and applicable at the time of any
inspection.
B. Cross reference: Units in a building subject to the New Jersey Hotel and
Multiple Dwellings Act which are not rented and which are owneroccupied
shall be subject to cyclical inspection by the City's Bureau of
164. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.
§ 246-12 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-16
1:692
§ 246-17. Unoccupied unit(s).
In the event that a rental unit fails to pass inspection, such unit or units shall
not thereafter be occupied and the owner of the property, the managing
agent or rental agent shall not rent or lease such rental unit, nor permit any
tenant to occupy such rental unit until the unit has passed inspection.
§ 246-18. Occupied unit(s).
Whenever a rental unit is occupied by a tenant at the time of the inspection
and the rental unit does not pass inspection, said unit may continue to
be occupied provided that all such repairs or corrections are made within
30 days of the original inspection. If the nature of the deficiency is such
that continued occupancy poses an imminent threat to the safety of the
occupants or others, then the appropriate officials may preclude further
occupancy of the rental unit until such time as the repairs are satisfactorily
made, or the officials may, in the exercise of their sound discretion, reduce
the time for making necessary repairs from 30 days to a lesser time
depending on the nature and extent of repairs to be made and the nature of
the threat. In the event that the necessary repairs are not made within the
time period specified herein, then the owner and any tenant occupying the
unit thereafter shall be deemed in violation of this article and subject to the
penalty provisions hereof. Each and every day that the violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 246-19. Reinspection.
§ 246-20. License suspended pending repairs.
Upon reinspection of a rental unit, if it is determined that the neccessary
repairs have not been made within the time period specified in § 246-19,
above, then in such event, the rental license shall be suspended and remain
Fire Safety, the Local Enforcing Agency (LEA) for the New Jersey
Division of Fire Safety in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 21
of the Brigantine City Code.
A. Any rental unit that does not pass inspection shall be subject to
reinspection at the expiration of 30 days, or upon the expiration of such
shorter time, if applicable. For good cause, the thirty-day period may be
extended by the Fire Inspector, with the consent of the Fire Official as
herein provided.
B. The Fire Official may grant extensions of time whenever he shall
determine, that despite diligent effort, compliance cannot be
accomplished within the time specified in the notice. No extension shall
be granted unless it is requested in writing by the owner. A request for
extension shall set forth the work which has been accomplished, the
work that remains, the reason why an extension is necessary and the
date by which the work will be completed. [Source: N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.10(d)]
§ 246-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-20
1:693
suspended until the necessary repairs have been made and the property
reinspected.
§ 246-21. Evidence of license; decal to be affixed to each rental
unit.
In addition to the issuance of a rental license each licensee shall be issued
a decal, which shall be permanently affixed to the main door through which
access is gained to the rental unit, or in a window in the rental unit, in
such a way that the decal is visible from the exterior of the premises in
which the rental unit is located. The failure to affix the decal as required by
this section shall constitute a violation thereof. The absence of a decal shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the rental unit has not been issued a
rental license.
§ 246-22. Occupancy prohibited.
No person, other than the owner, shall hereafter occupy, or attempt to
occupy, any rental unit, nor shall the owner, managing agent or rental agent
permit occupancy or attempted occupancy of any rental unit within the City
unless the same has been registered, inspected and licensed in accordance
with this chapter.
§ 246-23. Landlord prohibited from leasing unlicensed rental unit.
Any landlord who leases a rental unit while such unit is unlicensed or who
represents to any person, including any tenant, realtor, attorney or other
agent that such unit is properly licensed, shall be deemed in violation of this
article and subject to the fines and penalties herein. Each day that a tenant
shall remain in occupancy of such unlicensed rental unit shall be considered
a separate and distinct violation of this chapter for which the landlord shall
be responsible.
§ 246-24. Occupancy by tenant when unit unlicensed.
Any tenant who knowingly leases and/or occupies an unlicensed rental unit
shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and subject to the fines and
penalties included herein. Each day such tenant shall remain in occupancy
of such unlicensed premises shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation of this chapter.
§ 246-25. Agent prohibited from renting unlicensed rental unit.
Any realtor, attorney or other person who knowingly acts as a
representative of the landlord, tenant or both in order to effectuate the
leasing and/or occupancy of an unlicensed rental unit, shall be deemed
in violation of this chapter and subject to the fines and penalties herein
provided. The City will, on request and without charge, provide to each real
estate office a list of all rental units which have been licensed.
§ 246-20 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-26
1:694
§ 246-26. Limitations on occupancy.
Each owner granted a license pursuant to this section shall be permitted
to lease or rent the rental unit to a maximum specified number of tenants
and occupants, including minor children, which number shall not exceed the
number which has been computed in accordance with the following:
§ 246-27. Maximum number of occupants not to exceed 24.
§ 246-28. Maximum number of occupants; posting.
The maximum number of occupants shall be posted in each rental unit in a
location visible to any occupant of the rental unit. It shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to occupy the rental unit in excess of the maximum
number permitted. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to
the penalty provisions hereof.
§ 246-29. Owner responsibilities; state and municipal registration;
maintain tenant register; responsibility form.
A. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least the minimum square footage as calculated by the City
officials using the standards established by the BOCA National Building
Code, 2018 Edition.
B. Rental units shall not be occupied by more than the maximum number
of occupants as determined in accordance with Subsection A above, but
subject to the provisions of § 246-27.
C. Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens, nonhabitable spaces and interior
public areas shall not be occupied for sleeping purposes.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, or any other law or
ordinance, or any other rule, regulation or code to the contrary, and
notwithstanding any method of calculating occupancy authorized by
this chapter, no rental property, inclusive of all rental units contained
therein, shall have an authorized aggregate maximum permitted
occupancy greater than 24 occupants, as provided in the Hotel/Motel
Dwelling Law, N.J.S.A. 55:13A-I, et seq.
B. For purposes of calculating occupancy capacity, each rental unit within
a condominium form of ownership is considered a separate rental
property. (New Jersey Condominium Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1, et seq.)
A. Every owner of a rental property or rental unit shall:
(1) Comply with the registration requirements of the Landlord
Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8-27, et seq., as the same may be
amended and supplemented. A completed license application under
this chapter shall also serve as a registration pursuant to the New
Jersey Landlord Registration Act and the City shall index and file a
copy of such license application as required by law. The owner
§ 246-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-29
1:695
§ 246-30. Tenant responsibilities.
Each tenant shall:
must, however, fully comply with any other requirements of the
New Jersey Landlord Registration Act as the same may be amended
or supplemented.
(2) Comply with New Jersey State law which requires that owners of
rental units register such units with either the Municipal Clerk or
with the State of New Jersey as follows:
(a) Owners of one and two rental units which are owner occupied
are exempt from registration under the Landlord Registration
Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8-27 et seq., but shall be required to be
licensed by the City pursuant to this chapter.
(b) Owners of one and two rental units which are not owner
occupied are required to register such rental units with the
City Clerk or the Clerk's designee under the Landlord
Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8-27 et seq., and shall, in addition,
be required to be licensed by the City pursuant to this chapter.
(c) Owners of three or more rental units shall be required to
register such units with the State of New Jersey, Department of
Community Affairs, Bureau of Housing Inspection, or such
other or additional department, division or agency as may
hereafter be designated by the State of New Jersey. In addition,
owners of rental properties containing three or more rental
units shall also apply for a rental license from the City in
accordance with this chapter.
B. Every owner of a rental property or unit shall have the following further
duty and responsibility:
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the owner or the owner's agent or
managing agent to register all tenants in the tenant register and to
give a copy of the tenant register to the tenant(s) and to advise the
tenant(s) of the requirement that the tenant register be maintained
on the rental or leased premises at all times.
(2) The duty of the owner or managing agent under § 246-29B(1) may
be discharged through a realtor or other rental agent provided that
such realtor or rental agent agrees, in writing, to discharge that
responsibility.
A. Complete and sign the tenant register in accordance with this chapter
and maintain and safeguard such tenant register in the rental unit at all
times;
B. Immediately produce the tenant register, at all times, upon the request
of City Officials or employees including the Chief of Police or any officer
§ 246-29 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-30
1:696
§ 246-31. Types of fees.
The City shall charge a license fee and a separate fire inspection fee. There
is no separate fee for registration of a rental unit pursuant to the New
Jersey Landlord Registration Act, N.J.S.A. 46:8-27, et seq. For administrative
purposes, bills for license fees and fire inspection fees may be issued in the
year preceding the effective date of a fee but shall nevertheless reflect the
amount of the fee to be charged for the year designated.
§ 246-32. Time for payment of fees; late payments; refunds
prohibited.
All license and inspection fees shall be payable to the City as follows:
of the Brigantine Police Department or any representative of the
licensing, inspection or Code Enforcement departments or divisions
of the City of Brigantine or a representative of the Atlantic County
Department of Health;
C. Be responsible for maintaining the rental unit in such manner so as to
avoid and prevent said premises from becoming loud or disorderly or a
nuisance so as to interfere with the peace and tranquility and quality of
life of other nearby residents and visitors. Loud, offensive and
disorderly conduct may include excessive noise, unruly behavior,
obscene language, fighting, littering, parking of vehicles on lawns and
on neighboring property, public urination, poor maintenance of the
property and grounds and violation of trash collection and recycling
ordinances.
D. Be responsible for the proper storage and disposal of solid waste and
recyclable materials and to do so in accordance with applicable City
ordinances;
E. Comply strictly with the maximum occupancy limits established for
each rental unit and shall prevent occupancy by more than the
maximum number of occupants permitted.
A. Initial license application. All fees shall be payable at the time the initial
license application is submitted.
B. Renewal applications. A renewal application and invoice will be mailed
to each current license holder during the last three months of the
calendar year preceding renewal. Such application together with all
fees must be paid not later than December 31 of the year preceding
expiration of the license. No inspection of the rental unit(s) will be
conducted, however, until the completed renewal application is
returned to and all required fees are paid to the Licensing Clerk.
C. Late payment. If all fees are not paid by December 31, an additional late
payment fee of $50 shall be due and payable together with all other
fees. To avoid any late payment fee, the fee (and any renewal
application) must be received by the License Clerk by December 31, or
§ 246-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-32
1:697
§ 246-33. Enforcement.
The provisions of any of the several articles of this chapter shall be enforced
by any one or more of the following: the Chief of the Brigantine Police
Department or his/her designee, the Construction Code Official, the Fire
Official, the Licensing Clerk, Code Enforcement Official and Zoning Official
of the City, any employee designated by the City Council, and the Atlantic
County Department of Health.
§ 246-34. Rules and regulations.
City Council is authorized to adopt, by resolution, rules and regulations
pertaining to the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 246-35. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to one or more of the following:
§ 246-36. Violations occurring within one year.
Any person convicted of violating this chapter within one year of the date
of a previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation, shall
be sentenced by the Court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the Court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for
a violation of the chapter, but shall be calculated separately from the fine
imposed for the violation of the chapter. (See N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.)
the next business day thereafter if December 31 falls on a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday or it must be postmarked not later than
December 31.
A. For a first offense:
(1) A fine not to exceed the sum of $1,000; and/or
(2) Incarceration for a term not to exceed 90 days; and/or
(3) A period of community service for a period not exceeding 90 days.
B. For a second or subsequent offense:
(1) A fine in the minimum amount of $100 and not to exceed the sum of
$2,000; and/or
(2) Incarceration for a term not to exceed 90 days; and/or
(3) By a period of community service for a period not exceeding 90
days.
§ 246-32 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-37
1:698
§ 246-37. Additional penalties.
The foregoing penalties shall be exclusive of, and in addition to, any other
penalty or penalties provided in this chapter and the penalties set forth in
N.J.S.A. 46:8-35, of the Landlord Registration Act; including but not limited
to:
A. Any administrative penalties contained in:
(1) The Uniform Fire Safety Act; or
(2) The Uniform Construction Code (UCC), the International Property
Maintenance Code (IPMC) or any other code now in force in the
City or which may hereinafter be adopted by the City.
§ 246-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-37
1:699

ARTICLE II
Revocation or Suspension; Other Disciplinary Action; Procedure;
Conditional Renewals
§ 246-38. Grounds for revocation, suspension or probation.
A. The City may, administratively, decline to issue or renew a rental license
in accordance with subsection § 246-10 hereof. An owner shall be
entitled to appeal any such decision by the filing of an appeal within the
time permitted and in accordance with the procedures set forth in
subparagraphs § 246-10 and § 246-11.
B. The City may also revoke or suspend an issued and outstanding rental
license, or place such license in a probationary status. This action shall
be in addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, in accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:52-2 and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2, upon the
happening of one or more of the following:
(1) Conviction of the owner(s), or any of them if there is more than one,
of a violation of this chapter in the municipal court or other court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2) Following a determination by the City after a hearing that a
violation of this chapter has occurred.
(3) If, in any twenty-four-month period, there shall be four or more
complaints, on separate occasions, of conduct upon or in proximity
to any rental premises, and attributable to the acts or incitements
of any of the tenants of those premises, and such complaints have
been substantiated by prosecution and conviction in any court of
competent jurisdiction as a violation of any provision of Title 2C of
the New Jersey Statutes or any municipal ordinance governing
disorderly conduct.
(4) A pattern of permitting the rental unit(s) to be occupied by more
than the maximum number of occupants as defined herein.
(5) Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.
(6) A false, misleading, or fraudulent statement made in connection
with the registration, licensing or inspection of a rental unit or
units, under this chapter.
(7) A pattern of conduct which results in creating, maintaining,
permitting or suffering the existence of any of the following
conditions at or about the rental unit:
(a) A nuisance as that term is defined by N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12
provided, however, that a conviction of such person or persons
§ 246-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-38
1:701
§ 246-39. Complaints; filing.
A written complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a rental license
shall be filed with the City Clerk by any person mentioned as an
Enforcement Official in article i of this chapter. The complaint shall be
sufficiently specific to inform the landlord/owner - licensee of the charges
pending and shall state the particulars of any substantiated violations
underlying the charges. The complaint may be filed on the basis of
information and belief and the complainant need not rely on personal
knowledge or information.
§ 246-40. Procedure upon filing.
Upon the filing of such written complaint, the City Clerk shall promptly
follow the same procedure set forth in § 246-60.
under that statute shall not be required in order for the City to
take action relating to the rental license under this section;
(b) The failure to comply with any directive of the City concerning
the abatement of conduct prohibited by Subsection B(7)(a),
above.
(c) The failure to comply with City ordinances pertaining to the
proper accumulation and disposal of solid waste (trash) and
recyclable material or otherwise allowing such materials to
accumulate in such a way as to be unsanitary or unsightly.
(8) If the licensee, who is an owner of the property affected by the
license or upon which the licensed business or activity is
conducted, has failed to pay the taxes water, sewer or other
municipal charges due on the property for at least three
consecutive quarters.
(9) Any other grounds that would be a basis for denial or nonrenewal of
a rental license shall also constitute grounds for the revocation or
suspension of a rental license or the placing of such license in a
probationary status.
C. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation or suspension
of a rental license to demonstrate that the owner has taken appropriate
action and has made a good faith effort to abate the conditions or
circumstances giving rise to the revocation or suspension proceeding
including but not limited to the institution of legal action against the
tenant(s), occupant(s) or guests for recovery of the premises; eviction of
the tenant(s) or otherwise. Evidence of such actions on the part of the
owner or managing agent, however, shall not preclude the City from
placing the rental license in probationary status as provided in this
chapter, nor shall it preclude the City from instituting action pursuant
to Article IV of this chapter.
§ 246-38 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-41
1:702
§ 246-41. Hearing Officer; recusal.
The hearing required by this section shall be held before the City Hearing
Officer, unless such Hearing Officer shall recuse him/herself, in which event
the City Council shall appoint another independent hearing officer to
preside in the matter.
§ 246-42. Hearing.
The Hearing Officer shall transmit his findings of fact and conclusions of
law to the City Council within 15 days of the conclusion of the hearing.
City Council shall then review the matter and may accept, reject, or modify
the recommendations of the Hearing Officer based on the documentary
evidence and written findings of fact and conclusion of law submitted by the
Hearing Officer, and render a decision dismissing the complaint, revoking
or suspending the rental license, or determining that the rental license shall
not be renewed or reissued for one or more subsequent license years. The
rental license may also be placed in probationary status as provided herein.
§ 246-43. Record of hearing and proceedings.
A verbatim record shall be made of the hearing. All witnesses shall be
sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of evidence shall not apply and
the evidential rules and burden of proof shall be the same as those which
generally govern and are applied in administrative hearings. Any person
shall be entitled to obtain a transcript of such hearing at his sole cost and
expense.
§ 246-44. Appearance by Municipal Solicitor.
The Municipal Solicitor shall appear and prosecute on behalf of the
complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to this section.
§ 246-45. Recommendations of Hearing Officer as to probationary
status.
In lieu of a revocation or suspension of a rental license, the Hearing Officer
may recommend placing the rental license in a probationary status. The
Hearing Officer may also recommend specific terms of probation to be
imposed, if any. City Council shall make the final determination by
resolution and may, in its discretion, accept, reject, or modify the findings
and recommendations of the Hearing Officer. Once imposed, the
probationary status shall remain in effect for the remainder of that license
term and may be made applicable to the succeeding renewal term.
§ 246-46. Terms of probationary status of rental license.
The terms of the probationary status shall be specifically set forth in a
resolution of City Council, a copy of which shall be served upon the owner,
managing agent, and rental agent. Such notice shall be served personally
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or both. If service is made by
§ 246-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-46
1:703
certified mail, return receipt requested, it shall also be sent simultaneously
by first class mail. Mail to the owner and managing agent shall be at the
address indicated on the rental license application. Copies shall also be sent
to the names and addresses appearing on the City's tax records if different
from the names and addresses appearing on the rental license application.
Copies shall also be provided to the Chief of Police, Code Enforcement
Officer, Fire Official and Construction Code Official.
§ 246-47. Modification of probationary conditions.
The City Council may on its own initiative or at the request of an owner,
managing agent, tenant or occupant of the rental unit modify the terms
of such probationary status at any time during the probationary term. If
modified, it shall be by resolution, copies of which shall be served upon such
persons and in such manner as specified in the preceding subsection.
§ 246-48. Violation of conditions of probationary status.
The violation of any term or condition of the probation by the owner,
managing agent, tenant or occupant, shall be cause for the immediate
suspension or revocation of the rental license. Prior to suspension or
revocation, the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing conducted in
accordance with the provisions of § 246-42.
§ 246-49. Renewal of license in probationary status.
Any rental license which is in probationary status may be renewed for
the succeeding license term conditioned upon compliance by the owner,
managing agent, tenant and occupants with the terms and conditions of
probation.
§ 246-50. Failure to comply.
The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of probation by the
owner, managing agent, tenant or occupants shall be cause for the
immediate suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of the rental license.
Prior to suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal, the licensee shall be
entitled to a hearing conducted in accordance with the provisions of
§ 246-42.
§ 246-51. Rental license deemed severable for disciplinary action.
A rental license shall be deemed severable with respect to the revocation,
suspension or disciplinary actions instituted pursuant to this chapter.
Accordingly, the revocation or suspension or other disciplinary action
involving a rental license may be limited to one or more rental units or
may apply to all rental units in a property. If limited to less than all of the
rental units, such License shall remain in full force and effect as to any and
all rental units not involved in the revocation, suspension or disciplinary
proceedings.
§ 246-46 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-52
1:704
§ 246-52. Proceedings for revocation or suspension.
Any complaint seeking the suspension or revocation of a rental license shall
be filed by the City and served upon the owner or managing agent by
October 30th in order to have any effect on the current license year and the
rental season immediately following. If such a complaint is filed after said
date and if the charges are sustained, the revocation or suspension of the
rental license shall not impact upon the rental season immediately following
but shall affect the next ensuing rental season.
§ 246-53. Fines and penalties.
Any person, firm, association or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty provisions
set forth in § 246-35 and § 246-36, including those additional enhanced
penalties for repeat violations as specified in said sections and subsections.
§ 246-54. Penal and administrative penalty.
The foregoing penalties shall be in addition to any other penalty provided
in this chapter and shall be in addition to those penalties set forth in
N.J.S.A. 46:8-35. Specifically, the penal penalties shall be in addition to the
administrative penalties set forth in this article and shall not be in place
thereof.
§ 246-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-54
1:705

ARTICLE III
Posting of Bond Against Consequences of Tenants Behavior
§ 246-55. Findings.
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12n authorizes municipalities to enact an ordinance holding
landlords of rentals to standards of responsibility in the selection of tenants
and supervision of the rental premises. The City Council has determined
that there is a need for such an ordinance in the City of Brigantine.
§ 246-56. Definitions.
As used in this article of this chapter:
HEARING OFFICER — A person designated pursuant to this section to
hear and determine proceedings pursuant to this section and its enabling
legislation N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12n, et seq. As required by state statute, said
Hearing Officer shall be a licensed New Jersey attorney who shall not be an
owner or lessee of any real property within the City of Brigantine, nor hold
any interest in the assets of or profits arising from the ownership or lease of
such property.
LANDLORD — The person or persons who own or purport to own any
building in which there is rented or offered for rent housing space for living
or dwelling under either a written or oral lease, which building contains no
more than four dwelling units. In the case of a mobile home park, "landlord"
shall mean the owner of an individual dwelling unit within the mobile home
park. The limitation of not more than four dwelling units is limited solely to
the provisions of this Article 4 pertaining to the requirement for posting of
a bond by landlords under certain circumstances.
SEASONAL RENTAL — Any rental of residential accommodations for a term
of less than one year and including any part of the period extending from
May 1 to September 30. It shall also mean and include any tenancy, whether
written or oral, for a term of less than 175 consecutive days for residential
purposes by a person having a permanent place of residence elsewhere.
SUBSTANTIATED COMPLAINT — A complaint which may form the basis
for proceedings in accordance with the authority conferred by N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.12(q). A substantiated complaint shall be one in which there was
prosecution and conviction in any Court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 246-57. Duty and responsibility of landlord.
Landlords of rentals shall be held to standards of responsibility in the
selection of tenants and supervision of the rental premises. Under certain
circumstances, a landlord shall be required to post an adequate bond
against the consequences of disorderly behavior of their tenants as
hereinafter provided; and in the case of subsequent violations forfeit such
bond, in whole or in part, in consequences of such behavior.
§ 246-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-58
1:707
§ 246-58. Substantiated complaints; number required; procedure.
Action for proceedings. If in any twenty-four-month period there shall be
four or more complaints, on separate occasions, of conduct upon or in
proximity to any rental premises and attributable to the acts or incitements
of any of the tenants of those premises, and such complaints have been
substantiated by prosecution and conviction in any Court of competent
jurisdiction, as a violation of any provision of Title 2C of the New Jersey
Statutes or any municipal ordinance governing disorderly conduct, any
person mentioned as an enforcement official in Article I of this chapter may
institute proceedings to require the landlord of those premises to post a
bond against the consequences of future incidents of the same character.
[Source: N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12q.]
—
§ 246-59. Procedure upon filing of complaint.
Upon the filing of such written complaint, the City Clerk shall promptly:
A. Consult with the Municipal Prosecutor and the Hearing Officer to
determine a date when the required hearing shall be held which shall
not be sooner than 30 days from the date of mailing as hereinafter
provided;
B. Send a copy of the filed complaint to the landlord/owner-licensee and
the managing agent, if any, together with a copy of the notice of the
date, time, and place of the hearing. Such hearing shall be held in the
Municipal Building, Municipal Court or other public place within the
City of Brigantine. Said hearing shall be held no sooner than 30 days
from the date upon which the notice is served or mailed.
C. The complaint and hearing notice shall be sent certified mail with
return receipt requested and simultaneously by regular first class mail
to the landlord/owner-licensee and the managing agent, if any, at the
address indicated on the rental license application. Such notices shall
also be sent to the owner-licensee at the address appearing on the City
tax records provided that such address is different from the address
appearing on the rental license application.
D. A copy of the complaint and notice of hearing date shall be provided to
the Hearing Officer, Municipal Prosecutor, City Licensing Clerk and the
Business Administrator.
E. In addition to the complaint and notice of hearing date, the ownerlicensee
or landlord, and managing agent, if any, shall be informed of
the particulars of the substantiated complaints upon which the
proceedings are based.
§ 246-58 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-60
1:708
§ 246-60. Hearing.
At the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall give full hearing to both the
complaint of the municipality and to any evidence in contradiction or
mitigation that the landlord, if present or represented and offering such
evidence, may present. The Hearing Officer may consider, to the extent
deemed relevant by the Hearing Officer, prior complaints about the
residents of the property, even if those complaints did not result in a
conviction. At the conclusion of the hearing the Hearing Officer shall
determine whether the landlord shall be required to post a bond in
accordance with the terms of this section.
§ 246-61. Requirement for bond.
Any bond required to be posted shall be in accordance with the judgment
of the Hearing Officer, in light of the nature and extent of the offenses
indicated in the substantiated complaint upon which the proceedings are
based. Such bond shall be adequate in the case of subsequent offenses
to make reparation for: damages likely to be caused to public or private
property and damages consequent upon disruption of affected residents'
rights of fair use and quiet possession of their premises; securing the
payment of fines and penalties likely to be levied for such offenses; and
compensating the municipality for the costs of repressing and prosecuting
such incidents of disorderly behavior. In no event shall the bond be in an
amount less than $500 or more than $5,000. The City may enforce the
bond thus required by action in the Superior Court and the City shall be
entitled to an injunction prohibiting the landlord from making or renewing
any lease of the affected premises for residential purposes until that bond
or equivalent security, in satisfactory, form and amount, has been deposited
with the City.
§ 246-62. Duration of bond requirements; discharge; extension or
renewal of bond.
The bond or other security deposited in compliance with this section shall
remain in force for a period of three years. Upon the lapse of the specified
period, the landlord shall be entitled to the discharge thereof, unless prior
thereto further proceedings leading to a forfeiture or partial forfeiture of
the bond or other security shall have been had in which case the security
shall be renewed, in an amount and for a period that shall be specified by
the Hearing Officer.
§ 246-63. Proceedings for forfeiture.
If during the period for which a landlord is required to give security
pursuant to this section, a substantiated complaint is recorded against the
property in question, the City Council or any of the persons authorized in
§ 246-58 may institute proceedings against the landlord for the forfeiture
or partial forfeiture, of the security, or for an extension for the period for
§ 246-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-63
1:709
which such security is required, or for an increase in the amount of security
required, or for any or all of these purposes.
§ 246-64. Proceedings before Hearing Officer.
Any forfeiture or partial forfeiture of security shall be determined by the
Hearing Officer solely in accordance with the amount deemed necessary
to provide for the compensatory purposes set forth in § 246-61 above. Any
decision by the Hearing Officer to increase the amount or extend the period
of the required security shall be determined in light of the same factors
set forth in § 246-61 and shall be taken only to the extent that the nature
of the substantiated complaint or complaints out of which proceedings
arise under this section indicates the appropriateness of such change in
order to carry out the purposes of this section and the enabling legislation
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12n, et seq. The decision of the Hearing Officer in such
circumstances shall be enforceable in the same manner as provided in
§ 246-61.
§ 246-65. Qualifications.
The City Council is hereby authorized to appoint a Hearing Officer who is
qualified pursuant to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.12p, as amended
and supplemented. Such Hearing Officer shall be a licensed attorney of New
Jersey who shall not be an owner or lessee of any property within the City,
nor hold any interest in the assets of or profits arising from the ownership
or lease of such property.
§ 246-66. Appointment; termination.
The appointment of the Hearing Officer shall be by resolution of the City
Council. The appointment shall be for a term specified by the City Council,
but in no event to exceed one year. The Hearing Officer shall be eligible
for reappointment. The services of the Hearing Officer may be terminated
without cause upon the giving of 30 days' notice. The services of the
Hearing Officer may be terminated for cause immediately.
§ 246-67. Compensation.
The Hearing Officer may be compensated by salary or a professional
services contract in the discretion of the City Council.
§ 246-68. Recusal of Hearing Officer.
In the event that the Hearing Officer should deem it necessary to recuse
him/herself, for whatever reason, the City Council shall, by resolution,
appoint another independent hearing officer to preside in the matter. Any
substitute Hearing Officer shall possess all of the qualifications specified in
§ 246-65 and state statute.
§ 246-63 BRIGANTINE CODE § 246-68
1:710
Chapter 248
ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recreational facilities — See Ch. 241.
§ 246-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 246-68
1:711

ARTICLE I
Use of Helmets
[Adopted 12-20-2000 by Ord. No. 31-2000]
§ 248-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall have the following meanings in this article:
ROLLER SKATES — A pair of devices worn on the feet with a set of wheels
attached, regardless of the number or placement of those wheels, and used
to glide or propel the user over the ground.
SCOOTER — A device propelled by muscular power which consists of a
footboard between end wheels and is controlled by an upright steering
handle attached to the front wheel.
SKATEBOARD — A piece of wood, fiberglass or other rigid material,
mounted on skate wheels and propelled by muscular power.
§ 248-2. Helmet required.
Any person under 14 years of age shall not operate by roller skates,
skateboards or scooters along any roadways of the City of Brigantine or on
public property within the City of Brigantine under municipal jurisdiction
unless that person is wearing a properly fitted and fastened helmet which
meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute, the Snell
Memorial Foundation's 1990 Standard for Protective Headgear for Use in
Bicycling, the American Society for Testing and Materials Standard or other
such standard, as appropriate.
§ 248-3. State law controlling.
To the extent that any motor vehicle statute or other state law or regulation
exists concerning the operation of roller skates, skateboards or scooters,
said laws and regulations will remain in full force and effect and the
requirements of this article will be in addition to any requirements of said
statutes or regulations. To the extent that this article is contrary to any
such statute or regulation or any amendment thereto, said state statute
or regulation shall take precedence and control over this article and this
article does not absolve any individual from any of the requirements of any
such statute or regulation.
§ 248-4. Violations and penalties.
A person who violates the provision of this article by failure to wear an
approved helmet shall be warned of the violation by the enforcing official.
The parent or legal guardian of the violator may be fined a maximum of
$25 for a first offense and a maximum of $100 for any subsequent offense.
However, the penalties provided under the provisions of this article for
failure to wear an approved helmet may be waived if the parent or legal
guardian of the violator provides suitable proof that an approved helmet or
§ 248-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 248-4
1:713
appropriate personal protection equipment has been purchased since the
violation occurred.
§ 248-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 248-4
1:714
Chapter 250
SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 250-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTIQUE DEALER — Any person, firm or corporation other than a licensed
pawnbroker or licensed secondhand dealer having a place of business in
the City of Brigantine for purchasing, trading or dealing predominately in
antiques.
ANTIQUES — Very old and authentic objects of enhanced value owing their
increased worth in the unique appeal mainly to the fortuity of survival.
SECONDHAND DEALER — Any person, firm or corporation, other than a
licensed antique dealer, pawnbroker, licensed coin dealer, licensed motor
vehicle or trailer dealer purchasing, trading or dealing in any secondhand
goods whatsoever, said dealers to be designated in the following classes as
set forth below.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Goods which have been previously owned, worn
or used by another, i.e., not new.
§ 250-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of being a secondhand dealer, as defined in the chapter, without
first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided. A separate license
shall be required for each location, place or premises used for the conduct
of the business of being a secondhand dealer. Each location, place or
CLASS A DEALER — A person, firm or corporation, other than a Class
B or Class C secondhand dealer, engaged in the business of buying,
selling, trading, exchanging or dealing in secondhand personal
property of any description (other than motor vehicles).
A.
CLASS B DEALER — A person, firm or corporation primarily engaged
in the sale of new merchandise and incidentally engaged in selling,
trading, exchanging or dealing in secondhand goods of any description
(other than motor vehicles) as the result of having received the
secondhand goods in trade or by repossession or as part payment for
new merchandise. No "Class B secondhand dealer" shall engage in the
business of dealing in used personal property except as an incident to
the sale of other new merchandise.
B.
CLASS C DEALER — A charitable organization, as defined in Chapter
50(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended, which has
donated to it or receives on consignment secondhand personal property
(other than motor vehicles) for the purpose of resale.
C.
§ 248-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2
1:715
premises shall be limited to a single secondhand license. The Class A
licenses shall be limited to five issues at any given time.
§ 250-3. (Reserved)165
§ 250-4. Contents of license.
The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall state the name of the
person to whom issued, the place of business and the street number where
such business is located. Such license shall entitle the person receiving
it to conduct business at the location designated in the license, and such
business shall not be carried on or conducted in any other location than that
designated in or by the license. No secondhand dealer shall be permitted to
solicit upon any street or public highway of the City of Brigantine, and no
person, firm or corporation shall conduct a house-to-house canvass for the
purchase or sale of secondhand or used watches, jewelry, precious stones,
gold, silver, wrought gold or any other precious metals within the City.
§ 250-5. Fingerprints.
Each applicant shall have three sets of fingerprints taken by the Brigantine
Police Department. Fingerprints so furnished shall become a part of the
application. In the event of a partnership, all partners and, in the event
of a corporation, the President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer
shall be required to submit the above-mentioned sets of fingerprints, which
fingerprints so taken shall be submitted to the Federal Bureau of
Investigation and to such further authorities as the Chief of Police may
deem advisable for comparison and record.
§ 250-6. Class A dealers regulations and restrictions.
A. Record of purchases, sales or exchanges.
(1) Every Class A secondhand dealer shall keep a tightly bound book,
not loose-leaf, with pages numbered in sequence, in which there
shall be made, at the time of the transaction, a record in English of
every article received, purchased, sold or exchanged by him or her,
setting forth the following: the name, date of birth, sex, social
security number, residence, telephone number and general
description of the individual with whom the transaction is had; the
price or consideration paid or received at the time of the
transaction; the true value of the article involved; and a complete
description of every article received, sold or exchanged, giving the
manufacturer's name and/or other marks of identification
appearing on said article.
(2) All records made pursuant to this section shall be maintained by
the dealer at the dealer's place of business for a period of not less
165. Editor's Note: Former § 250-3, License fee; expiration, which provided that "no fee will be
charged secondhand dealers," was repealed 3-24-1993 by Ord. No. 5-1993.
§ 250-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 250-6
1:716
than one year after the date that the property is sold or disposed of
in any manner.
(3) The account of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively.
(4) The dealer shall securely fasten on any article purchased or
received, for which records must be kept pursuant to this section, a
tag to be prescribed by the Director of the Department of Police.
(5) The dealer shall legibly write in English on the tag the date of the
purchase or receipt of the article and a number corresponding to
the property in the dealer's book.
(6) The tag shall remain on the property until such time as the property
is sold or disposed of by the dealer.
(7) Each dealer shall secure the name and address of the person
purchasing or otherwise acquiring any of the following items:
(a) Binoculars.
(b) Cameras.
(c) Furs.
(d) Household appliances.
(e) Jewelry or other items composed of or manufactured, in whole
or significant part, of a precious metal.
(f) Musical instruments.
(g) Office machines and equipment.
(h) Radios and television sets.
(i) Watches.
(j) Any item other than those listed above having a retail sales
value of $100 or more.
(8) All records made pursuant to the above Subsection A shall be
maintained by the dealer at the dealer's place of business for a
period of not less than one year after the date the property is sold
or disposed of in any manner.
B. Identification cards.
(1) The Class A secondhand dealer shall, at the time of making each
transaction, require the seller to write his or her signature and
address along with the seller's description and verification of
identity on a card bearing the serial number of the transaction
corresponding to that record in the dealer's book. If such person is
unable to write, he or she shall sign by mark, and in such event, the
dealer shall record on the signature card such information as will
§ 250-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6
1:717
§ 250-7. Class B dealer regulations and restrictions.
identify the individual to be identified. Further, each card will
contain space for a thumbprint of the seller and will be placed on
the card at the time of the transaction.
(2) The dealer shall require and inspect two types of identification
from the seller or person delivering the property.
(3) The dealer shall enter all identifying numbers to the extent
contained in the identification provided by the seller or person
delivering the property.
C. Reports to the Chief of Police. All Class A secondhand dealers shall,
every day before the hour of 11:00 a.m., deliver to the Chief of Police or
his or her designee, from blank forms to be prescribed, legible and
correct transcripts from their record books showing the descriptions of
every and all articles or things received by them on the business day
immediately preceding (except as to the purchase of rags, old iron and
paper), together with the amount paid therefor and a description of the
person making the sale. The Chief of Police shall have the power and
authority to require such to be done in a manner and form subject to his
or her approval. Whenever the amount to be paid by the dealer for
secondhand goods does not represent their true, fair and reasonable
market value, the dealer must, simultaneously with or before the
receipt of sale, report the transaction to the Chief of Police of the City of
Brigantine or his or her designee.
A. Maintenance of records.
(1) Each Class B secondhand dealer shall keep at his or her place of
business a record of each transaction involving used personal
property, setting forth the following:
(a) An accurate and complete description of the goods, article or
thing received in trade or part payment for other merchandise.
(b) The date of receipt.
(c) The name, sex, color and address of the person from whom
acquired.
(d) The name and address of the person, corporation or firm which
ultimately purchases or receives the property from the dealer.
(2) All records shall be maintained by the dealer at the dealer's place
of business for a period of not less than one year after the date the
property is sold or disposed of in any manner.
B. Reports to the Chief of Police. All Class B secondhand dealers shall, on
the day following a transaction of secondhand goods, before the hour of
11:00 a.m., deliver to the Chief of Police or his or her designee, from
blank forms to be prescribed, legible and correct transcripts from their
§ 250-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 250-7
1:718
§ 250-8. Regulations and restrictions applicable to all dealers.
record books, showing the descriptions of every and all articles or
things received by them on the business day immediately preceding
(except as to the purchase of rags, old iron and paper), together with
the amount paid therefor and a description of the person making the
sale. The Chief of Police shall have the power and authority to require
such to be done in a manner and form subject to his or her approval.
Whenever the amount to be paid by the dealer for secondhand goods
does not represent their true, fair and reasonable market value, the
dealer must, simultaneously with or before the receipt of the sale,
report the transaction to the Chief of Police of the City of Brigantine or
his or her designee.
A. Prohibition as to melted or altered goods. No dealer in secondhand
goods shall purchase any piece or mass of melted precious metal, ingot
of amateur manufacture or any article with serial numbers or jeweler's
marks obliterated unless payment for the article is withheld for a period
of 24 hours prior to the transaction of the pertinent information
required under this chapter.
B. Purchases from minors. No dealer in secondhand goods shall purchase
or receive any article of secondhand personal property from a minor,
that being under the age of 18 years, unless the minor's parent or legal
guardian is physically present during the transaction and presents the
identification required by the chapter.
C. Melting, wrecking and remodeling. No secondhand dealer shall take
apart or melt down any jewelry, watch case or article composed or
manufactured, in all or in part, of gold, silver or platinum until he or she
shall have made a record of his or her intention to do so, along with all
other data recorded in his or her record book, and shall have reported
the same to the Chief of Police in the same manner as reports of
purchase. The articles proposed to be taken apart, melted down,
wrecked or remodeled must be kept for a period of 15 business days
before such action is taken unless the articles have been inspected by
the Chief of Police or his or her designate and written approval has
been given for such melting, wrecking or remodeling prior to the
completion of the aforesaid period.
D. Record inspection. The aforesaid record book and all goods, articles or
things purchased, received or kept for sale or exchange by every
secondhand dealer shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the
inspection by any duly authorized agent of the Department of Police.
E. Inspection, seizure and detention of property by police.
(1) It shall be the duty of every secondhand dealer and of every person
in a dealer's employ to admit to the premises during business hours
any member of the Brigantine City Police Department to examine
any book or other record on the premises, as well as the articles
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-8
1:719
purchased or received, and to take possession of any article known
by the police officer or official to be missing or to have been stolen,
or where said officer or official has probable cause to believe the
article is missing or stolen.
(2) It shall be a violation of the provisions of this chapter for any
licensed secondhand dealer or any agent, clerk or employee of any
such dealer to hinder or in any manner prevent any agent or
member of the Brigantine Police Department from making an
inspection of the premises and taking into possession any article or
articles known or believed to have been unlawfully taken from the
rightful owner or possessor of said article or articles.
(3) Upon taking possession of an article or articles, an authorized
official or police officer shall furnish the dealer with a receipt which
shall include the date, name of the official or officer taking the
article, his rank and a description of the article or articles taken.
(4) Any article taken by an authorized official or police officer from a
dealer shall, as soon as possible, be delivered to the property clerk
of the Brigantine Police Department where it shall remain until
such time as ownership or the right to possession, or both, have
been determined according to law.
(5) The property clerk of the Brigantine Police Department shall notify
the dealer, in writing, of any deposition of the property. The notice
shall include the date of disposition and the name of the person
receiving the property.
(6) In lieu of taking possession of secondhand goods pursuant to this
chapter, a member of the Brigantine Police Department may place a
temporary detainer on the property for a period not to exceed 60
calendar days from the date that the written notice of the detainer
is issued to the dealer.
(7) During the period of detention, the property shall remain in the
custody of the dealer, and the dealer shall be prohibited from
selling, disposing of in any manner or changing the identity of the
property.
(8) During the period of detention, the dealer shall keep the detained
property separate and distinct from all other property in the
dealer's place of business.
F. Goods to be kept without concealment for 15 business days.
(1) Every dealer in secondhand goods must keep, without
concealment, for a period of 15 business days, subject to inspection
by any police officer, all goods, wares and merchandise, except
papers and rags purchased or received from any person, before
selling, shipping or otherwise disposing of the same unless the
item(s) has (have) been sooner inspected by the Chief of Police or
§ 250-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 250-8
1:720
§ 250-9. Exemptions.
§ 250-10. Denial, suspension or revocation of license.
his or her designee and the licensee receives written approval for
such selling, shipping or disposal.
(2) Property being held pursuant to this section shall be kept in the
dealer's place of business and shall be kept separate and distinct
from all other property or merchandise in the dealer's place of
business.
G. Storage. No secondhand dealer shall make use of any property, private
or public, not included within the licensed premises for the storage,
handling or displaying of any secondhand article, unless those premises
are duly approved and registered with the licensing authority.
H. Hours of business. No Class A or Class B secondhand dealer shall
transact any business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
There will be no restriction as to time as to Class C secondhand dealers.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any antique dealer or
licensed coin dealer who deals strictly in his or her respective specialty.
Any of the aforesaid dealers who deal in any secondhand items which
are not their specialties are required to obtain licenses pursuant to this
chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any pawnbroker, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1. However, any pawnbroker who deals in any
secondhand items not for the purpose of pawning or making loans
thereon is required to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter and to
abide by the same.
A. The Director of the Department of Police may deny, suspend or revoke
any secondhand license pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-2 for sufficient cause
after notice and hearing; sufficient cause is to include but not be limited
to:
(1) Violation of any provision of this chapter.
(2) Advertising of any kind by a dealer to purchase secondhand goods
without being licensed pursuant to this chapter.
(3) Failure of any person to state fully on his or her application for a
license both his or her name and official place of business within
the City of Brigantine.
(4) Conviction of an offense or crime in connection with the operation
of a secondhand dealer's business.
(5) Utilization of the business for the disposal of stolen goods.
§ 250-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10
1:721
§ 250-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine, be
punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed $500.
Chapter 252
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Excavations — See Ch. 165.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 181.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Fees schedule — See Ch. 210, Art. II.
Nuisances — See Ch. 220.
Water — See Ch. 290.
(6) Conducting the business in such a way as to make it a menace to
the health and welfare of the City.
B. The secondhand dealer shall be liable and responsible for any of the
foreseeable acts or omissions of the licensee's agents, clerks or
employees.
§ 250-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 250-11
1:722
ARTICLE I
Water and Sewer Rents
[Adopted 6-21-1950 by Ord. No. 5-1950]
§ 252-1. Annual rates established.
There is hereby established an annual water rental or charge for the use,
operation, maintenance and construction of the water system and facilities
of the City of Brigantine and an annual sewerage rental or charge for the
use, operation, maintenance and construction of the sewers and sewerage
system and sewage disposal facilities of the City of Brigantine upon the
owners of properties served thereby at the rates hereinafter set forth.
§ 252-2. Schedule of water rental charges. [Amended 12-28-1992 by
Ord. No. 28-1992]
The water rental established shall be an annual charge upon the owner
of each property connected to said water system in accordance with the
schedule as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Business, Article II, Fees
Schedules, for the following types of connections:
§ 252-3. Schedule of sewerage rental service fees. [Amended
5-20-1964 by Ord. No. 11-1964; 2-2-1966 by Ord. No. 1-1966;
12-6-1972 by Ord. No. 26-1972; 4-22-1977 by Ord. No. 8-1977;
1-17-1979 by Ord. No. 3-1979; 11-21-1979 by Ord. No. 23-1979;
10-21-1981 by Ord. No. 24-1981; 2-17-1982 by Ord. No. 9-1982;
3-7-1984 by Ord. No. 3-1984; 2-15-1989 by Ord. No. 4-1989]
A. Where the connection is intended to serve persons customarily using
the property numbering 25 or less.
B. Where the connection is intended to serve persons customarily using
the property numbering 26 to 100.
C. Where the connection is intended to serve persons customarily using
the property numbering over 100.
D. Where there is no connection but the property abuts a street wherein a
water main has been laid and to which the property may connect, a
standby or ready-to-serve charge.
E. Where a connection is made for temporary purposes, or for any other
purpose not otherwise provided for herein.
A. The sewerage rental service fee (hereinafter "service fee") established
shall be an annual charge upon the owner of each property connected
to the sewerage system in accordance with the schedule as set forth in
Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, for the
following types of service: [Amended 4-19-1989 by Ord. No. 8-1989;
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(1) For service to a single-family residence.
§ 252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3
1:723
§ 252-4. Due date of sewerage rental charges; connections made
after due date. [Amended 5-20-1964 by Ord. No. 11-1964;
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
The sewerage rental charges established by this article166 shall be due
annually in advance on the first day of January of each and every year,
except that, whenever a sewer connection to any property is made after
January 1 in any year, said charges shall become due at the time of such
connection, and if such connection shall be made after July 1 in any year,
such charges shall be only 1/2 of the annual charges established in this
article, and excepting further, however, for the remainder of the calendar
year of 1964 such charges for new sewerage connections made after May
1, 1964, shall be 1/2 of the annual charge set forth in this article, and the
additional charge on all sewerage connections existing on May 1, 1964,
shall be 1/4 of the annual charge set forth in this article.
§ 252-5. Water to be turned off for unpaid charges.
If any water rental charges or sewerage rental charges remain unpaid
on any property 60 days after becoming due, the supply of water to said
property may be turned off, and, in such event, water shall not again be
supplied to such property until all such charges against it shall first be paid.
§ 252-6. Collection of charges.
The Director of the Department of Revenue and Finance is hereby charged
with the duty of collecting the water rental charges and the sewerage rental
charges imposed by this article.
(2) For service to a multifamily residence or an apartment house,
where the nature of the occupancy is permanent rather than
transient or temporary.
(3) For service to a motel, hotel, boardinghouse or similar
establishment, the occupancy of which is primarily transient or
temporary.
(4) For service to any other establishment providing sewerage
facilities for public use.
(5) For all other services not described above.
B. Other than any connection fee as may be required by applicable rules
and regulations, service payments authorized by this article shall
commence upon the activation of the service for either water or sewer,
or the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs earlier.
No temporary connections shall be allowed for any reason, except upon
prior permission of the Department of Public Works.
166. Editor's Note: The rental charges established by this article are set forth in Ch. 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Art. II, Fees Schedule.
§ 252-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-7
1:724
§ 252-7. Consolidation and operation of water and sewer systems.
The water and sewer systems of the City of Brigantine are hereby
consolidated and shall hereafter be operated as one utility and under one
head, namely the Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 252-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-7
1:725

ARTICLE II
Service Connection Charges
[Adopted 12-21-1955 by Ord. No. 14-1955]
§ 252-8. Sewer connection charge; restoration of streets. 167
[Amended 6-30-1959 by Ord. No. 3-1959; 5-20-1964 by Ord. No.
10-1964; 10-21-1970 by Ord. No. 10-1970; 7-18-1973 by Ord. No.
7-1973; 2-17-1982 by Ord. No. 10-1982; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
§ 252-9. Installation of water connections; fees; payment. [Amended
6-30-1959 by Ord. No. 3-1959; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
As to all water connections existing in the City of Brigantine at the date of
adoption of this article on December 21, 1955, meters shall thereafter be
installed in accordance with such plan or program as may be adopted by the
Director of the Department of Public Works, and the cost of such installation
shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees
Schedule, for a three-fourths-inch water meter where the water connection
is one inch in dimension or less, to be paid by the owner of the affected
property in three equal installments, the first of which should be payable
on July 1, 1956, and subsequent installments of which shall be payable on
July 1 of each of the two succeeding years. Any water connections larger
than one inch in dimension which shall, in the discretion of the Director of
the Department of Public Works, require a larger meter than the aforesaid
three-fourths-inch meter, shall cost the sum as set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, plus the additional cost of
larger meter, yolk, pipe and connecting materials above and beyond the cost
of same for the aforesaid three-fourths-inch meter on the one-inch water
connection. This cost shall be paid immediately on installation.
§ 252-10. Water to be turned off for unpaid charges.
If any charge becoming due under this article shall remain unpaid on any
property 60 days after becoming due, the supply of water to said property
may be turned off, and, in such event, water shall not again be supplied to
such property until any such charge against it shall be paid.
A. The charges for the service by the City to the customer for a sewer
connection from the City main to the curbline shall be as set forth in
Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
B. In addition to the charges scheduled above, there shall be an additional
charge for restoration of streets where excavation is necessary as set
forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
167. Editor's Note: See also § 252-54, Other charges and fees.
§ 252-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-11
1:727
§ 252-11. Collection of charges.
The Director of the Department of Revenue and Finance is hereby charged
with the duty of collecting the fees and charges imposed by this article.
§ 252-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-11
1:728
ARTICLE III
Sewer Connection Required
[Adopted 11-3-1965 by Ord. No. 14-1965]
§ 252-12. Buildings to be connected to sewers.
All buildings located within the City of Brigantine upon a street in which a
sewer is constructed are required to be connected with such sewer.
§ 252-13. Connection required prior to issuance of certificate of
occupancy. [Amended 2-4-2004 by Ord. No. 3-2004]
§ 252-14. City to make connection upon neglect of owner.
All existing buildings shall be connected to the sewer not later than 60 days
from the effective date of this article. In the event that the owner of any
property or properties affected hereby shall neglect to make such sewer
connections, the City, after notice given as prescribed by law, shall award
contracts for the making of such improvement and cause such connection
to be made under the direction and supervision of the Plumbing Inspector.
§ 252-15. Owner to bear expenses.
Upon the failure of the owner of property or properties to connect with the
sewer in accordance with the provisions hereof and the performance of such
connection by the City, the cost and expense of said connection shall be
assessed to the owner and shall constitute a lien on said property collectible
in the same manner as other real property taxes and assessments.
A. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Construction Official
for any building hereafter to be constructed unless such connection has
been made.
B. No residential or commercial premises within the City of Brigantine
shall be constructed or reconstructed and connected or reconnected to
the public sewer without the installation of an approved curbside
"cleanout device" of such design and type as is approved in accordance
with the applicable Uniform Construction and Plumbing Codes. The
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the Construction
Official may, in cases where the public health and safety or the health
and safety of occupants is affected or where the sewer installation at
any existing particular property is adversely affecting the operation of
the public sewer system, require the installation of such curbside
cleanout device in any existing property where none exists or, in the
event of refusal of the property owner to install such device, require the
termination of sewer service to the said property under such conditions
as are necessary to protect the public health and safety or the health
and safety of the occupants.
§ 252-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-16
1:729
§ 252-16. Use of cesspools.
The use of cesspools (or similar devices) in buildings located upon a street
in which a sewer is constructed is hereby prohibited.
§ 252-16 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-16
1:730
ARTICLE IV
Sewer Use Regulations
[Adopted 1-4-1989 by Ord. No. 23-1988]
§ 252-17. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — The Atlantic County Utilities Authority.
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter or in satisfying the
oxygen demand of other materials present during incubation for a given
time and at a specified temperature. It shall be reported as the amount of
oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter, used in a period of five days at
20º C.
CHLORINE DEMAND (expressed in milligrams per liter) — The difference
between the amount of chlorine added to wastewater and the amount of
residual chlorine remaining at the end of a twenty-minute contract period.
COD (denoting "chemical oxygen demand") — The amount of oxygen
required for the complete chemical oxidation of organics and oxidizable
organics in a liquid.
COMBINED WASTE — A wastewater containing surface or storm water.
COMMERCIAL USER — Any mercantile, establishment or place of business
discharging less than 25,000 gallons per day of sanitary waste or its
equivalent to the (local) sewer system. See definition of "sanitary waste."
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended
solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria and such other additional pollutants
as are now or may be in the future specified and controlled in the
Authority's NPDES permit for its wastewater treatment plant where said
plant has been designed and used to reduce or remove such pollutants.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other sources. It
shall contain no polluting substances which would produce BOD, SS, or
toxic substances as limited in § 252-34 of these regulations.
COUNTY SEWER SYSTEM — All intercepting sewers, pumping stations,
force mains, wastewater treatment plants and appurtenances thereto
owned and operated by the Atlantic County Utilities Authority.
EFFLUENT — Wastewater, after some degree of treatment, flowing out of
any treatment device or facility.
EQUIVALENT DWELLING UNIT (EDU) — A dwelling or structure normally
occupied by a single family.
FORCE MAIN — A pipeline carrying flow under pressure.
§ 252-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-17
1:731
GREASE or OIL — Any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Any pollutant which is not a compatible
pollutant as defined in this article.
INDUSTRIAL USER —
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. Section 1317(a), (b), or (c)].[Amended
2-16-2005 by Ord. No. 2-2005]
INFILTRATION — Water entering the local sewer system from the ground,
through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints,
connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is
distinguished from, inflow.
INFLOW — Water discharged into the local sewer system from such sources
as, but not limited to, roof leaders, cellar, yard and area drains, foundation
drains, cooling water discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas,
manhole covers, cross connections from storm sewers and combined
sewers, catch basins, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters or
drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration.
INFLUENT — Wastewater, raw or partly treated, flowing into any
wastewater treatment device or facilities.
INTERCEPTING SEWER — An Authority-owned sewer which receives a flow
from a local sewer.
Any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of the local sewer system
which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day
of sanitary wastes and which is identified in the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as
amended and supplemented, under one of the following divisions:
A.
B. Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
C. Division B, Mining.
D. Division D, Manufacturing.
Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and Sanitary
Services.
E.
F. Division I, Services.
Any nongovernmental user of the local sewer system which discharges
wastewater containing incompatible pollutants subject to pretreatment
standards.
G.
Any nongovernmental user of the local sewer system which discharges
wastewater containing pollutants which would interfere with or
prohibit the treatment and/or disposal of waste sludges.
H.
§ 252-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-17
1:732
LOCAL AUTHORITY — The Board of Commissioners of the City of
Brigantine.
LOCAL SEWER — Any sewer or system of sewers which receives flow from
a local sewer.
LOCAL SEWER SYSTEM — All intercepting sewers, force mains, pumping
stations and appurtenances thereto owned and operated by the City of
Brigantine.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
The program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the
discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters, the
contiguous zone and the oceans pursuant to Section 402 of P.L. 92-500.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation,
association, group or society, and includes the State of New Jersey, and
agencies, districts, commissions and political subdivisions created by or
pursuant to state law.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
POLLUTANTS — May be so defined now or hereafter by appropriate local,
state or federal agencies or by the Authority; or substances which may
be present in wastewater, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, the amount
of which may contain soluble or insoluble solids of organic or inorganic
nature which may deplete the dissolved oxygen content of natural waters,
contribute solids, contain oil, grease or floating solids which may cause
unsightly appearance on the surface of such waters or contain materials
detrimental to aquatic life.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real property, including land, improvements or
appurtenances, and buildings, ground, etc.
PRETREATMENT — Application of physical, chemical and biological
processes to reduce the amount of pollutants in or alter the nature of the
pollutant properties in a wastewater prior to discharging such wastewater
into the County sewer system.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All applicable federal rules and
regulations implementing Section 307 of P.L. 92-500, as well as any
nonconflicting state or local standards. In cases of conflicting standards or
regulations, the more stringent thereof shall be applied.
PUMPING STATION — A facility in which wastewater is conveyed from a
lower hydraulic elevation to a higher hydraulic elevation using mechanical
or pneumatic devices.
REGULATORY AGENCY — Agencies, such as but not limited to the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the United States
Environmental Protection Agency and the United States Corps of
Engineers, which have authority over the operation of the local sewer
system.
§ 252-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-17
1:733
RESERVED CAPACITY — Any portion of the county or local sewer system
which has been exclusively reserved by and for a user through a formal,
written agreement between the user and the Authority.
RESIDENTIAL USER — The owner or occupants of any residence,
apartment, condominium, mobile home or other dwelling permanently
connected to the local sewer system.
SANITARY WASTE — Wash water, culinary wastes and liquid waste
containing only human excreta and similar matter, flowing in or from a
building drainage system or sewer originating in a dwelling, business
building, factory or institution. For the purposes of this article, sanitary
waste shall be characterized as containing 250 milligrams per liter BOD and
250 milligrams per liter total suspended solids.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit, generally closed, for carrying wastewater.
SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage shredded to such a degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in public sewers, with no particle having a dimension greater than 1/2 inch
in any direction.
SS (denoting "suspended solids") — The laboratory determination of the
dry weight expressed in milligrams per liter of solids that either float on
the surface, are in suspension or are settleable and can be removed from
wastewater by filtering through a Gooch crucible.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.[Amended 2-16-2005 by Ord.
No. 2-2005]
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of the local sewer authority or
his duly appointed deputy, agent or representative.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance, whether gaseous, liquid or solid,
which, when discharged to the sewer system in sufficient quantities, may
tend to interfere with any treatment process, constitute a hazard to
recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from the wastewater
treatment plant, pose a hazard to men working in the sewer system or
constitute a hazard to fish or animal life.
UNSHREDDED GARBAGE — Solid waste from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food or food products and from the handling, storing and sale
of produce.
USER — Any person discharging or permitting the discharge of wastewater
to the local sewer system.
WASTEWATER — The water-carried domestic, human or animal wastes
from residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places,
together with such groundwater infiltration, industrial and commercial
wastes as may be present.
§ 252-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-18
1:734
§ 252-18. Approval required for certain discharges.
No person shall discharge, directly or indirectly, into the local sewer system
any wastewater, the characteristics of which do not conform to the
concentration limits prescribed herein, or discharge into the local sewer
system any toxic substances or any other objectionable material or
substances as specified under this article, except upon written approval
by the Superintendent and upon such terms and conditions as may be
established by the local authority in the acceptance of the wastewater.
§ 252-19. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or permit the discharge or infiltration into the
local sewer system any of the following:
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F. (65º C.) or
in excess of that permitted by pretreatment standards.
B. Any liquid containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or
not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter of solvent-soluble materials or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32º F. and 150º F. (0º C. and 65º C.)
C. Any wastewater that contains more than two parts per million by
weight any of the following gases:
(1) Hydrogen sulfide.
(2) Sulfur dioxide.
(3) Oxides of nitrogen.
D. Any residues from petroleum storage, refining or processing, waste
fuels, lubricants or solvents.
E. Any wastewater containing any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason
of their nature or quantity, are, or may be, sufficient, either alone or by
interaction with other substances, to create an explosive, flammable or
combustible atmosphere in any part of the local sewer system. At no
time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the
point of discharge into the sewer system, be more than 5% nor any
single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
F. Any solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, such as but not limited to
mud, straw, metal, rags, glass, tar, plastics, wood and shavings.
G. Any solid or viscous substance in quantities of such size capable of
causing an interference with the proper operation of the local sewer
system, such as but not limited to ashes, cinders, sand, feathers,
fleshings, entrails or paper or plastic containers, etc.
H. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
§ 252-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-19
1:735
§ 252-20. Disposal of sanitary waste.
No person shall dispose of wastes from septic tanks, cesspools or other
sources of sanitary waste to the local sewer system without the written
approval of the Superintendent.
§ 252-21. New sources of inflow.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any new source of
inflow into the local sewer system.
§ 252-22. Approval required prior to connection.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any element of the local sewer system without first
obtaining the written approval of the Superintendent.
I. Any waste having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment and personnel of the local authority.
J. Any radioactive waste or isotope of such half-life or concentration as to
be in excess of that permitted by appropriate regulatory agencies
having control over their use or in such quantity as to cause damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the local authority.
K. Any waste containing noxious or malodorous solids, liquids or gases
which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or are or may be sufficient to
prevent entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair.
L. Any material which exerts or causes:
(1) Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as but not
limited to Fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(2) Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye solutions
and vegetable tanning solutions) which cannot be removed by the
wastewater treatment plant.
(3) Unusual BOD, COD or chlorine requirements in such quantities as
to constitute an unacceptable load on the wastewater treatment
works.
(4) Any unusual concentration or flow of any given constituent which
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes exceeds more
than five times the average twenty-four-hour concentrations or flow
rates during normal operation.
§ 252-19 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-23
1:736
§ 252-23. Connection requirements and procedures.
Connections to the local sewer system shall be designed and constructed to
conform to the requirements and/or procedures set forth in Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9 and all applicable state and
local building and plumbing codes. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight and shall be subject to the inspection and approval
of the Superintendent.
§ 252-24. Discharge of toxic solids, wastes and gases.
No person shall discharge to the local sewer system any liquid containing
toxic solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any wastewater
treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a
public nuisance, prevent the attainment of effluent limitations as imposed
by regulatory agencies, preclude the selection of the most cost-effective
alternative for wastewater treatment or sludge disposal or create any
hazard in the effluent of the wastewater treatment plant or the receiving
waters.
§ 252-25. Maximum permissible concentration of certain
substances.
The concentration in wastewater of any of the following substances shall be
limited to the stated maximum concentrations in order to be acceptable for
discharge to the local sewer system:
Substance
Maximum Permissible
Concentration
(milligrams/liter)
Arsenic (As) 4.0
Boron (Bo) 1.0
Chromium (total) 5.0
Chromium (hexavalent) 2.0
Copper (Cu) 1.0
Cyanide (total) 1.0
Iron (Fe) 15.0
Lead (Pb) 0.1
Nickel (Ni) 1.0
Zinc (Zn) 5.0
Cadmium (Cd) 2.0
Phenol 0.1
Mercury (Hg) 0.01
MBAS 10
§ 252-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-25
1:737
Substance
Maximum Permissible
Concentration
(milligrams/liter)
Total solids 5,000
Silver (Ag) 0.05
§ 252-26. Limitations imposed by regulatory agencies.
When appropriate regulatory agencies prohibit, establish pretreatment
standards or otherwise limit the discharge of any substance or pollutant,
users will be required to reduce the discharge of the substances to the
sewers to the levels prescribed by those agencies.
§ 252-27. Approval required for certain water or waste
characteristics.
The admission into the local sewer system of any waters or wastes having
the following characteristics shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Superintendent:
§ 252-28. Responsibility to pay increased managing costs.
Any person who contributes toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases, or
any combination thereof, which cause an increase in the cost of managing
the effluent of the Atlantic County System shall be responsible for paying
those increased costs.
§ 252-29. Regulatory actions for control of prohibited wastes.
If wastewaters containing any substance described in §§ 252-18 through
252-28 of this article are discharged or proposed to be discharged into the
local sewer system or to any sewer tributary thereto, the Superintendent
may take any action necessary to:
A. A five-day BOD concentration greater than 300 parts per million.
B. A suspended solids concentration in excess of 300 parts per million, by
weight.
C. Incompatible pollutants, as defined within this article.
D. Pollutants subject to pretreatment standards.
E. An average daily discharge in excess of 10,000 gallons.
A. Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater.
B. Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will
reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with
this article.
§ 252-25 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-29
1:738
§ 252-30. Submission of plans when pretreatment or equalization
required.
Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows prior to discharge
into the local sewer system is required, plans, specifications and other
pertinent data or information relating to such pretreatment or flow-control
facilities shall first be submitted for review and approval. Such approval
shall not exempt the discharge of such facilities from compliance with any
applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any governmental
authority. Any subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or
flow-control facilities shall not be made without due notice to and prior
approval of the Superintendent.
§ 252-31. Responsibility for operation of pretreatment facilities.
If pretreatment or control of waste flows is required, such facilities shall
be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner or operator at his expense, subject to the requirements of this article
and all other applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
§ 252-32. Admission of officials to property.
§ 252-33. Protection from accidental discharge.
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other regulated wastes. Facilities to prevent
C. Require pretreatment, including storage facilities, or flow equalization
necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics or
substances so that the discharge will not violate this article.
D. Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay
any additional costs or expense incurred by the Authority for handling
and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment system.
E. Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or
necessary to achieve the purpose of this article.
A. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purposes of this article, the
officers and agents of the City, upon the presentation of credentials,
may enter upon any property or premises at reasonable times for the
purpose of:
(1) Copying any records required to be kept under the provisions of
this article.
(2) Inspecting any monitoring equipment or method.
(3) Sampling any discharge of wastewater.
B. The officers and agents of the City may enter upon the property at any
hour under emergency circumstances.
§ 252-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-33
1:739
accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and
maintained at the user's own costs and expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the Superintendent for review and shall be approved by him
before construction of the facility. Review and approval of such plans and
operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the
responsibility to modify his facility as necessary to meet the requirements
of this article.
§ 252-34. Reporting of accidental discharge.
If, for any reason, a facility or user does not comply with or will be unable
to comply with any prohibition or limitation in this article, the facility
responsible for such discharge shall immediately notify the Superintendent
so that corrective action may be taken to protect the treatment system.
In addition, a written report addressed to the Superintendent detailing
the date, time and cause of the accidental discharge, the quantity and
characteristics of the discharge and the corrective action taken to prevent
future discharges shall be filed by the responsible industrial facility within
five days of the occurrence of the noncomplying discharge.
§ 252-35. Power of Superintendent to refuse discharge.
Nothing under this article shall be construed to reduce in any manner the
power of the Superintendent to refuse to accept any discharge if, in his
opinion, there is not compliance with the provisions of any section of this
article.
§ 252-36. Methods for determining waste quantities.
The local authority shall regularly use meters or devices or methods for
determining waste quantities (volumes) directly or by differentials or
otherwise and make tests and use other means for determining the quality
and other characteristics of all sewerage, industrial wastes or other wastes
discharged into the local sewer system.
§ 252-37. Methods for measuring characteristics of wastes.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of sewerage and
wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, as prepared, approved and published jointly by
the American Health Association, the American Water Works Association
and the Water Pollution Control Federation or other reference source as
specified by regulatory agency requirements such as Methods for Chemical
Analysis of Water and Wastes, published by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. Sampling shall be carried out in
accordance with customarily accepted methods such to reflect the effect of
the constituents upon the local sewer system and to determine the existence
§ 252-33 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-37
1:740
of any hazards. Volume determination shall be conducted in accordance
with sound engineering practice.
§ 252-38. Determination of waste volumes.
§ 252-39. Determination of pollutant concentration.
A. In determining the volume of wastewater contributed to the local sewer
system by a user, the local authority shall utilize such methods (as
determined by each City or MUA).
B. Industrial users.
(1) In determining the volume of wastewater contributed to the local
sewer system by an industrial user, the local authority may use a
representative value:
(a) The amount of water supplied to the premises as shown upon
the water meter, if the premises are metered;
(b) The volume of wastewater discharged into the local sewer by
the industry as determined by measurements made by the local
authority;
(c) An allowance for each employee on the premises; or
(d) A figure determined by the local authority by any combination
of the foregoing or any other equitable method.
(2) Measurements shall be made, whenever possible, at a common
manhole into which all volumes from an industry are combined.
Such manhole shall be constructed by the owner of such premises
at his own expense, when directed by an order of the
Superintendent. Whenever the installation of such a common
manhole is impossible or impractical, the owner of such premises
shall construct and maintain at his own expense, in lieu of the
common manhole, two or more manholes as required by an order of
the Superintendent, for accurate measurement of all volumes
discharged from such premises into the manhole. When required,
the measurements shall be taken at a point or points to be selected
by the Superintendent. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
A. The pollutant concentration of any wastewater shall be determined by
the local authority from the representative samples taken by
representatives of the local authority at a point of volume determination
as provided for in § 252-38 of this article at any period or time or in such
duration and in such a manner as the Superintendent may elect, or at
any place or manner mutually agreed upon between the user and the
Superintendent. The intent of any sampling procedure is to establish
the pollutant concentration in the wastewater discharged during an
average or typical day. This concentration may be derived, according to
§ 252-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-39
1:741
§ 252-40. Dispute over volume and/or pollutant concentration.
§ 252-41. Access to property; sampling facilities.
the best judgment of the Superintendent, by combining repeated
subsamplings during one day, by combination of a series of such days
or by combination of a number of a multiple series of such days.
B. Whenever the wastes discharged to a sewer might be expected to show
appreciable periodic variation during the year, the local authority may
average the results of two or more series of analyses taken to reflect
these variations and thereby determine an average annual pollutant
concentration.
A. In the event that the volume and/or pollutant concentration of the waste
discharged to the local sewer system as determined under §§ 252-38
and 252-39 of this article is disputed by a user, a program of resampling
and gauging with subsequent chemical determination may be instituted
as follows:
(1) The user may submit a written request for resampling and gauging
of the waste to the Superintendent. Upon receipt of such request,
the local authority will conduct the necessary test at the user's
expense. The user shall confer with representatives of the local
authority in order that agreement may be reached as to the various
factors which must be considered in a new sampling program; or
(2) The user may, at his own expense, employ a consultant or agency of
recognized professional standing to conduct a resampling and
reanalysis program, under the direction of the Superintendent and
for a period of time to be specified by the Superintendent.
B. The results of the resampling and the reanalysis shall be considered to
be the current analysis of the user's waste. In all cases, the
determination of the local authority, whether or not modified after
resampling and reanalysis, as provided for in this section, shall be final
as regards volumes or pollutant concentrations.
A. The local authorities shall have unrestricted access at reasonable hours
to all premises served by the local authority to inspect any aspect of the
sewer system and to see that the requirements of the local authority
regarding the use of the user's sewer connection are being observed.
B. Additionally, any owner of property which discharges industrial waste
into the sanitary sewerage system shall, at the owner's expense,
provide suitable facilities to enable samples of such waste to be
collected for analysis and further permit the local authority to collect
such samples from users within the City.
§ 252-39 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-42
1:742
§ 252-42. Wastewater discharge permit required.
All industrial users connecting to or proposing to connect to or discharge
into any part of the local sewer system must first obtain a discharge permit
therefor. All existing industrial users connected to or discharging into any
part of the local sewer system must obtain an industrial waste discharge
permit within 90 days of the date of final adoption and promulgation of this
article.
§ 252-43. Permit application; issuance.
§ 252-44. Permit conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of
this article and all other rules and regulations established by the Authority.
A. Users seeking an industrial waste discharge permit shall complete and
file with the Superintendent an application on the form prescribed by
the Superintendent and accompanied by the applicable fee. In support
of this application, the user shall submit the following information:
(1) The name, address and SIC number of the applicant.
(2) The volume of wastewater to be discharged.
(3) The wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not
limited to those set forth in §§ 252-18 through 252-28 of this article,
as determined by an analytical laboratory of recognized
professional standing.
(4) The time and duration of discharge.
(5) The average and heavy-peak wastewater flow rates, including daily,
monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
(6) The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and
elevation.
(7) A description of activities, facilities and plant process on the
premises, including all materials and types of materials which are,
or could be, discharged.
(8) Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production.
(9) The number and type of employees and hours of work.
(10) Any other information as may be deemed by the Superintendent to
properly determine the nature of the waste to be discharged.
B. The Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and
may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of
the data furnished, the Superintendent may issue an industrial waste
discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
§ 252-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-44
1:743
The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced
in accordance with this article and applicable state and federal regulations.
Permit conditions may include the following:
§ 252-45. Duration of permit; modification of permit by
Superintendent.
§ 252-46. Permits nontransferable; revocation.
A. The average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
B. Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization.
C. Requirements for installation of inspection and sampling facilities and
specification for monitoring programs.
D. Requirements for maintaining and submitting technical reports and
plant records relating to wastewater discharges.
E. Daily average and daily maximum discharge rates, or other appropriate
conditions when pollutants subject to limitations and prohibitions are
proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge.
F. Compliance schedules.
G. Other conditions to ensure compliance with this article.
A. Permits shall be issued for a period of one year.
B. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification
and change by the Superintendent during the life of the permit, as
limitations or requirements as identified in §§ 252-18 through 252-28
are modified. A user shall be notified of proposed changes in his permit
at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or
new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance.
A. Permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. An
industrial waste discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred
subject to having his permit revoked.
B. Violations subjecting a user to possible revocation of his permit include,
but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Failure of a user accurately to report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of his discharge.
(2) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operation or
wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring.
§ 252-44 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-46
1:744
§ 252-47. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Superintendent finds that any person has violated or is
violating this article and the prohibitions, limitations or requirements
contained herein, he may serve upon such person a written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time, not to exceed
30 days, for the satisfactory correction thereof.
§ 252-48. Legal action for relief from violations.
Any discharge in violation of the substantive provisions of this article or
an order of the local authority shall be considered a public nuisance. If
any person discharges sewerage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the
local sewer in violation of this article or any order of the local authority,
the local authority's solicitor shall commence an action for appropriate
legal and/or equitable relief in an appropriate court of this municipality or
the municipality in which this local authority is located. In the event that
such action is commenced by the local authority's solicitor, the prayer for
relief shall include a claim for all costs of such action, including reasonable
attorney fees. In the event that the local authority prevails in such legal
action, such costs, including reasonable attorney's fees, shall be paid by the
person against whom the proceeding has been commenced.
§ 252-49. Violations and penalties.
§ 252-50. User charges to be assessed; changes in charges.
(4) Violation of conditions of the permit.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or fail to
comply therewith shall severally, for each and every violation and
noncompliance, forfeit and pay a penalty not to exceed $1,000 or be
imprisoned for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both. [Amended
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
B. This imposition of the foregoing penalty shall not bar the right of the
local authority to specifically enforce the provisions of this article.
C. Any violation of this article shall be considered a distinct and separate
violation for each and every day that the violation continues.
A. Each user of the local sewer system shall be assessed a user charge in
such an amount as necessary and appropriate to defray the costs of
constructing, operating and maintaining the local sewer system and the
annual charge imposed by the Atlantic County Sewerage Authority. The
user charge system set forth below ensures that each user will pay its
proportionate share of construction, operation and maintenance costs
incurred by the operation of the local authority.
B. Such user charges are based upon estimated annual operating and
capital costs due and owing by the City of Brigantine (local authority)
§ 252-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-50
1:745
§ 252-51. Disposition of funds; dedication of accounts.
§ 252-52. Use of surplus funds.
When at the end of any fiscal year user charges have been collected in
excess of those required to defray operating maintenance expenses, the
surplus shall be applied to reduce user charges for the next fiscal year.
§ 252-53. Determination of user charges.
§ 252-54. Other charges and fees.
and may be changed from time to time as the need generated by such
costs may require. For the first year of operation, the aforementioned
estimates shall be based upon the costs incurred by the local authority
for constructing, operating and maintaining the existing sewer system
during the three years preceding the enactment of this article.
A. Revenues derived from the collection of user charges shall be deposited
to and disbursements associated with the operation and maintenance of
the local sewer system shall be withdrawn from an account or accounts
dedicated exclusively to these purposes.
B. Amalgamation of the local sewer system accounts with those for any
other purpose, including public water supply, shall be contrary to the
intent of this article.
A. Residential users. Residential users shall be considered a user class,
and as such all users will be considered as having like wastewater
quality. Charges to residential users of the local sewer system shall be
based upon the quantity of water, whether purchased from a public
utility or obtained from a private source.
B. Commercial users. Commercial users shall be considered a user class,
and as such all users will be considered as having like wastewater
quality. Charges to commercial users of the local sewer system shall be
based upon the quantity of water, whether purchased from a public
utility or obtained from a private source.
C. Industrial users. Charges to industrial users of the local sewer system
shall be based upon the characteristics of each individual industrial
user. Rates shall be established by the quality-quantity-base-plussurcharge
approach.
A. No statement contained within this article shall be construed as
prohibiting the collection of additional fees for initial sewer system
connection, sewer expansions or extensions, dedicated (reserved)
transport or treatment capacity in excess of current actual use, or
pretreatment of industrial wastes.
B. The charges for service by the local authority to the customer for a
sewer connection from the local authority main to the curbline shall be
§ 252-50 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-54
1:746
§ 252-55. Notification of user charge.
Each user shall, not less than once annually, be notified in writing of the
computed user charge. The notification shall clearly identify the amount
required for local collection and that imposed for treatment by the Atlantic
County Sewerage Authority.
§ 252-56. Payment of user charges.
§ 252-57. Penalty for unpaid amounts.
In the event of nonpayment of all or any portion of the user charges herein
prescribed and provided as and when due, such unpaid amounts shall bear
an interest penalty of the rate of 1% per month after 30 days from the date
the amount became due.
§ 252-58. Revisions to user charges.
The local authority shall, at least once annually, review and, if necessary,
revise this article and associated user charges to ensure that revenues are
sufficient to offset the total costs of operating and maintaining the local
sewer system and maintain the proportionate distribution of costs among
users or user classes.
§ 252-59. Effect on water and sewer rates.
The sewer rates stated in § 252-3, Schedule of sewerage rental service fees,
as amended, of Article I of this chapter, will remain in effect until further
notice.
§ 252-60. Dedication of accounts and surpluses.
as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees
Schedule.168 [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
C. In addition to the charges scheduled above, there shall be an additional
charge for restoration of streets where excavation is necessary for
FABC paving as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article
II, Fees Schedule. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
A. Residential user charges herein prescribed shall be for the (calendar/
fiscal) year, (date) to (date) and shall be due and payable annually, on
the (day) day of the (month) of each year.
B. Commercial and industrial user charges herein prescribed shall be due
for three-month periods and shall be due and payable four times per
year, with billings to be made on the first day of January, April, July and
October of each year.
168. Editor's Note: See also § 252-8, Sewer connection charge; restoration of streets.
§ 252-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-60
1:747
§ 252-61. Payment of sewer connection charges; changes.
§ 252-62. Review of user charge system; additional costs.
A. Revenue derived from the collection of user charges shall be deposited
to and disbursements associated with the operation and maintenance of
the local sewer system shall be withdrawn from an account or accounts
dedicated exclusively to these purposes.
B. When, at the end of any fiscal year, user charges dedicated to the
Brigantine Water and Sewer Department have been collected in excess
of those required, the surplus shall be applied to reduce the user
charges as aforesaid for the next fiscal year.
C. Amalgamation of local sewer system accounts with those for any other
purpose, including public water supply, shall be contrary to the intent of
this article.
A. The aforesaid sewer connection charge shall be payable immediately
after the same shall fall due.
B. Such sewer charges will be based upon estimated annual operating and
capital costs, due and owing, by the City of Brigantine and may be
changed from time to time as the need generated by such costs may
require.
C. Each user shall, not less than once annually, be notified in writing of the
computed user charge. The notification shall clearly identify the
amount required for local collection and that imposed for treatment by
the Atlantic County Utilities Authority.
A. The Brigantine Water and Sewer Department shall review the
wastewater contributions of users, the total costs of operation and
maintenance and its approved user charge system not less often than
every two years. Upon biennial review of its system, the Brigantine
Water and Sewer Department shall revise its charges to maintain the
proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs and to
generate sufficient revenue to pay the total operation and maintenance
costs.
B. Each user which discharges any toxic pollutants causing increase in the
cost of managing and effluent or the sludge shall pay for such increase
in costs.
C. The cost of operation and maintenance for all flow not directly
attributable to users (i.e., infiltration/inflow) shall be distributed among
all users by the same method that the cost of operation and
maintenance is distributed among users.
§ 252-60 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-62
1:748
ARTICLE V
Reduction for Aged or Disabled Individuals
[Adopted 11-2-1994 by Ord. No. 26-1994]
§ 252-63. Reduction granted.
The City of Brigantine hereby grants a reduction in the amount of $50 to
any homeowner who has a permanent residence in the City of Brigantine
who:
§ 252-64. Proof of age policy.
The City Manager or his designee shall establish a policy as to what
documents are acceptable to prove a person's age, pursuant to this article,
and to whom the same must be submitted.
A. Is of the age of 65 or more years; or
B. Less than 65 years of age and permanently and totally disabled
according to the provisions of the Federal Social Security Act; or
C. Disabled under any federal law administered by the United States
Department of Veterans' Affairs, if the disability is rated as 60% or
higher and the person either is annually eligible to receive assistance
under the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and Disabled
Program; or
D. Has a total income not in excess of $10,000 per year, exclusive of
benefits under any one of the following:
(1) The Federal Social Security Act and all amendments and
supplements thereto;
(2) Any other program of the federal government or pursuant to any
other federal law which provides benefits in whole or in part in lieu
of benefits referred to in or for persons excluded from coverage
under Subsection D(1) of this section, including but not limited to
the Federal Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 and federal pension,
disability and retirement programs; or
(3) Pension, disability or retirement programs of any state or its
political subdivisions or agencies thereof for persons not covered
under Subsection D(1) of this section, except that the total amount
of benefits to be allowed exclusion by any owner under Subsection
D(2) or (3) of this section shall not be in excess of the maximum
amount of benefits payable to and allowable for exclusion by an
owner in similar circumstances under Subsection D(1) of this
section.
§ 252-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-65
1:749
§ 252-65. Applicability.
The fifty-dollar reduction established by this article shall not be applicable
concerning any connection or disconnection of sewer service in the City of
Brigantine.
§ 252-66. Dual or joint ownership.
If any home has more than one owner and any one such owner qualifies for
a reduction pursuant to the terms of this article, then said reduction shall
apply and be granted. Any homeowner who owns more than one property
shall only be allowed one reduction, with said reduction being applied to
said individual's permanent residence.
§ 252-67. One reduction allowed for each property.
If any home has more than one owner who qualifies for a reduction, only
one reduction shall be allowed for a specific property.
§ 252-65 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-67
1:750
ARTICLE VI
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 2-16-2005 by Ord. No. 2-2005]
§ 252-68. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below
are the same as or are based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWERAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewerage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other then stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Brigantine,
unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other then
the Tier A Municipal Storm Water General Permit issued to the City of
Brigantine. Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. Section 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Brigantine or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewerage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollution Discharge
Elimination System Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other then heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
§ 252-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-68
1:751
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finish product, byproduct, or
waste product. Process waste water includes, but is not limited to, leachate
and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation, (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 252-69. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the City of Brigantine any domestic sewerage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 252-70. Enforcement.
This article may be enforced and summonses issued by any member of
the Department of Public Works, any member of the Brigantine Police
Department, any member of the City of Brigantine Fire Department Rental
Inspection Bureau and/or the Construction Official or Zoning Officer.
§ 252-71. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250 in the discretion of the
Municipal Court Judge. Each separate day that a violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense.
§ 252-68 BRIGANTINE CODE § 252-71
1:752
Chapter 253
(RESERVED)
Chapter 254
SHOPPING CARTS, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 220, Art III.
§ 254-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ABANDONED CART — A handdrawn or propelled vehicle or wheel
container made of metal, wood or other materials such as is generally
provided by merchants for the use of their customers in carting or carrying
goods, merchandise or groceries to automobiles or other vehicles which is
left unattended for a period of time in excess of 30 minutes on a property
other than the property owned or leased by the merchant who has provided
the use of said carts in the normal operation of their business.
PERSON — Any individual of either sex, any partnership, corporation or any
other legal entity.
§ 254-2. Abandonment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, his agent or employee to leave an
abandoned cart upon any property not his, hers or its own, including but
not limited to any street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk, park, traffic island or
other property whether privately owned or not.
§ 254-3. Identification required.
Any cart provided or made available for use by any person in the City of
Brigantine shall have a plainly visible form of identification indicating the
owner of said cart or the establishment where said cart is used in the
normal course of business.
§ 254-4. Removal.
The Department of Public Works of the City of Brigantine or any other
person so authorized by the City Manager of the City of Brigantine shall
have the power pursuant to this chapter to remove or cause to be removed
any abandoned cart found within the confines of the City of Brigantine, and
§ 252-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-4
1:753
said abandoned cart shall be taken by the City of Brigantine and shall be
held by said City until redeemed, sold or otherwise disposed of pursuant to
this chapter.
§ 254-5. Notice provided to owner.
When the Department of Public Works shall take control of any cart
pursuant to this chapter, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to the owner
of said abandoned cart or the business establishment where said abandoned
cart is used in the general course of business advising that the cart is being
held by the City of Brigantine and indicating the amount of money necessary
to redeem said cart.
§ 254-6. Redemption.
Any abandoned cart may be redeemed by the owner or business
establishment where said abandoned cart is used in the regular course of
business at any time prior to a sale pursuant to this chapter by the payment
of a fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fee
Schedule, to the City of Brigantine. Any person attempting to redeem said
cart must provide proof of ownership satisfactory to the City of Brigantine.
§ 254-7. Sale of unclaimed carts.
When any such cart remains in the control of the City of Brigantine for
a period of 30 days and no person has presented proof to the City of
Brigantine establishing such persons ownership right to said cart, the City
Manager or his designee shall give public notice in a newspaper circulated
within the City of Brigantine advising that at a specified place, time and
date any and all carts in the possession of the City of Brigantine shall be
sold at public auction to the highest bidder.
§ 254-8. Disposition of moneys received.
Any money paid to the City of Brigantine due to the redemption or sale of
any abandoned cart shall be placed in the general treasury of the City of
Brigantine, and any such money shall be first used to pay any costs incurred
for advertising or otherwise to effectuate a sale or for any other reason
incurred pursuant to this chapter.
§ 254-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall cause a cart to become an abandoned cart as
described in this chapter or otherwise violate this chapter shall be subject
to a fine up to $1,000 or imprisonment in the county jail up to 90 days, or
both, as may be fixed in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge before
whom said person appears.
§ 254-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 254-9
1:754
Chapter 256
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sign regulations — See Ch. 198, Art. XVII.
§ 254-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 254-9
1:755

ARTICLE I
Restrictions in Certain Areas
[Adopted 1-15-1992 by Ord. No. 24-1991]
§ 256-1. Justice Vincent S. Haneman Memorial Bridge to
Lighthouse Circle.
Unless prior written approval is obtained by the City Manager of the City
of Brigantine, the placement of any and all signs within the jurisdiction of
the City of Brigantine along the public right-of-way from the foot of the
Justice Vincent S. Haneman Memorial Bridge to the southernmost section of
the sidewalk at the Lighthouse Circle is hereby prohibited. Said prohibition
of signs is not limited to but includes the prohibition against any signs
of service organizations who wish to advertise said service organizations'
particular functions and any signs placed by any political party or candidate
along Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard.
§ 256-2. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding anything otherwise contained in this article, the intention
of this article is not to prohibit any signs erected by the City of Brigantine
which would welcome residents to said community.
§ 256-3. Effect on existing and future signs.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, it is not the
intention of this article to make illegal any sign currently existing which
has received the appropriate and required approvals by either the City
of Brigantine Zoning Board or Planning Board. Likewise, notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in this article, it is the intention of this article not
to prohibit any signs which in the future may be approved by the Planning
Board and/or Zoning Board of the City of Brigantine.
§ 256-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 256-3
1:757
Chapter 257
SMOKING
§ 256-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 256-3
1:758
ARTICLE I
Smoking on City-Owned Property
[Adopted 11-5-2014 by Ord. No. 15-2014]
§ 257-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — Any electric device that can be used to
deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the device,
including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe.
This definition shall not include any medically prescribed inhalation devices,
including, but not limited to, inhalers, respirators, or oxygen tanks.
SMOKE or SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke
from or the possession of a lit cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked,
or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking
device, cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, or pipe.
§ 257-2. Smoking on City property prohibited.
A. No person shall smoke while on the outdoor grounds of any City
building, including adjacent parking lots and in any and all of the City
parks, recreational areas, and adjacent parking lots, whether owned,
leased or utilized by the City. The prohibitions provided for herein are
subject to the following terms and conditions:
(1) The prohibitions provided for herein apply to all City parks
identified in Exhibit A169 attached hereto. Additional City parks may
be subject to these prohibitions upon further designation by the
City Manager;
(2) The prohibition relating to recreational areas does not include a
prohibition at the Links Golf Course, and on Brigantine public
beaches, it being the intention of City Council that the prohibitions
provided for herein shall not apply to those facilities;
(3) The prohibitions provided for herein apply to temporary special
events and facilities unless otherwise waived by City Council or the
City Manager; and
(4) The prohibitions provided for herein apply to the Brigantine
Farmers Market at all times that the farmers market is in
operation.
B. No person shall smoke in any vehicle and motorized equipment owned
or leased by the City.
169. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 257-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 257-3
1:759
§ 257-3. Enforcement.
Whenever a law enforcement officer or a City Code Enforcement Official
observes or reasonably believes that there exists a violation of this article,
he or she may provide a warning to the individual to stop smoking on the
premises. If the individual does not comply, the law enforcement officer or
City Code Enforcement Official may issue a summons and complaint to the
violator. The complaint shall be written and served upon the violator.
§ 257-4. Violations and Penalties.
Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be issued a summons
and complaint for a violation. Any person found guilty of violating this
article shall be fined $100, plus court costs, except that any person found
guilty of or pleading guilty to a first violation of this article may be
sentenced to not less than 10 hours of community service.
§ 257-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 257-4
1:760
Chapter 258
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and dune protection — See Ch. 101.
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 181.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
§ 258-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Purpose.
(1) It is hereby determined that:
(a) Land development projects and associated disturbance of
vegetation and soil and changes in land cover, including
increases in impervious cover, alter the hydrologic response of
local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and
volumes. If inadequately or improperly managed, this
stormwater runoff can deplete groundwater resources and
increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment
transport and deposition.
(b) This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of
waterborne pollutants.
(c) Increases of stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint
source pollutants have occurred in the past as a result of land
development, and contribute to the degradation of the water
resources of the City of Brigantine.
(d) Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution
can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of
stormwater runoff from development sites.
(e) It is in the public interest to regulate the discharge of
stormwater runoff from major development projects, as
defined in § 258-7 of this chapter, as provided in this chapter, in
order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff
rates and volumes, to maintain groundwater recharge, and to
control and minimize soil erosion, stream channel erosion and
nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff.
(2) Therefore, it is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, and the provisions of the adopted master plan and
land use ordinances of the City of Brigantine.
§ 257-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-1
1:761
B. Goals and techniques.
(1) Through this chapter, the City of Brigantine has established the
following goals for stormwater control:
(a) To reduce flood damage, including damage to life and property;
(b) To minimize any increase in stormwater runoff from new
development;
(c) To reduce soil erosion from any development or construction
project;
(d) To assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and
bridges, and other in-stream structures;
(e) To maintain groundwater recharge;
(f) To minimize any increase in nonpoint pollution;
(g) To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage;
(h) To restore, protect, maintain and enhance the quality of the
streams and water resources of the City of Brigantine;
(i) To minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff from new and
existing development in order to restore, protect, enhance and
maintain the chemical, physical and biological integrity of the
surface and groundwaters of the City of Brigantine, to protect
public health and to enhance the domestic, municipal,
recreational, industrial and other uses of water; and
(j) To protect public safety through the proper design and
operation of stormwater management basins.
(2) In order to achieve the goals for stormwater control set forth in this
chapter, the City of Brigantine has identified the following
management techniques:
(a) Implementation of multiple stormwater management best
management practices (BMPs) may be necessary to achieve
the performance standards for stormwater runoff quantity and
rate, groundwater recharge, erosion control, and stormwater
runoff quality established through this chapter.
(b) Compliance with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate,
groundwater recharge, erosion control, and stormwater runoff
quality standards established through N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq.,
and this chapter, shall be accomplished to the maximum extent
practicable through the use of nonstructural BMPs, before
relying on structural BMPs. Nonstructural BMPs are also
known as low impact development (LID) techniques.
§ 258-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-1
1:762
(c) Nonstructural BMPs shall include both environmentally
sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed
to stormwater.
(d) Source control plans shall be developed based upon physical
site conditions and the origin, nature and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
(e) Structural BMPs, where necessary, shall be integrated with
nonstructural stormwater management strategies and proper
maintenance plans.
(f) When using structural BMPs, multiple stormwater
management measures, smaller in size and distributed
spatially throughout the land development site, shall be used
wherever possible to achieve the performance standards for
water quality, quantity and groundwater recharge established
through this chapter before relying on a single, larger
stormwater management measure to achieve these
performance standards.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall apply to:
(a) All site plans and subdivisions for major developments
occurring within the area that require preliminary or final site
plan or subdivision review; and
(b) All major development projects undertaken by the City of
Brigantine.
D. Procedures. In addition to other development review procedures set
forth in the Code of the City of Brigantine, major developments located
within the City shall comply with the stormwater management
requirements and specifications set forth in this chapter. New
agricultural development that meets the definition of major
development in § 258-7 of this chapter shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5.4(b)7:8.
E. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
(1) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable ordinance, code, rule, regulation, statute, act or
other provision of law.
§ 258-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-1
1:763
§ 258-2. Site development stormwater plan.
(2) In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of
law except that, where any provision of this chapter imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive or
stringent provisions or higher standards shall control.
(3) In the event that a regional stormwater management plan(s) is
prepared and formally adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.1 et seq.
for any drainage area(s) or watershed(s) of which the City of
Brigantine is a part, the stormwater provisions of such a plan(s)
shall be adopted by the City of Brigantine within one year of the
adoption of a regional stormwater management plan (RSWMP) as
an amendment to an areawide water quality management plan.
Local ordinances proposed to implement the RSWMP shall be
submitted to the NJDEP for certification within six months of the
adoption of the RSWMP per N.J.A.C. 7:8.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a site
development that is subject to this chapter, the applicant shall
submit all of the required components of the checklist for the site
development stormwater plan at Subsection C below as part of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval. These
required components are in addition to any other information
required under any provisions of the City of Brigantine's land use
ordinance.170
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the site development project
meets the standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit three copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with § 258-3C of this chapter.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development stormwater plan shall be reviewed as a part of the
subdivision or site plan review process by the municipal board or
official from whom municipal approval is sought. That municipal board
or official shall consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or
Zoning Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets
the standards set forth in this chapter.
170. Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Land Use.
§ 258-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-2
1:764
C. Checklist requirements. Any application for approval of a major
development shall include at least the following information. All
required engineering plans shall be submitted to the City of Brigantine
in CAD Format 15 or higher, registered and rectified to NJ State Plane
Feet NAD 83 or Shape Format NJ State Plan Feet NAD 83, and all other
documents shall be submitted in both paper and commonly used
electronic file formats such as PDF, word processing, database or
spreadsheet files. Three copies of each item shall be submitted.
(1) Topographic Base Map. The applicant shall submit a topographic
base map of the site which extends a minimum of 300 feet beyond
the limits of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet or greater, showing one-foot contour intervals. The
map shall indicate the following: existing surface water drainage,
shorelines, steep slopes, soils, highly erodible soils, wetlands and
floodplains, along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands
and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing
surface and subsurface human-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and man
made features not otherwise shown. The City of Brigantine may
require upstream tributary drainage system information as
necessary.
(2) Environmental site analysis. The applicant shall submit a written
description along with the drawings of the natural and humanmade
features of the site and its environs. This description should
include:
(a) A discussion of environmentally critical areas, soil conditions,
slopes, wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site.
Particular attention should be given to unique, unusual or
environmentally sensitive features and to those that provide
particular opportunities for or constraints on development; and
(b) Detailed soil and other environmental conditions on the portion
of the site proposed for installation of any stormwater BMPs,
including, at a minimum: soils report based on on site soil
tests; locations and spot elevations in plan view of test pits and
permeability tests; permeability test data and calculations; and
any other required soil data (e.g., mounding analyses results)
correlated with location and elevation of each test site; crosssection
of proposed stormwater BMPs with side-by-side
depiction of soil profile drawn to scale and seasonal high water
table elevation identified; and any other information necessary
to demonstrate the suitability of the specific proposed
structural and nonstructural stormwater management
measures relative to the environmental conditions on the
portion(s) of the site proposed for implementation of those
measures.
§ 258-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-2
1:765
(3) Project description and site plan(s). The applicant shall submit a
map (or maps) at the scale of the topographical base map
indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads,
parking areas, utilities, structural facilities for stormwater
management and sediment control, and other permanent
structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show areas where
alterations will occur in the natural terrain and cover, including
lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high groundwater
elevations. A written description of the site plan and justification
for proposed changes in natural conditions shall also be provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan.
(a) The applicant shall submit a detailed land use planning and
source control plan which provides a description of how the
site will be developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater
recharge and stormwater runoff quantity and quality standards
in § 258-4 through use of nonstructural or low-impact
development techniques and source controls to the maximum
extent practicable before relying on structural BMPs. The land
use planning and source control plan shall include a detailed
narrative and associated illustrative maps and/or plans that
specifically address how each of the following nine
nonstructural strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the
NJDEP Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5) and set
forth below Subsection C(4)(a)[1] through [9]) will be
implemented to the maximum extent practicable to meet the
standards in § 258-4 of this chapter on the site. If one or more
of the nine nonstructural strategies will not be implemented on
the site, the applicant shall provide a detailed rationale
establishing a basis for the contention that use of the strategy
is not practicable on the site.
[1] Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
[2] Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect
the flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
[3] Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
[4] Minimize the decrease in the predevelopment "time of
concentration";
[5] Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and
grading;
[6] Minimize soil compaction and all other soil disturbance;
[7] Provide low-maintenance landscaping that provides for the
retention and planting of native plants and minimizes the
§ 258-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-2
1:766
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides, in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24;
[8] Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas; and
[9] Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the
use or exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent
or minimize the release of those pollutants into
stormwater runoff. These source controls shall include, but
are not limited to:
[a] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation
of trash and debris in drainage systems;
[b] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of
trash and debris from drainage systems;
[c] Site design features that help to prevent and/or
contain spills or other harmful accumulations of
pollutants at industrial or commercial developments;
and
[d] Applying fertilizer in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules when establishing vegetation
after land disturbance.
(b) For sites where stormwater will be generated from high
pollutant loading areas or where stormwater will be exposed to
source material, as defined in § 258-7 of this chapter, the
applicant shall also demonstrate in the Land Use Planning and
Source Control Plan that the requirements of § 258-4 have
been met.
(c) The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the performance
standards in § 258-4 of this chapter is not required for
development sites creating less than one acre of disturbance.
However, each application for major development and any
other application where the City of Brigantine otherwise
requires a landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or
revegetation plan in accordance with the CMP standards at
N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.24(c). In addition, the applicant shall
demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing trees and vegetation
on the development site will be preserved and protected
according to the minimum standards established by provisions
of the City of Brigantine Land Use Ordinance,171 Zoning
Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance approval.
171. Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Land Use.
§ 258-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-2
1:767
§ 258-3. Methodologies for the calculation of stormwater runoff
rate and volume, stormwater runoff quality, and groundwater
recharge.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The applicant shall submit
a map, at the same scale as the topographic base map, depicting
the following information:
(a) The total area to be disturbed, paved and/or built upon,
proposed surface contours, land area to be occupied by the
stormwater management facilities and the type of vegetation
thereon, and details of the proposed plan to manage and
dispose of stormwater; and
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention (if applicable) and emergency spillway provisions
with maximum discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations (groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff rate,
volume and quality). The applicant shall submit comprehensive
hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for the design
storms specified in § 258-3. The standards for groundwater
recharge and stormwater runoff rate, volume and quality required
by § 258-4 shall be met using the methods, calculations and
assumptions provided in § 258-3.
(7) Inspection, maintenance and repair plan. The applicant shall
submit a detailed plan describing how the proposed stormwater
management measure(s) shall meet the maintenance and repair
requirements of § 258-6 of this chapter. Said plan shall include, at a
minimum, the following elements:
(a) The frequency with which inspections will be made;
(b) The specific maintenance tasks and requirements for each
proposed structural and nonstructural BMP;
(c) The name, address and telephone number for the entity
responsible for implementation of the maintenance plan;
(d) The reporting requirements; and
(e) Copies of the inspection and maintenance reporting sheets.
(8) Exception from submission requirements. An exception may be
granted from submission of any of these required components
(except Subsection C(7) above, Inspection, maintenance, and
repair plan) if its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
§ 258-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-3
1:768
A. Method of calculating stormwater runoff rate and volume.
(1) In complying with the stormwater runoff quantity and rate
standards in § 258-4B, the design engineer shall calculate the
stormwater runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff Equation, Runoff
Curve Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described
in the NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology
and Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds,
incorporated herein by reference, as amended and supplemented.
Alternative methods of calculation may be utilized, provided such
alternative methods are at least as protective as the NRCS
methodology when considered on a regional stormwater
management basis.
(2) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall separately calculate and then combine the
runoff volumes from pervious and directly connected impervious
surfaces within each drainage area within the parcel.
(3) Calculation of stormwater runoff from unconnected impervious
surfaces shall be based, as applicable, upon the two-step method
described in the current New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual or the NRCS methodology.
(4) In calculating stormwater runoff using the NRCS methodology, the
design engineer shall use appropriate twenty-four-hour rainfall
depths as developed for the project site by the National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(5) When calculating stormwater runoff for predeveloped site
conditions, the design engineer shall use the following criteria:
(a) When selecting or calculating runoff curve numbers (CNs) for
predeveloped project site conditions, the project site's land
cover shall be assumed to be woods in good condition.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate runoff
coefficients if:
[1] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof
without interruption for at least five years immediately
prior to the time of application; and
[2] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
(b) If more than one land cover has existed on the site during the
five years immediately prior to the time of application, the land
cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations.
§ 258-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-3
1:769
(c) All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in good
hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to
have conservation treatment.
(d) In calculating predeveloped site stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall include the effects of all land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows,
and culverts, that affect predeveloped site stormwater runoff
rates and/or volumes.
(e) Where tailwater will affect the hydraulic performance of a
stormwater management measure, the design engineer shall
include such effects in the measure's design.
B. Method of calculating stormwater runoff quality.
(1) In complying with the stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 258-4F(1), the design engineer shall calculate the stormwater
runoff rate and volume using the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service (NRCS) Runoff Equation, Runoff Curve
Numbers, and Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the
NRCS National Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, as
amended and supplemented.
(2) The design engineer shall also use the NJDEP Water Quality Design
Storm, which is 1 1/4 inches of rainfall falling in a nonlinear pattern
in two hours. Details of the Water Quality Design Storm are shown
in Table 1.
(3) Calculation of runoff volumes, peak rates, and hydrographs for the
Water Quality Design Storm may take into account the
implementation of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
[Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(a).]
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
§ 258-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-3
1:770
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
[Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(a).]
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(4) Total suspended solids (TSS) reduction calculations.
(a) If more than one stormwater BMP in series is necessary to
achieve the required 80% TSS reduction for a site, the
applicant shall utilize the following formula to calculate TSS
reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100, where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs;
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP; and
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP.
(b) If there is more than one on site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using
a weighted average.
(5) TSS removal rates for stormwater BMPs.
(a) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual. The BMP
Manual may be obtained from the address identified in
§ 258-12A or found on the NJDEP's Web site at
www.njstormwater.org. TSS reduction shall be calculated
based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2.
(b) Alternative stormwater management measures, removal rates
and methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the
design engineer provides documentation demonstrating the
§ 258-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-3
1:771
capability of these alternative rates and methods to the City of
Brigantine. Any alternative stormwater management measure,
removal rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
subject to approval by the City of Brigantine and a copy shall
be provided to the following:
[1] The Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418,
Trenton, NJ 08625-0418.
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs
[Source: 7:8-5.5(c) and New Jersey BMP Manual Chapter
4]
Best
Management
Practice
TSS
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Nitrogen
Percent
Removal
Rate
Bioretention
systems
90 60 30
Constructed
stormwater
wetland
90 50 30
Extended
detention
basin
40-60 (final
rate based
upon
detention
time; see
New Jersey
BMP
Manual,
Chap. 9)
20 20
Infiltration
basin
80 60 50
Manufactured
treatment
device
Pollutant
removal
rates as
certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 258-3
Pollutant
removal rates
as certified
by NJDEP;
see § 258-3.
Pollutant
removal rates
as certified by
NJDEP; see
§ 258-3.
80 (porous
paving)
Pervious
paving
systems 80
(permeable
pavers with
storage bed)
60 50
§ 258-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-3
1:772
Table 2: Pollutant Removal Rates for BMPs
[Source: 7:8-5.5(c) and New Jersey BMP Manual Chapter
4]
Best
Management
Practice
TSS
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Phosphorus
Percent
Removal
Rate
Total
Nitrogen
Percent
Removal
Rate
0 - volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage bed)
0 - volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage bed)
0 - volume
reduction
only
(permeable
pavers
without
storage bed)
Sand filter 80 50 35
60 (turf
grass)
70 (native
grasses,
meadow and
planted
woods)
Vegetative
filter strip
(For filter
strips with
multiple
vegetated
covers, the
final TSS
removal rate
should be
based upon a
weighted
average of
the adopted
rates shown
in Table 2,
based upon
the relative
flow lengths
through each
cover type.)
80
(indigenous
woods)
30 30
Wet pond/
retention
basin
50-90 (final
rate based
upon pool
volume and
detention
time; see NJ
BMP Manual
50 30
(6) Nutrient removal rates for stormwater BMPs. For purposes of
postdevelopment nutrient load reduction calculations, Table 2
§ 258-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-3
1:773
presents the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed
in accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual. If alternative
stormwater BMPs are proposed, the applicant shall demonstrate
that the selected BMPs will achieve the nutrient removal standard
required in § 258-4F.
C. Methods of calculating groundwater recharge.
(1) In complying with the groundwater recharge requirements in
§ 258-4C(1), the design engineer may calculate groundwater
recharge in accordance with the New Jersey Groundwater
Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS) computer program incorporated
herein by reference as amended and supplemented. Information
regarding the methodology is available in § 258-10A or from the
New Jersey BMP Manual.
(2) Alternative groundwater recharge calculation methods to meet
these requirements may be used upon approval by the municipal
engineer.
(3) In complying with the groundwater recharge requirements in
§ 258-4C(1)(b), the design engineer shall:
(a) Calculate stormwater runoff volumes in accordance with the
USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and Runoff
Curve Numbers, as described in the NRCS National
Engineering Handbook Part 630 - Hydrology and Technical
Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds as
amended and supplemented; and
(b) Use appropriate two-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall depths as
developed for the project site by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration, available online at
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/index.html.
(4) When calculating groundwater recharge or stormwater runoff for
predeveloped site conditions, the design engineer shall use the
following criteria:
(a) When selecting land covers or calculating runoff curve
numbers (CNs) for predeveloped project site conditions, the
project site's land cover shall be assumed to be woods.
However, another land cover may be used to calculate runoff
coefficients if:
[1] Such land cover has existed at the site or portion thereof
without interruption for at least five years immediately
prior to the time of application; and
§ 258-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-3
1:774
§ 258-4. Performance standards for major development.
[2] The design engineer can document the character and
extent of such land cover through the use of photographs,
affidavits, and/or other acceptable land use records.
(b) If more than one land cover, other than woods, has existed on
the site during the five years immediately prior to the time of
application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
(including woods) shall be used for the computations.
(c) All predeveloped land covers shall be assumed to be in good
hydrologic condition and, if cultivated, shall be assumed to
have conservation treatment.
A. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the performance standards in
this section for major development shall be met by incorporating
the nine nonstructural strategies identified in Subchapter 5 of the
NJ Stormwater Management Rules (N.J.A.C. 7:8-5), and set forth in
§ 258-2C(4)(a), into the design. The applicant shall identify within
the land use planning and source control plan required by
§ 258-2C(4) of this chapter how each of the nine nonstructural
measures will be incorporated into the design of the project to the
maximum extent practicable.
(2) If the applicant contends that it is not practical for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons to incorporate any of the nine
nonstructural strategies into the design of a particular project, the
applicant shall provide a detailed rationale establishing a basis for
the contention that use of the strategy is not practical on the site.
This rationale shall be submitted in accordance with the checklist
requirements established by § 258-2 to the City of Brigantine. A
determination by the City of Brigantine that this rationale is
inadequate or without merit shall result in a denial of the
application unless one of the following conditions are met:
(a) The land use planning and source control plan is amended to
include a description of how all nine nonstructural measures
will be implemented on the development site, and the amended
plan is approved by the City of Brigantine;
(b) The land use planning and source control plan is amended to
provide an alternative nonstructural strategy or measure that
is not included in the list of nine nonstructural measures, but
still meets the performance standards in § 258-4, and the
amended plan is approved by the City of Brigantine; or
(c) The land use planning and source control plan is amended to
provide an adequate rationale for the contention that use of the
§ 258-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-4
1:775
particular strategy is not practical on the site, and the
amended plan is approved by the City of Brigantine.
(3) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each applicant
shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing trees and vegetation
on the development site will be preserved, protected and
maintained according to the minimum standards established by
provisions of the City of Brigantine Land Use Ordinance, Zoning
Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance approval. Existing
trees and vegetation shall be protected during construction
activities in accordance with the Standard for Tree Protection
During Construction provided in the NJ State Soil Conservation
Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, which is incorporated herein by reference as amended
and supplemented.
(4) In addition to all other requirements of this section, each
application for major development, and any other application
where the City of Brigantine otherwise requires a landscaping plan,
shall contain a landscaping or revegetation plan.
(5) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 258-4 shall be
dedicated to a government entity; shall be subjected to a
conservation easement filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office; or shall be subjected to an equivalent form of restriction
approved by the City of Brigantine that ensures that that measure,
or equivalent stormwater management measure is maintained in
perpetuity, as detailed in § 258-6 of this chapter.
(6) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, which may be obtained
from the address identified in § 258-12A or found on the NJDEP's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
(7) Exception for major development sites creating less than one acre
of disturbance. The use of nonstructural strategies to meet the
performance standards in § 258-4 of this chapter is not required for
major development creating less than one acre of disturbance.
However, the following requirements shall be met:
(a) Each application for major development and any other
application where the City of Brigantine otherwise requires a
landscaping plan shall contain a landscaping or revegetation
plan;
(b) Each applicant shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, existing
trees and vegetation on the development site will be preserved
and protected according to the minimum standards established
by provisions of the City of Brigantine Land Use Ordinance,
Zoning Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance
approval; and
§ 258-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-4
1:776
(c) Existing trees and vegetation shall be protected during
construction activities in accordance with the Standard for
Tree Protection During Construction provided in the NJ State
Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, which is incorporated herein
by reference as amended and supplemented.
B. Stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards.
(1) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from any
point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetlands transition area
or surface water body. In addition, stormwater runoff shall not be
directed in such a way as to increase the volume and/or rate of
discharge into any surface water body from that which existed
prior to development of the site.
(2) To the maximum extent practical, there shall be no direct discharge
of stormwater runoff onto farm fields so as to protect farm crops
from damage due to flooding, erosion and long-term saturation of
cultivated crops and cropland.
(3) For all major developments, the total runoff volume generated from
the net increase in impervious surfaces by a ten-year, twenty-fourhour
storm shall be retained and infiltrated on site.
(4) In addition, the design engineer, using the assumptions and factors
for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge calculations
contained in § 258-3, shall either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
the postdeveloped stormwater runoff hydrographs from the
project site for the two-, ten-, and one-hundred-year storms do
not exceed, at any point in time, the site's predeveloped runoff
hydrographs for the same storms;
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
under postdeveloped site conditions:
[1] There is no increase in predeveloped stormwater runoff
rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storms; and
[2] Any increased stormwater runoff volume or change in
stormwater runoff timing for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storms will not increase flood damage at or
downstream of the project site. When performing this
analysis for predeveloped site conditions, all off-site
development levels shall reflect existing conditions. When
performing this analysis for postdeveloped site conditions,
all off-site development levels shall reflect full
development in accordance with current zoning and land
use ordinances; or
§ 258-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-4
1:777
(c) Demonstrate that the peak postdeveloped stormwater runoff
rates from the project site for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storms are 50%, 75% and 80%, respectively, of the site's
peak predeveloped stormwater runoff rates for the same
storms. Peak outflow rates from on-site stormwater measures
for these storms shall be adjusted where necessary to account
for the discharge of increased stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes from project site areas not controlled by the on-site
measures. These percentages do not have to be applied to
those portions of the project site that are not proposed for
development at the time of application, provided that such
areas are:
[1] Protected from future development by imposition of a
conservation easement, deed restriction, or other
acceptable legal measures; or
[2] Would be subject to review under these standards if they
are proposed for any degree of development in the future.
(5) In tidal flood hazard areas, a stormwater runoff quantity analysis in
accordance with Subsection B(4)(a), (b) and (c) above shall only be
applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase
flood damages below the point of discharge.
(6) The standards for stormwater runoff quantity and rate required by
this section shall be met using the methods, calculations and
assumptions provided in § 258-3.
C. Groundwater recharge standards.
(1) For all major developments, with the exception of those described
in § 258-C(4), below, the design engineer, using the assumptions
and factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations contained in § 258-3, shall either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
the postdeveloped project site maintains 100% of the site's
predeveloped average annual groundwater recharge volume;
or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that
any increase in the project site's stormwater runoff volume for
the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm from predeveloped to
postdeveloped conditions is infiltrated on site.
(2) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all site
groundwater recharge measures so as to avoid adverse hydraulic
impacts. Adverse hydraulic impacts include but are not limited to
raising the groundwater table so as to cause surface ponding;
flooding of basements and other subsurface structures and areas;
§ 258-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-4
1:778
preventing a stormwater infiltration basin from completely
draining via infiltration within 72 hours of a design storm event;
and interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
disposal systems and other surface and subsurface facilities in the
vicinity of the groundwater recharge measure.
(3) The standards for groundwater recharge required by this section
shall be met using the methods, calculations and assumptions
provided in § 258-3.
(4) Exceptions.
(a) The preceding groundwater recharge standards shall not apply
to sites that create less than one acre of disturbance.
D. Erosion control standards. The minimum design and performance
standards for erosion control are those established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and its
implementing regulations, N.J.A.C 2:90-1.1 through 1.4.
E. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) There shall be no direct discharge of stormwater runoff from any
point or nonpoint source to any wetland, wetland transition area or
surface water body.
(2) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
total suspended solids (TSS) load in the stormwater runoff from the
postdeveloped site by 80%, expressed as an annual average.
(3) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce the nutrient load in the stormwater runoff from the
postdeveloped site by the maximum extent practicable. In
achieving this reduction, the design of the development site shall
include nonstructural and structural stormwater management
measures that optimize nutrient removal while still achieving the
groundwater recharge, runoff quantity and rate, and TSS removal
standards in this section.
(4) The standards for stormwater runoff quality required by this
section shall be met using the methods, calculations, assumptions
and pollutant removal rates provided in § 258-3.
(5) Exceptions.
(a) The preceding stormwater runoff quality standards shall not
apply to the following major development sites:
[1] Major development sites where less than 1/4 acre of
additional impervious surface is proposed; or
[2] Major residential development sites that create less than
one acre of disturbance.
§ 258-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-4
1:779
(b) The TSS reduction requirement in § 258-4F(2) shall not apply
to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a
numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the NJPDES
rules (N.J.A.C. 7:14A) or in a discharge specifically exempt
under a NJPDES permit from this requirement.
(c) The stormwater runoff quantity and rate standards in § 258-4B
shall still be met for all major development sites.
F. Additional stormwater quality standards for high pollutant loading
areas and areas where stormwater runoff is exposed to source material.
(1) This subsection applies to the following areas of a major
development as defined in § 258-7 of this chapter:
(a) High pollutant loading areas (HPLAs); and
(b) Areas where stormwater is exposed to "source material."
(2) For a major development in areas described in Subsection F(1)(a)
or (b) above, in addition to the infiltration requirements specified in
Subsection B(2) and the groundwater recharge requirements
specified in Subsection C, the applicant shall demonstrate in the
land use planning and source control plan required in § 258-2C(4)
that the following requirements have been met:
(a) The extent of the areas described in Subsection F(1)(a) and (b)
above have been minimized on the development site to the
maximum extent practicable;
(b) The stormwater runoff from the areas described in Subsection
F(1)(a) and (b) above is segregated to the maximum extent
practicable from the stormwater runoff generated from the
remainder of the site such that commingling of the stormwater
runoff from the areas described in Subsection F(1)(a) and (b)
above and the remainder of the site will be minimized;
(c) The amount of precipitation falling directly on the areas
described in Subsection F(1)(a) and (b) above is minimized to
the maximum extent practicable by means of a canopy, roof or
other similar structure that reduces the generation of
stormwater runoff; and
(d) The stormwater runoff from or commingled with the areas
described in Subsection F(1)(a) and (b) above for the water
quality design storm, defined in § 258-3B, Table 1 shall be
subject to pretreatment by one or more of the following
stormwater BMPs, designed in accordance with the New
Jersey BMP Manual to provide 90% TSS removal:
[1] Bioretention system;
[2] Sand filter;
§ 258-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-4
1:780
[3] Wet ponds which shall be hydraulically disconnected by a
minimum of two feet of vertical separation from the
seasonal high water table and shall be designed to achieve
a minimum 80% TSS removal rate;
[4] Constructed stormwater wetlands; and/or
[5] Media filtration system manufactured treatment device
with a minimum 80% TSS removal as verified by the New
Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and as
certified by NJDEP.
(e) If the potential for contamination of stormwater runoff by
petroleum products exists on site, prior to being conveyed to
the pretreatment BMP required in Subsection D(2)(d) above,
the stormwater runoff from the areas described in Subsection
F(1)(a) and (b) above shall be conveyed through an oil/grease
separator or other equivalent manufactured filtering device to
remove the petroleum hydrocarbons. The applicant shall
provide the reviewing agency with sufficient data to
demonstrate acceptable performance of the device.
G. Threatened and endangered species and associated habitat standards.
Stormwater management measures shall address the impacts of the
development on habitat for threatened and endangered species, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(c), N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.27, and 7:50-6.33
and 34.
H. Exceptions and mitigation requirements.
(1) Exceptions from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements established by this chapter may be granted at the
discretion of the City of Brigantine provided that all of the following
conditions are met:
(a) The exception is consistent with that allowed by the City of
Brigantine;
(b) The City of Brigantine has an adopted and effective municipal
stormwater management plan in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:8-4.4, which includes a mitigation plan in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:8-4.2(c)11. The mitigation plan shall identify what
measures are necessary to offset the deficit created by
granting the exception and the municipality shall submit a
written report to the county review agency and the NJDEP
describing the exception and the required mitigation.
Guidance for developing municipal stormwater management
plans, including mitigation plans, is available from the NJDEP,
Division of Watershed Management and the New Jersey BMP
Manual.
§ 258-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-4
1:781
§ 258-5. Design, construction, and safety standards for structural
measures.
(c) The applicant demonstrates that mitigation, in addition to the
requirements of mitigation plan discussed in Subsection
4(1)(b) above, will be provided consistent with one of the
following options:
[1] Mitigation may be provided off site, but within the same
drainage area as the development site, and shall meet or
exceed the equivalent recharge, quality or quantity
performance standard which is lacking on the
development site due to the exception; or
[2] In lieu of the required mitigation, a monetary in lieu
contribution may be provided by the applicant to the City
of Brigantine in accordance with the following:
[a] The amount of the in lieu contribution shall be
determined by the City of Brigantine, but the
maximum in lieu contribution required shall be
equivalent to the cost of implementing and
maintaining the stormwater management measure(s)
for which the exception is granted;
[b] The in lieu contribution shall be used to fund an offsite
stormwater control mitigation project(s) located
within the same drainage area as the development
site, and shall meet or exceed the equivalent recharge,
quality or quantity performance standards which is
lacking on the development site. Such mitigation
project shall be identified by the City of Brigantine in
the City of Brigantine's adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. The stormwater control project to
which the monetary contribution will be applied shall
be identified by the City of Brigantine at the time the
exception is granted. The applicant shall amend the
project description and site plan required in
§ 258-2C(3) to incorporate a description of both the
standards for which an on-site exception is being
granted and of the selected off-site mitigation project.
(d) The City of Brigantine shall expend the in lieu contribution to
implement the selected off-site mitigation project within five
years from the date that payment is received. Should the City
of Brigantine fail to expend the in lieu contribution within the
required timeframe, the mitigation option provided in
Subsection 4(1)(c)[2] of this chapter shall be void and the City
of Brigantine shall be prohibited from collecting in lieu
contributions.
§ 258-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-5
1:782
A. General design and construction standards.
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
meet the standards established in this section. These standards
have been developed to protect public safety, conserve natural
features, create an aesthetically pleasing site and promote proper
on site stormwater management.172
(2) The following structural stormwater management measures may
be utilized as part of a stormwater management system at a major
land development, provided that the applicant demonstrates that
they are designed, constructed and maintained so as to meet the
standards and requirements established by this chapter. If
alternative stormwater management measures are proposed, the
applicant shall demonstrate that the selected measures will
achieve the standards established by this chapter.
(a) Bioretention systems;
(b) Constructed stormwater wetlands;
(c) Extended detention basins;
(d) Infiltration basins;
(e) Vegetated filter strips;
(f) Infiltration basins and trenches;
(g) Wet ponds with suitable liners;
(h) Pervious paving systems; and
(i) Manufactured treatment devices, provided their pollutant
removal rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for
Advanced Technology and certified by the NJDEP.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including
environmentally critical areas, wetlands, flood-prone areas, slopes,
depth to seasonal high water table, soil type, permeability and
texture, and drainage area and drainage patterns.
(4) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed
and constructed to be strong, durable, and corrosion resistant
(measures that are consistent with the relevant portions of the
Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3, 7.4,
and 7.8 shall be deemed to meet this requirement); to minimize and
facilitate maintenance and repairs; and to ensure proper
functioning.
172. Editor's Note: Though not required by N.J.A.C. 7:8, pursuant to their authority,
municipalities may have the option to require existing basins that pose a public health or
safety hazard to be retrofitted to comply with the standards in this subsection.
§ 258-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-5
1:783
(5) For all stormwater management measures at a development site,
each applicant shall submit a detailed inspection, maintenance and
repair plan consistent with the requirements of § 258-5 of this
chapter.
(6) To the maximum extent practicable, the design engineer shall
design structural stormwater management measures on the
development site in a manner that:
(a) Limits site disturbance, maximizes stormwater management
efficiencies, and maintains or improves aesthetic conditions;
(b) Utilizes multiple stormwater management measures, smaller
in size and distributed spatially throughout the land
development site, instead of a single larger structural
stormwater management measure;
(c) Incorporates pretreatment measures. Pretreatment can extend
the functional life and increase the pollutant removal capability
of a structural stormwater management measure.
Pretreatment measures may be designed in accordance with
the New Jersey BMP Manual or other sources approved by the
municipal engineer.
(7) Stormwater management basins shall be designed in a manner that
complements and mimics the existing natural landscape, including
but not limited to the following design strategies:
(a) Use of natural, non-wetland wooded depressions for
stormwater runoff storage; and
(b) Establishment of attractive landscaping in and around the
basin that mimics the existing vegetation.
(8) Stormwater management basins shall be designed with gently
sloping sides. The maximum allowable basin side slope shall be
three horizontal to one vertical.
(9) Guidance on the design and construction of structural stormwater
management measures may be found in the New Jersey BMP
Manual. Other guidance sources may also be used upon approval
by the municipal engineer.
(10) After all construction activities and required field testing have been
completed on the development site, as-built plans depicting design
and as-built elevations of all stormwater management measures
shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor and submitted to the
municipal engineer. Based upon the municipal engineer's review of
the as-built plans, all corrections or remedial actions deemed by
the municipal engineer to be necessary due to the failure to comply
with the standards established by this chapter and/or any reasons
of public health or safety shall be completed by the applicant. In
§ 258-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-5
1:784
lieu of review by the municipal engineer, the City of Brigantine
reserves the right to engage a professional engineer to review the
as-built plans. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with such
review.
B. Design and construction standards for stormwater infiltration BMPs.
(1) Stormwater infiltration BMPs, such as bioretention systems with
infiltration, dry wells, infiltration basins, pervious paving systems
with storage beds, and sand filters with infiltration, shall be
designed, constructed and maintained to completely drain the total
runoff volume generated by the basin's maximum design storm
within 72 hours after a storm event. Runoff storage for greater
times can render the BMP ineffective and may result in anaerobic
conditions, odor and both water quality and mosquito breeding
problems.
(2) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be designed, constructed and
maintained to provide a minimum separation of at least two feet
between the elevation of the lowest point of the bottom of the
infiltration BMP and the seasonal high water table.
(3) A stormwater infiltration BMP shall be sited in suitable soils
verified by field testing to have permeability rates between one and
20 inches per hour. If such site soils do not exist or if the design
engineer demonstrates that it is not practical for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons to site the stormwater infiltration
BMP(s) in such soils, then the stormwater infiltration BMP(s) may
be sited in soils verified by field testing to have permeability rates
in excess of 20 inches per hour, provided that a bioretention
system, designed, installed and maintained in accordance with the
New Jersey BMP Manual is installed to meet one of the following
conditions:
(a) The bioretention system is constructed as a separate measure
designed to provide pretreatment of stormwater and to convey
the pretreated stormwater into the infiltration BMP; or
(b) The bioretention system is integrated into and made part of the
infiltration BMP and, as such, does not require an underdrain
system. If this option is selected, the infiltration BMP shall be
designed and constructed so that the maximum water depth in
the bioretention system portion of the BMP during treatment
of the stormwater quality design storm is 12 inches in
accordance with the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(4) The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within a BMP
that relies on infiltration shall be 1/2 inch per hour. A factor of
safety of two shall be applied to the soil's field-tested permeability
rate to determine the soil's design permeability rate. (For example,
if the field-tested permeability rate of the soil is four inches per
hour, its design permeability rate would be two inches per hour.)
§ 258-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-5
1:785
The minimum design permeability rate for the soil within a
stormwater infiltration basin shall also be sufficient to achieve the
minimum seventy-two-hour drain time described in Subsection B(1)
above. The maximum design permeability shall be 10 inches per
hour.
(5) A soil's field tested permeability rate shall be determined in
accordance with the following:
(a) The predevelopment field test permeability rate shall be
determined according to the methodologies provided in
§ 258-10C(3) of this chapter;
(b) The results of the required field permeability tests shall
demonstrate a minimum tested infiltration rate of one inch per
hour;
(c) After all construction activities have been completed on the
site and the finished grade has been established in the
infiltration BMP, postdevelopment field permeability tests shall
also be conducted according to the methodologies provided in
§ 258-10C(3) of this chapter;
(d) If the results of the postdevelopment field permeability tests
fail to achieve the minimum required design permeability rates
in Subsection B(5) above utilizing a factor of safety of two, the
stormwater infiltration BMP shall be renovated and retested
until such minimum required design permeability rates are
achieved; and
(e) The results of all field permeability tests shall be certified by a
professional engineer and transmitted to the municipal
engineer.
(6) To help ensure maintenance of the design permeability rate over
time, a six-inch layer of K5 soil shall be placed on the bottom of a
stormwater infiltration BMP. This soil layer shall meet the textural
and permeability specifications of a K5 soil as provided at N.J.A.C.
7:9A, Appendix A, Figure 6, and be certified to meet these
specifications by a professional engineer licensed in the State of
New Jersey. The depth to the seasonal high water table shall be
measured from the bottom of the K5 sand layer.
(7) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on the
groundwater table and design the project site and all stormwater
infiltration basins so as to avoid adverse hydraulic impacts.
Adverse hydraulic impacts include but are not limited to raising the
groundwater table so as to cause surface ponding; flooding of
basements and other subsurface structures and areas; preventing a
stormwater infiltration basin from completely draining via
infiltration within 72 hours of a design storm event; and
interference with the proper operation of subsurface sewage
§ 258-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-5
1:786
disposal systems and other surface and subsurface structures in
the vicinity of the stormwater infiltration basin.
(8) The design engineer shall conduct a mounding analysis, as defined
in § 258-7, of all stormwater infiltration BMPs. The mounding
analysis shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements in
§ 258-10C(3). Where the mounding analysis identifies adverse
impacts, the stormwater infiltration BMP shall be redesigned or
relocated, as appropriate.
(9) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall be constructed in accordance
with the following:
(a) To avoid sedimentation that may result in clogging and reduce
the basin's permeability rate, stormwater infiltration basins
shall be constructed according to the following:
[1] Unless the conditions in Subsection B(9)(a)[2] below are
met, a stormwater infiltration basin shall not be placed
into operation until its drainage area is completely
stabilized. Instead, upstream runoff shall be diverted
around the basin and into separate, temporary stormwater
management facilities and sediment basins. Such
temporary facilities and basins shall be installed and
utilized for stormwater management and sediment control
until stabilization is achieved in accordance with the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey, which is incorporated herein by reference as
amended and supplemented.
[2] If the design engineer determines that, for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons, temporary stormwater
management facilities and sediment basins cannot be
constructed on the site, the stormwater infiltration basin
may be placed into operation prior to the complete
stabilization of its drainage area provided that the basin's
bottom during this period is constructed at a depth at least
two feet higher than its final design elevation. All other
infiltration BMP construction requirements in this section
shall be followed. When the drainage area is completely
stabilized, all accumulated sediment shall be removed
from the infiltration BMP, which shall then be excavated to
its final design elevation in accordance with the
construction requirements of this section and the
performance standards in § 258-4.
(b) To avoid compaction of subgrade soils of BMPs that rely on
infiltration, no heavy equipment such as backhoes, dump
trucks or bulldozers shall be permitted to operate within the
footprint of the BMP. All excavation required to construct a
stormwater infiltration BMP shall be performed by equipment
§ 258-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-5
1:787
placed outside the BMP. If this is not possible, the soils within
the excavated area shall be renovated and tilled after
construction is completed to reverse the effects of compaction.
In addition, post development soil permeability testing shall be
performed in accordance with Subsection B(5) of this section.
(c) Earthwork associated with stormwater infiltration BMP
construction, including excavation, grading, cutting or filling,
shall not be performed when soil moisture content is above the
lower plastic limit.
C. Safety standards for structural stormwater management measures.
(1) If a structural stormwater management measure has an outlet
structure, escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the
structure. "Escape provisions" means the permanent installation of
ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that provide readily
accessible means of ingress and egress from the outlet structure.
(2) A trash rack is a device intended to intercept runoff-borne trash
and debris that might otherwise block the hydraulic openings in an
outlet structure of a structural stormwater management measure.
Trash racks shall be installed upstream of such outlet structure
openings as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the
structural stormwater management measure in accordance with
the following:
(a) The trash rack should be constructed primarily of bars aligned
in the direction of flow with one-inch spacing between the bars
to the elevation of the water quality design storm. For
elevations higher than the water quality design storm, the bars
shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the hydraulic
opening it is protecting or six inches, whichever is less.
Transverse bars aligned perpendicular to flow should be sized
and spaced as necessary for rack stability and strength.
(b) The trash rack shall not adversely affect the hydraulic
performance of either the outlet structure opening it is
protecting or the overall outlet structure.
(c) The trash rack shall have sufficient net open area under clean
conditions to limit the peak design storm velocity through it to
a maximum of 2.5 feet per second.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) An overflow grate is a device intended to protect the opening in the
top of a stormwater management measure outlet structure. If an
§ 258-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-5
1:788
outlet structure has an overflow grate, such grate shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
shall be removable for emergencies and maintenance;
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no more than two inches
across the smallest dimension; and
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(4) The maximum side slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm
shall not be steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
(5) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
structural stormwater management measures having a permanent
pool of water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below the
permanent water surface, and the second step shall be located one
foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface. See
Subsection C(5)(a) below, for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(a) Illustration of safety ledges.
Source: N.J.A.C. 7:8-6 Appendix A.
§ 258-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-6
1:789
§ 258-6. Inspection, maintenance and repair.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review pursuant to § 258-1C of this
chapter shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C
below.
B. General inspection, maintenance and repair plan.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare an inspection, maintenance and
repair plan for the stormwater management measures, including
both structural and nonstructural measures incorporated into the
design of a major development. This plan shall be submitted as part
of the checklist requirements established in § 258-2C. Inspection
and maintenance guidelines for stormwater management measures
are available in the New Jersey BMP Manual.
(2) The inspection, maintenance and repair plan shall contain the
following:
(a) Accurate and comprehensive drawings of the site's stormwater
management measures;
(b) Specific locations of each stormwater management measure
identified by means of longitude and latitude as well as block
and lot number;
(c) Specific preventative and corrective maintenance tasks and
schedules for such tasks for each stormwater BMP;
(d) Cost estimates, including estimated cost of sediment, debris or
trash removal; and
(e) The name, address and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for regular inspections and preventative
and corrective maintenance (including repair and
replacement). If the responsible person or persons is a
corporation, company, partnership, firm, association,
municipality or political subdivision of this state, the name and
telephone number of an appropriate contact person shall also
be included.
(3) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log
of all preventative and corrective maintenance performed for the
site's stormwater management measures, including a record of all
inspections and copies of all maintenance-related work orders in
the inspection, maintenance and repair plan. Said records and
inspection reports shall be retained for a minimum of five years.
(4) If the inspection, maintenance and repair plan identifies a person
other than the developer (for example, a public agency or
homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
inspection and maintenance, the plan shall include documentation
§ 258-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-6
1:790
of such person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of
the developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
measure to such person under an applicable ordinance or
regulation.
(5) If the person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Subsection B(3) above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on Subsection
B(6) below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for each
property on which the maintenance described in the maintenance
plan shall be undertaken.
(6) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the
effectiveness of the inspection, maintenance and repair plan at
least once per year and update the plan and the deed as needed.
(7) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Subsection B(2) above shall submit the updated
inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the documentation
required by Subsection B(2) and (3) above to the City of Brigantine
once per year.
(8) The person responsible for inspection, maintenance and repair
identified under Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make
available, upon request by any public entity with administrative,
health, environmental or safety authority over the site, the
inspection, maintenance and repair plan and the documentation
required by Subsection B(2) and (3) above.
C. Responsibility for inspection, repair and maintenance shall not be
assigned or transferred to the owner or tenant of an individual property
in a residential development or project, unless such owner or tenant
owns or leases the entire residential development or project.
D. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including but not limited to repairs or replacement to any associated
appurtenance of the measure; removal of sediment, debris, or trash;
restoration of eroded areas; snow and ice removal; fence repair or
replacement; restoration of vegetation; repair or replacement of
linings; and restoration of infiltration function.
E. Stormwater management measure easements shall be provided by the
property owner as necessary for facility inspections and maintenance
and preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and facilities. The purpose of the easement shall be
specified in the maintenance agreement.
F. In the event that the stormwater management measure becomes a
public health nuisance or danger to public safety or public health, or if
it is in need of maintenance or repair, the City of Brigantine shall so
§ 258-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-6
1:791
notify the responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice,
the responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or the municipal engineer's designee. The City of Brigantine,
at its discretion, may extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance
and repair for good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to
perform such maintenance and repair within the allowable time, the
City of Brigantine may immediately proceed to do so with its own forces
and equipment and/or through contractors. The costs and expenses
of such maintenance and repair by the City of Brigantine shall be
entered on the tax roll as a special charge against the property and
collected with any other taxes levied thereon for the year in which the
maintenance and repair was performed.
G. Requirements for inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater
BMPs that rely on infiltration. If a stormwater infiltration BMP is
incorporated into the design of a major development, the applicant shall
include the following requirements in its inspection, maintenance and
repair plan:
(1) Once per month (if needed): mow side slopes, remove litter and
debris, stabilize eroded banks, repair erosion at inflow structure(s);
(2) After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall: ensure that
infiltration BMPs drain completely within 72 hours after the storm
event. If stored water fails to infiltrate 72 hours after the end of the
storm, corrective measures shall be taken. Raking or tilling by light
equipment can assist in maintaining infiltration capacity and break
up clogged surfaces;
(3) Four times per year (quarterly): inspect stormwater infiltration
BMPs for clogging and excessive debris and sediment
accumulation within the BMP, remove sediment (if needed) when
completely dry;
(4) Two times per year: inspect for signs of damage to structures,
repair eroded areas, check for signs of petroleum contamination
and remediate;
(5) Once per year: inspect BMPs for unwanted tree growth and remove
if necessary, disc or otherwise aerate bottom of infiltration basin to
a minimum depth of six inches; and
(6) After every storm exceeding one inch of rainfall, inspect and, if
necessary, remove and replace K5 sand layer and accumulated
sediment, to restore original infiltration rate.
(7) Additional guidance for the inspection, maintenance and repair of
stormwater infiltration BMPs can be found in the New Jersey BMP
Manual.
§ 258-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-6
1:792
H. Financing of inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater BMPs.
An adequate means of ensuring permanent financing of the inspection,
maintenance and repair of stormwater BMPs shall be implemented and
detailed in the inspection, maintenance and repair plan. Permanent
financing of the inspection, maintenance and repair of stormwater
BMPs shall be accomplished by:
(1) The assumption of the inspection and maintenance program by a
municipality, county, public utility or homeowner's association.
(2) The required payment of fees to a municipal stormwater fund in an
amount equivalent to the cost of both ongoing maintenance
activities and necessary structural replacements. The fee schedule
shall be based upon the contractual obligations for the public
works personnel, including benefits and overhead and equipment
operation costs.
(3) Prior to the granting of any site development approval, the
applicant shall enter into an agreement with the municipality to
ensure the continued operation and maintenance of the stormwater
facility. This agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the
municipal attorney and may include, but may not necessarily be
limited to, personal guaranties, deed restrictions, covenants and
bonds. In cases where the property is subdivided and sold
separately, a homeowners' association or responsible entity should
be established as the responsible entity, absent an agreement by
the governmental agency to assume responsibility. The agreement
shall also provide for regular inspection at the expense of the
applicant and the applicant's successors in interest and for the
undertaking by the applicant and the applicant's successors in
interest of such corrective measures as are shown by such
inspection to be required for the proper functioning of the facilities.
An inspection escrow of $600 per year for 20 years $12,000 for
each individual stormwater management facility shall be posted
with the City. In addition, the applicant shall:
(a) Describe in detail the mechanisms for maintenance, including:
[1] Types and quantities of equipment necessary for
maintenance.
[2] Maintenance schedule in terms of maintenance activities
required on an annual basis.
[3] The methodology of maintaining all detention/filtration
facilities on the site.
[4] The entity responsible for the maintenance activity.
[5] The life expectancy of the stormwater facility.
§ 258-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-6
1:793
§ 258-7. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. When used
in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed
to them.
AQUACULTURE — The propagation, rearing and subsequent harvesting
of aquatic organisms in controlled or selected environments, and their
subsequent processing, packaging and marketing, including but not limited
to activities to intervene in the rearing process to increase production
such as stocking, feeding, transplanting and providing for protection from
predators.
CERTIFICATION — Either a written statement signed and sealed by a
licensed New Jersey professional engineer attesting that a BMP design or
stormwater management system conforms to or meets a particular set of
standards or to action taken by the Commission pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:50-3,
Part II or Part IV. Depending upon the context in which the term is used, the
terms "certify" and "certified" shall be construed accordingly.
CITY OF BRIGANTINE — The Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment
or other board, agency or official of the City of Brigantine with authority
to approve or disapprove subdivisions, site plans, construction permits,
building permits or other applications for development approval. For the
purposes of reviewing development applications and ensuring compliance
(b) Itemized costs associated with each of the items described in
Subsection H(3)(a), in addition to manpower, capital costs for
equipment and foreseeable costs associated with repair of a
system which fails.
(c) Obtain approval from the approving authority for all
arrangements and values described in Subsection H(1)(a) and
(b).
(d) Provide a twenty-year maintenance guaranty for the entire
stormwater management system.
(e) The agreement required by Subsection H(3) above shall
provide for an inspection and maintenance program of at least
20 years in duration.
(4) Time for completion of stormwater facilities.
(a) Stormwater control improvements shall be completely
installed and as-built certification shall be provided to the City,
except for final landscaping, prior to issuance of any
certificates of occupancy for the development.
(b) Final landscaping shall be completed in accordance with the
schedule established for completion of all other improvements.
§ 258-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-7
1:794
with the requirements of this chapter, the City of Brigantine may designate
the municipal engineer or other qualified designee to act on behalf of the
City of Brigantine.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density caused by subjecting
soil to greater-than-normal loading. Compaction can also decrease soil
infiltration and permeability rates.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, erection, reconstruction, alteration,
conversion, demolition, removal or equipping of buildings, structures or
components of a stormwater management system, including but not limited
to collection inlets, stormwater piping, swales and all other conveyance
systems, and stormwater BMPs.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGN PERMEABILITY — The tested permeability rate with a factor of
safety of two applied to it (e.g., if the tested permeability rate of the soils is
four inches per hour, the design rate would be two inches per hour).
DEVELOPMENT — The change of or enlargement of any use or disturbance
of any land, the performance of any building or mining operation, the
division of land into two or more parcels, and the creation or termination of
rights of access or riparian rights, including but not limited to:
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
A. A change in type of use of a structure or land;
A reconstruction, alteration of the size, or material change in the
external appearance of a structure or land;
B.
A material increase in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase
in the number of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices or
dwelling units in a structure or on land;
C.
Commencement of resource extraction or drilling or excavation on a
parcel of land;
D.
E. Demolition of a structure or removal of trees;
F. Commencement of forestry activities;
§ 258-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-7
1:795
DEVELOPMENT, MAJOR — Any division of land into five or more lots;
any construction or expansion of any housing development of five or more
dwelling units; any construction or expansion of any commercial or
industrial use or structure on a site of more than three acres; or any
development, grading, clearing or disturbance of an area in excess of 1/4 of
an acre, (10,890 square feet). "Disturbance" for the purpose of this chapter
is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil
or bedrock or clearing, cutting or removing of vegetation.
DEVELOPMENT, MINOR — All development other than major development.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a BMP, a stormwater
management system, a particular receiving water body or a particular point
along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened animal species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge
areas. T & E habitat constitutes habitat that is critical for the survival of
a local population of threatened and endangered species or habitat that
is identified using the Department's landscape project as approved by the
Department's Endangered and Nongame Species Program, whichever is
more inclusive. Threatened and endangered wildlife shall be protected in
conformance with N.J.A.C. 7:50-6.33.
EXCEPTION — The approval by the approving authority of a variance or
other material departure from strict compliance with any section, part,
phrase or provision of this chapter. An exception may be granted only under
certain specific, narrowly defined conditions described herein.
EXTENDED DETENTION BASIN — A facility constructed through filling
and/or excavation that provides temporary storage of stormwater runoff.
It has an outlet structure that detains and attenuates runoff inflows and
promotes the settlement of pollutants. An extended detention basin is
normally designed as a multistage facility that provides runoff storage
and attenuation for both stormwater quality and quantity management.
The term "stormwater detention basin" shall have the same meaning as
"extended detention basin."
FINISHED GRADE — The elevation of the surface of the ground after
completion of final grading, either via cutting, filling or a combination
thereof.
G. Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill on a parcel of land;
In connection with the use of land, the making of any material change
in noise levels, thermal conditions, or emissions of waste material; and
H.
Alteration, either physically or chemically, of a shore, bank, or
floodplain, seacoast, river, stream, lake, pond, wetlands or artificial
body of water.
I.
§ 258-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-7
1:796
GRADING — Modification of a land slope by cutting and filling with the
native soil or redistribution of the native soil which is present at the site.
GROUNDWATER — Water below the land surface in a zone of saturation.
GROUNDWATER MOUNDING ANALYSIS — A test performed to
demonstrate that the groundwater below a stormwater infiltration basin will
not "mound up," encroach on the unsaturated zone, break the surface of the
ground at the infiltration area or downslope, and create an overland flow
situation.
HEAVY EQUIPMENT — Equipment, machinery, or vehicles that exert
ground pressure in excess of eight pounds per square inch.
HIGH POLLUTANT LOADING AREA — An area in an industrial or
commercial development site where solvents and/or petroleum products are
loaded/unloaded, stored, or applied; where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; where hazardous materials are expected to be present in greater
than reportable quantities as defined by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR 302.4; where recharge would be
inconsistent with NJDEP-approved remedial action work plan or landfill
closure plan; and/or where a high risk exists for spills of toxic materials,
such as gas stations and vehicle maintenance facilities. The term "HPLA"
shall have the same meaning as "high pollutant loading area."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which precipitation enters the soil
through its surface.
IN LIEU CONTRIBUTION — A monetary fee collected by the City of
Brigantine in lieu of requiring strict on-site compliance with the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity and/or stormwater
runoff quality standards established in this chapter.
INSTALL — To assemble, construct, put in place or connect components of
a stormwater management system.
MITIGATION — Acts necessary to prevent, limit, remedy or compensate
for conditions that may result from those cases where an applicant has
demonstrated the inability or impracticality of strict compliance with the
stormwater management requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:8, in an
adopted regional stormwater management plan, or in a local ordinance
which is as protective as N.J.A.C. 7:8, and an exception from strict
compliance is granted by the City of Brigantine.
NEW JERSEY STORMWATER BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES MANUAL
— Guidance developed by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, in coordination with the New Jersey Department of Agriculture,
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, the New Jersey
Department of Transportation, municipal engineers, county engineers,
consulting firms, contractors, and environmental organizations to address
the standards in the New Jersey Stormwater Management Rules, N.J.A.C.
7:8. The BMP manual provides examples of ways to meet the standards
§ 258-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-7
1:797
contained in the rule. An applicant may demonstrate that other proposed
management practices will also achieve the standards established in the
rules. The manual, and notices regarding future versions of the manual,
are available from the Division of Watershed Management, NJDEP, PO
Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; and on the NJDEP's website,
www.njstormwater.org. The term "New Jersey BMP Manual" shall have the
same meaning as "New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices
Manual."
NJDEP — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NJPDES — The New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq. and in N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the NJDEP pursuant to the authority
of the Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C.
7:14A for a discharge of pollutants.
NONPOINT SOURCE —
NONSTRUCTURAL BMP — A stormwater management measure, strategy
or combination of strategies that reduces adverse stormwater runoff
impacts through sound site planning and design. Nonstructural BMPs
include such practices as minimizing site disturbance, preserving important
site features, reducing and disconnecting impervious cover, flattening
slopes, utilizing native vegetation, minimizing turf grass lawns, maintaining
natural drainage features and characteristics and controlling stormwater
runoff and pollutants closer to the source. The term "Low Impact
Development technique" shall have the same meaning as "nonstructural
BMP."
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERMEABILITY — The rate at which water moves through a saturated unit
area of soil or rock material at hydraulic gradient of one, determined as
prescribed in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.2 (tube permeameter test), N.J.A.C. 6.5 (pit
bailing test) or N.J.A.C. 6.6 (piezometer test). Alternative permeability test
procedures may be accepted by the approving authority provided the test
Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor, or condition, other
than a point source, from which pollutants are or may be discharged;
A.
Any human-made or human-induced activity, factor, or condition, other
than a point source, that may temporarily or permanently change any
chemical, physical, biological, or radiological characteristic of waters
of the state from what was or is the natural, pristine condition of such
waters, or that may increase the degree of such change; or
B.
Any activity, factor, or condition, other than a point source, that
contributes or may contribute to water pollution.
C.
D. The term "NPS" shall have the same meaning as "nonpoint source."
§ 258-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-7
1:798
procedure attains saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic
head effects on infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate with units
expressed in inches per hour and is accompanied by a published source
reference. Examples of suitable sources include hydrogeology,
geotechnical, or engineering text and design manuals, proceedings of
American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peerreview
journals. Neither a soil permeability class rating test, as described
in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a percolation test, as described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4,
are acceptable tests for establishing permeability values for the purpose of
complying with this chapter.
PERMEABLE — Having a permeability of one inch per hour or faster. The
terms "permeable soil," "permeable rock" and "permeable fill" shall be
construed accordingly.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, municipality or political subdivision of this state subject to
municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding
operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel, or other floating craft,
from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include
return flows from irrigated agriculture.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substances (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended [42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.]), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, suspended solids, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the
state, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous
and nonhazardous pollutants.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person licensed to practice professional
engineering in the State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:8-27 et seq.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REPLICATE — One of two or more soil samples or tests taken at the same
location (within five feet of each other) and depth, within the same soil
horizon or substratum. In the case of fill material, replicate tests are tests
performed on subsamples of the same bulk sample packed to the same bulk
density.
SAND — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles which are
between 0.05 and 2.0 millimeters in equivalent spherical diameter. Also, a
soil textural class having 85% or more of sand and a content of silt and clay
§ 258-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-7
1:799
such that the percentage of silt plus 1.5 times the percentage of clay does
not exceed 15, as shown in § 258-10C(1) (USDA Soil Textural Triangle).
SEASONALLY HIGH WATER TABLE — The upper limit of the shallowest
zone of saturation which occurs in the soil, identified as prescribed in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.8.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin which
is not a rock substratum, including sediments below the biologically active
and/or weathered zones.
SOURCE MATERIAL — Any material(s) or machinery located at an
industrial facility that is directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include but are not limited to raw materials; intermediate
products; final products; waste materials; byproducts; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are related to
process, manufacturing, or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER INFILTRATION BMP — A basin or other facility constructed
within permeable soils that provides temporary storage of stormwater
runoff. An infiltration BMP does not normally have a structural outlet to
discharge runoff from the stormwater quality design storm. Instead, outflow
from an infiltration BMP is through the surrounding soil. The terms
"infiltration measure" and "infiltration practice" shall have the same
meaning as "stormwater infiltration basin."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances. This includes but is not limited to structural
and nonstructural stormwater best management practices described in
the New Jersey BMP Manual and designed to meet the standards for
stormwater control contained within this chapter. The terms "stormwater
best management practice" and "stormwater BMP" shall have the same
meaning as "stormwater management measure."
§ 258-7 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-7
1:800
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers resulting from precipitation.
SUITABLE SOIL — Unsaturated soil above the seasonally high water table
which contains less than 50% by volume of coarse fragments and which has
a tested permeability rate of between one and 20 inches per hour.
SURFACE WATER — Any waters of the state which are not groundwater.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for runoff to travel from
the hydraulically most distant point of the drainage area to the point of
interest within a watershed.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The insoluble solid matter suspended in
water and stormwater that is separable by laboratory filtration in
accordance with the procedure contained in the Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater Prepared and published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and
the Water Pollution Control Federation. The term "TSS" shall have the same
meaning as "total suspended solids."
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface and groundwater, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
WATER TABLE — The upper surface of a zone of saturation.
WELL — A bored, drilled or driven shaft, or a dug hole, which extends below
the seasonally high water table and which has a depth which is greater than
its largest surface dimension.
WETLANDS — Those lands which are inundated or saturated by water at
a magnitude, duration and frequency sufficient to support the growth of
hydrophytes. Wetlands include lands with poorly drained or very poorly
drained soils as designated by the National Cooperative Soils Survey of the
Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture.
Wetlands include coastal wetlands and inland wetlands, including
submerged lands. The term "wetland" shall have the same meaning as
"wetlands."
WET POND — A stormwater facility constructed through filling and/or
excavation that provides both permanent and temporary storage of
stormwater runoff. It has an outlet structure that creates a permanent
pool and detains and attenuates runoff inflows and promotes the settling
of pollutants. A stormwater retention basin can also be designed as a
multistage, facility that also provides extended detention for enhanced
stormwater quality design storm treatment and runoff storage and
attenuation for stormwater quantity management. The term "stormwater
retention basin" shall have the same meaning as "wet pond."
§ 258-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-8
1:801
§ 258-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter may be
subject to the following penalties: a fine of up to $1,000, imprisonment for
up to 90 days and/or community service for up to 90 days at the discretion
of the municipal court judge.
§ 258-9. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon the following: approval by
the Atlantic County Review Agency.
§ 258-10. Appendices.
A. Methods for calculating groundwater recharge.
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32: A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey. Available
at http://www.njgeology.org/geodata/dgs99-2.htm.
(2) The New Jersey Groundwater Recharge Spreadsheet (NJGRS).
Available in the New Jersey BMP Manual, Chapter 6, at
http://www.njstormwater.org/bmp_manual2.htm.
B. NJDEP nonstructural strategies point system. The New Jersey
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.2(a), and § 258-4A of
this chapter, require nonstructural stormwater management strategies
to be incorporated into the site design of a major development. A total
of nine strategies are to be used to the maximum extent practical to
meet the groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater
quantity requirements of the rules prior to utilizing structural
stormwater management measures. The New Jersey Nonstructural
Stormwater Management Strategies Point System (NSPS) provides a
tool to assist planners, designers and regulators in determining that the
strategies have been used to the maximum extent practical at a major
development as required by the rules. Refer online to
http://www.njstormwater.org for information on the NSPS.
C. Soils.
(1) USDA Soil Textural Triangle.
§ 258-8 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-10
1:802
Source: US Department of Agriculture.
(2) Definitions. For the purposes of this appendix, the following terms
shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
A-HORIZON — The uppermost mineral horizon in a normal soil
profile. The upper part of the A-horizon is characterized by
maximum accumulation of finely divided, dark-colored organic
residues, known as humus, which are intimately mixed with the
mineral particles of the soil.
ARTESIAN ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which
exists immediately below a hydraulically restrictive horizon, and
which has an upper surface that is at a pressure greater than
atmospheric, either seasonally or throughout the year.
CHROMA — The relative purity or strength of a color, a quantity
which decreases with increasing grayness. Chroma is one of the
three variables of soil color as defined in the Munsell system of
classification.
§ 258-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-10
1:803
CLAY — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are smaller than 0.002 millimeters in equivalent spherical
diameter. Also, a soil textural class having more than 40% clay, less
than 45% sand, and less than 40% silt, as shown in Subsection C(1)
USDA Soil Textural Triangle.
CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having 27% to 40% clay and
20% to 45% sand, as shown in Subsection C(1) USDA Soil Textural
Triangle.
COARSE FRAGMENT — A rock fragment contained within the
soil which is greater than two millimeters in equivalent spherical
diameter or which is retained on a two-millimeter sieve.
COUNTY SOIL SURVEY REPORT — A report prepared by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation
Service which includes maps showing the distribution of soil
mapping units throughout a particular county together with
narrative descriptions of the soil series shown and other
information relating to the uses and properties of the various soil
series.
DIRECT SUPERVISION — Control over and direction of work
carried out by others with full knowledge of and responsibility for
such work.
EQUIVALENT SPHERICAL DIAMETER OF A PARTICLE — The
diameter of a sphere which has a volume equal to the volume of the
particle.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE HORIZON — A horizon of limited thickness
within the soil profile which provides inadequate removal of
pollutants from stormwater due to a high coarse fragment content,
excessively coarse texture and/or excessively rapid permeability.
EXCESSIVELY COARSE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum below the
soil profile which extends beyond the depth of soil profile pits and
borings and which provides inadequate removal of pollutants from
stormwater due to a high coarse fragment content, excessively
coarse texture and/or excessively rapid permeability.
EXTREMELY FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose
moist aggregated mass crushes only under very strong pressure;
cannot be crushed between the thumb and forefinger and shall be
broken apart bit by bit.
FIRM CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose moist
aggregated mass crushes under moderate pressure between the
thumb and forefinger but resistance is distinctly noticeable.
HARD CONSISTENCE — A type of soil material whose dry
aggregated mass is moderately resistant to pressure; can be
broken in the hands without difficulty but is barely breakable
between the thumb and forefinger.
§ 258-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-10
1:804
HUE — The dominant spectral color, one of the three variables of
soil color defined within the Munsell system of classification.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE HORIZON — A horizon within
the soil profile which slows or prevents the downward or lateral
movement of water and which is underlain by permeable soil
horizons or substrata. Any soil horizon which has a saturated
permeability less than one inch per hour is hydraulically restrictive.
HYDRAULICALLY RESTRICTIVE SUBSTRATUM — A substratum
below the soil profile which slows or prevents the downward or
lateral movement of water and which extends beyond the depth of
profile pits or borings or to a massive substratum. A substratum
which has a saturated permeability less than one inch per hour is
hydraulically restrictive.
LOAMY SAND — A soil textural class, as shown in Subsection C(1)
USDA Soil Textural Triangle, that has a maximum of 85% to 90%
sand with a percentage of silt plus 1 1/2 times the percentage of
clay not in excess of 15%; or a minimum of 70% to 85% sand with
a percentage of silt plus 1 1/2 times the percentage of clay not in
excess of 30%.
LOWER PLASTIC LIMIT — The moisture content corresponding
to the transition between the plastic and semisolid states of soil
consistency. This corresponds to the lowest soil moisture content at
which the soil can be molded in the fingers to form a rod or wire, 1/
8 inch in thickness, without crumbling.
MOTTLING — A color pattern observed in soil consisting of
blotches or spots of contrasting color. The term "mottle" refers to
an individual blotch or spot. The terms "color variegation," "iron
depletion" and "iron concentration" are equivalent to the term
"mottling." Mottling due to redoximorphic reactions is an indication
of seasonal or periodic and recurrent saturation.
MUNSELL SYSTEM — A system of classifying soil color consisting
of an alphanumeric designation for hue, value and chroma, such
as "7.5 YR 6/2," together with a descriptive color name, such as
"strong brown."
O-HORIZON — A surface horizon, occurring above the A-horizon
in some soils, which is composed primarily of undecomposed or
partially decomposed plant remains which have not been
incorporated into the mineral soil.
PERCHED ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which
occurs immediately above a hydraulically restrictive horizon and
which is underlain by permeable horizons or substrata which are
not permanently or seasonally saturated.
PIEZOMETER — A device consisting of a length of metal or plastic
pipe, open at the bottom or perforated within a specified interval,
§ 258-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-10
1:805
and used for the determination of depth to water, permeability or
hydraulic head within a specific soil horizon or substratum.
PLATY STRUCTURE — Characterized by a soil aggregate which
has one axis distinctly shorter than the other two and are oriented
with the short axis vertical.
REGIONAL ZONE OF SATURATION — A zone of saturation which
extends vertically without interruption below the depth of soil
borings and profile pits.
SANDY CLAY — A soil textural class having 35% or more of clay
and 45% or more of sand, as shown in Subsection C(1) USDA Soil
Textural Triangle.
SANDY LOAM — A soil textural class, as shown in Subsection C(1)
USDA Soil Textural Triangle, that has a maximum of 20% clay, and
the percentage of silt plus twice the percentage of clay exceeds
30% and contains 52% or more sand; or less than 7% clay, less than
50% silt, and between 43% and 52% sand.
SILT — A particle size category consisting of mineral particles
which are between 0.002 and 0.05 millimeters in equivalent
spherical diameter. It also means a soil textural class having 80%
or more of silt and 12% or less of clay, as shown in Subsection C(1),
USDA Soil Textural Triangle.
SILT LOAM — A soil textural class having 50% or more of silt and
12% to 27% of clay; or 50% to 80% of silt and less than 12% of clay,
as shown in Subsection C(1), USDA Soil Textural Triangle.
SILTY CLAY — A soil textural class having 40% or more of clay
and 40% or more of silt, as shown in Subsection C(1) USDA Soil
Textural Triangle.
SILTY CLAY LOAM — A soil textural class having 27% to 40% of
clay and less than 20% of sand, as shown in Subsection C(1) USDA
Soil Textural Triangle.
SOIL AGGREGATE — A naturally occurring unit of soil structure
consisting of particles of sand, silt, clay, organic matter, and coarse
fragments held together by the natural cohesion of the soil.
SOIL COLOR — The soil color name and Munsell color designation
determined by comparison of the moist soil with color chips
contained in a Munsell soil color book.
SOIL CONSISTENCE — The resistance of a soil aggregate or clod
to being crushed between the fingers or broken by the hands.
Terms for describing soil consistence described are in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-5.3(h).
SOIL HORIZON — A layer within a soil profile differing from layers
of soil above and below it in one or more of the soil morphological
characteristics including color, texture, coarse fragment content,
structure, consistency and mottling.
§ 258-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-10
1:806
SOIL LOG — A description of the soil profile which includes the
depth, thickness, color, texture, coarse fragment content, mottling,
structure and consistence of each soil horizon or substratum.
SOIL MAPPING UNIT — An area outlined on a map in a County
Soil Survey Report and marked with a letter symbol designating a
soil phase, a complex of two or more soil phases, or some other
descriptive term where no soil type has been identified.
SOIL PHASE — A specific type of soil which is mapped by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service and which belongs to a
soil series described within the County Soil Survey Report.
SOIL PROFILE — A vertical cross-section of undisturbed soil
showing the characteristic horizontal layers or horizons of the soil
which have formed as a result of the combined effects of parent
material, topography, climate, biological activity and time.
SOIL SERIES — A grouping of soil types possessing a specific
range of soil profile characteristics which are described within the
County Soil Survey Report. Each soil series may consist of several
"soil phases" which may differ in slope, texture of the surface
horizon or stoniness.
SOIL STRUCTURAL CLASS — One of the shape classes of soil
structure described in N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.3(g).
SOIL STRUCTURE — The naturally occurring arrangement, within
a soil horizon, of sand, silt and clay particles, coarse fragments and
organic matter, which are held together in clusters or aggregates
of similar shape and size.
SOIL TEST PIT — An excavation made for the purpose of exposing
a soil profile which is to be described.
SOIL TEXTURAL CLASS — One of the classes of soil texture
defined within the USDA system of classification. (Soil Survey
Manual, Agricultural Handbook No. 18, USDA Soil Conservation
Service 1962.)
SOIL TEXTURE — The relative proportions of sand, silt and clay
in that portion of the soil which passes through a sieve with twomillimeter
openings.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The depth below the ground surface or
the elevation with respect to some reference level, of the water
level observed within a soil profile pit or boring, or within a
piezometer, after this level has stabilized or become relatively
constant with the passage of time.
SUBSTRATUM — A layer of soil or rock material present below the
soil profile and extending beyond the depth of soil borings or profile
pits.
UNSUITABLE SOIL — All soil other than suitable soil.
§ 258-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-10
1:807
USDA SYSTEM OF CLASSIFICATION — The system of classifying
soil texture used by the United States Department of Agriculture
which defines 12 soil textural classes based upon the weight
percentages of sand, silt and clay in that portion of the soil which
passes through a sieve with two-millimeter openings. The soil
textural classes are shown graphically on the USDA Soil Textural
Triangle, as shown in Subsection C(1).
VALUE — The relative lightness or intensity of a color, one of the
three variables of soil color defined within the Munsell system of
classification.
VERY FIRM CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a moist soil which
crushes under strong pressure; barely crushable between thumb
and forefinger.
VERY HARD CONSISTENCE — Characterized by a dry soil which
is resistant to pressure, can be broken in the hands only with
difficulty; not breakable between the thumb and forefinger.
ZONE OF SATURATION — A layer within or below the soil profile
which is saturated with groundwater either seasonally or
throughout the year. This includes both regional and perched
zones.
(3) Methods for assessing soil suitability for infiltration stormwater
management BMPs. The results of a subsurface investigation shall
serve as the basis for the site selection and design of stormwater
infiltration BMPs. The subsurface investigation shall include, but
not be limited to, a series of soil test pits and soil permeability tests
conducted in accordance with the following:
(a) All soil test pits and soil permeability results shall be
performed under the direct supervision of a professional
engineer. All soil logs and permeability test data shall be
accompanied by a certification by a professional engineer. The
results and location (horizontal and vertical) of all soil test pits
and soil permeability tests, both passing and failing, shall be
reported to the City of Brigantine.
(b) During all subsurface investigations and soil test procedures,
adequate safety measures shall be taken to prohibit
unauthorized access to the excavations at all times. It is the
responsibility of persons performing or witnessing subsurface
investigations and soil permeability tests to comply with all
applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations
governing occupational safety.
(c) A minimum of two soil test pits shall be excavated within the
footprint of any proposed infiltration BMP to determine the
suitability and distribution of soil types present at the site.
Placement of the test pits shall be within 20 feet of the basin
perimeter, located along the longest axis bisecting the BMP.
§ 258-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-10
1:808
For BMPs larger than 10,000 square feet in area, a minimum
of one additional soil test pit shall be conducted within each
additional area of 10,000 square feet. The additional test pit(s)
shall be placed approximately equidistant to other test pits,
so as to provide adequate characterization of the subsurface
material. In all cases, where soil and or groundwater
properties vary significantly, additional test pits shall be
excavated in order to accurately characterize the subsurface
conditions below the proposed infiltration BMP. Soil test pits
shall extend to a minimum depth of eight feet below the lowest
elevation of the basin bottom or to a depth that is at least
two times the maximum potential water depth in the proposed
infiltration BMP, whichever is greater.
(d) A soil test pit log shall be prepared for each soil test pit. The
test pit log shall, at a minimum, provide the elevation of the
existing ground surface, the depth and thickness (in inches) of
each soil horizon or substratum, the dominant matrix or
background and mottle colors using the Munsell system of
classification for hue, value and chroma, the appropriate
textural class as shown on the USDA textural triangle, the
volume percentage of coarse fragments (larger than two
millimeters in diameter), the abundance, size, and contrast of
mottles, the soil structure, soil consistence, and soil moisture
condition, using standard USDA classification terminology for
each of these soil properties. Soil test pit logs shall identify the
presence of any soil horizon, substratum or other feature that
exhibits an in-place permeability rate less than one inch per
hour.
(e) Each soil test pit log shall report the depth to seasonally high
water level, either perched or regional, and the static water
level based upon the presence of soil mottles or other
redoximorphic features, and observed seepage or saturation.
Where redoxomorphic features including soil mottles resulting
from soil saturation are present, they shall be interpreted to
represent the depth to the seasonal high water table unless soil
saturation or seepage is observed at a higher level. When the
determination of the seasonally high water table shall be made
in ground previously disturbed by excavation, direct
observation of the static water table during the months of
January through April shall be the only method permitted.
(f) Any soil horizon or substratum which exists immediately below
a perched zone of saturation shall be deemed by rule to exhibit
unacceptable permeability (less than one inch per hour). The
perched zone of saturation may be observed directly, inferred
based upon soil morphology, or confirmed by performance of a
hydraulic head test as defined at N.J.A.C. 7:9A-5.9.
§ 258-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-10
1:809
(g) Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be installed in soils that
exhibit artesian groundwater conditions. A permeability test
shall be conducted in all soils that immediately underlie a
perched zone of saturation. Any zone of saturation which is
present below a soil horizon which exhibits an in-place
permeability of less than 0.2 inch per hour shall be considered
an artesian zone of saturation unless a minimum one-foot-thick
zone of unsaturated soil, free of mottling or other
redoximorphic features and possessing a chroma of four or
higher, exists immediately below the unsuitable soil.
(h) A minimum of one permeability test shall be performed at each
soil test pit location. The soil permeability rate shall be
determined using test methodology as prescribed in N.J.A.C.
7:9A-6.2 (tube permeameter test), 6.5 (pit bailing test) or 6.6
(piezometer test). When the tube permeameter test is used, a
minimum of two replicate samples shall be taken and tested.
Alternative permeability test procedures may be accepted by
the approving authority provided the test procedure attains
saturation of surrounding soils, accounts for hydraulic head
effects on infiltration rates, provides a permeability rate with
units expressed in inches per hour and is accompanied by a
published source reference. Examples of suitable sources
include hydrogeology, geotechnical or engineering text and
design manuals, proceedings of American Society for Testing
and Materials (ASTM) symposia, or peer-review journals.
Neither a soil permeability class rating test, as described in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.3, nor a percolation test, as described in
N.J.A.C. 7:9A-6.4, are acceptable tests for establishing
permeability values for the purpose of complying with this
chapter.
(i) Soil permeability tests shall be conducted on the most
hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum to be left in
place below the basin as follows. Where no soil replacement is
proposed, the permeability tests shall be conducted on the
most hydraulically restrictive horizon or substratum within
four feet of the lowest elevation of the basin bottom or to a
depth equal to two times the maximum potential water depth
within the basin, whichever is greater. Where soil replacement
is proposed, the permeability tests shall be conducted within
the soil immediately below the depth of proposed soil
replacement or within the most hydraulically restrictive
horizon or substratum to a depth equal to two times the
maximum potential water depth within the basin, whichever is
greater. Permeability tests may be performed on the most
hydraulically restrictive soil horizons or substrata at depths
greater than those identified above based upon the discretion
of the design or testing engineer. The tested infiltration rate
should then be divided by two to establish the soil's design
§ 258-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-10
1:810
permeability rate. Such division will provide a 100% safety
factor to the tested rate.
(j) The minimum acceptable tested permeability rate of any soil
horizon or substratum shall be one inch per hour. Soil
materials that exhibit tested permeability rates slower than
one inch per hour shall be considered unsuitable for
stormwater infiltration. The maximum reportable "tested
permeability rate" of any soil horizon or substratum shall be no
greater than 20 inches per hour regardless of the rate attained
in the test procedure.
(k) After all construction activities have been completed on the
development site and the finished grade has been established
in the infiltration BMP, a minimum of one permeability test
shall be conducted within the most hydraulically restrictive soil
horizon or substratum below the as-built BMP to ensure the
performance of the infiltration BMP is as designed. Hand tools
and manual permeability test procedures shall be used for the
purpose of confirming BMP performance. In addition, the
infiltration BMP shall be flooded with water sufficient to
demonstrate the performance of the BMP. Test results shall be
certified to the municipal engineer.
(l) A groundwater mounding analysis shall be provided for each
stormwater infiltration BMP. The groundwater mounding
analysis shall calculate the maximum height of the
groundwater mound based upon the volume of the maximum
design storm. The professional engineer conducting the
analysis shall provide the municipal engineer with the
methodology and supporting documentation for the mounding
analysis used and shall certify to the City of Brigantine, based
upon the analysis, that the groundwater mound will not cause
stormwater or groundwater to break out to the land surface or
cause adverse impact to adjacent surface water bodies,
wetlands or subsurface structures, including but not limited to
basements and septic systems. If there is more than one
infiltration BMP proposed, the model shall indicate if and how
the mounds will interact. The mounding analysis shall be
calculated using the most restrictive soil horizon that will
remain in place within the explored aquifer thickness unless
alternative analyses is authorized by the municipal engineer.
The mounding analysis shall be accompanied by a cross section
of the infiltration BMP and surrounding topography and the
mound analysis shall extend out to the point(s) at which the
mound intersects with the preexisting maximum water table
elevation.
(m) The applicant shall demonstrate that stormwater infiltration
BMPs meet the seventy-two-hour drain time requirement
established in § 258-5B(1) of this chapter.
§ 258-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-10
1:811
D. Pretreatment measures for infiltration BMPs. By reducing incoming
velocities and capturing coarser sediments, pretreatment can extend
the functional life and increase the pollutant removal capability of
infiltration measures. Therefore, the installation of pretreatment
measures is recommended for all development sites. Pretreatment
measures may include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Vegetative filter strips;
(2) Bioretention systems. Used in conjunction with a bioretention
system, the infiltration basin takes the place of the standard
underdrain;
(3) Sand filters;
(4) Grassed swales; and
(5) Detention basins.
E. Collection and conveyance.
(1) Bicycle-safe inlet grates. Site development plans that incorporate
site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash and
debris from drainage systems shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through
storm drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
§ 258-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-10
1:812
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 258-3 are conveyed through any device (e.g.,
end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1.5 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 258-3 of this chapter; or
[4] Where the NJDEP determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(2) Catch basins. Catch basins are storm drain inlets with or without
sumps. Catch basins may provide pretreatment for other
stormwater BMPs by capturing large sediments. The sediment and
pollutant removal efficiency of catch basins depends on the size of
the sump and the performance of routine maintenance to retain the
available sediment storage space in the sump. Where catch basins
with sumps are proposed, the minimum two-feet separation
between the bottom of the sump and seasonally high water table
shall be provided.
(3) Open or perforated conveyance piping. Where adequate separation
to the seasonal high water table exists, stormwater from the
development site may be conveyed to a stormwater basin via a
system of perforated pipes. These pipes may be made of PVC or
corrugated metal and are available with perforations of varying
size and spacing. Perforated pipe specifications shall be certified by
a professional engineer. A professional engineer shall certify that
§ 258-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-10
1:813
§ 258-11. Additional sources for technical guidance.
Chapter 259
STORM SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater control — See Ch. 258. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
perforated conveyance piping will not act to intercept the seasonal
high water table and convey groundwater to the stormwater basin.
All open or perforated stormwater conveyance systems shall be
installed with a minimum separation of two feet from the seasonal
high water table.
A. NJDEP technical guidance sources.
(1) New Jersey BMP Manual. Available from the Division of Watershed
Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625; or online at
http://www.njstormwater.org.
(2) NJDEP Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual.
Available from the Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; or online at http://njedl.rutgers.edu/ftp/PDFs/
1188.pdf.
B. Additional guidance sources.
(1) State Soil Conservation Committee Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey. Available from all State Soil
Conservation Districts, including Burlington County Soil
Conservation District, Tiffany Square, Suite 100, 1289 Route 38,
Hainesport, New Jersey 08036; Phone: 609-267-7410; Fax
609-267-3347; Web site: http://bscd.org.
(2) State Soil Conservation Districts.
(3) New Jersey Department of Transportation, PO Box 600, Trenton, NJ
08625-0600; Phone: 609-530-3536; Web site:
http://www.state.nj.us/transportation.
§ 258-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 258-11
1:814
ARTICLE I
Retrofitting of Storm Drains
[Adopted 4-20-2011 by Ord. No. 5-2011]
§ 259-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter into the municipal separate storm
water system operated by the City of Brigantine so as to protect the public,
health, safety and welfare of residents and visitors to the municipality.
§ 259-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in the
text of this Chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is to be considered mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Brigantine and is designed
and used for the collecting and conveying stormwater. MS4s do not include
combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to
carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater
from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries all springs, streams
and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or artificial,
within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 259-3. Prohibited conduct.
A. No person in control of private property, except a residential lot with
one single-family house, shall authorize the repaving, repairing,
resurfacing, reconstructing or altering of any surface that is in direct
§ 259-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-3
1:815
§ 259-4. Design standards.
Storm drain inlets identified in this article shall comply with the following
standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials through storm
drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials"
means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable
solids. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection D below.
contact with an existing storm drain inlet on the property unless the
storm drain inlet either:
(1) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 259-4 below
prior to the completion of the project.
B. For the purpose of this section, paving or repairing shall not include the
repair of individual potholes and resurfacing shall include top coating
or chip sealing with asphalt, emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inch across the smallest dimension.
B. Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and
grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads, including bridges, driveways, parking areas,
bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
C. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening, or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces, shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
D. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
§ 259-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 259-4
1:816
§ 259-5. Enforcement.
This article may be enforced by the Construction Official, the Zoning Officer,
the Director of the Department of Public Works or the City Engineer.
§ 259-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (for example, the
end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a
catch basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent
delivery of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass
through one of the following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7,2(c), that action to meet this
standard is an undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or
will damage or destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic
property.
§ 259-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-6
1:817
Chapter 260
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch 165.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Fees schedule — See Ch. 210, Art II.
Sewers — See Ch. 252.
Water — See Ch. 290.
§ 259-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 259-6
1:818
ARTICLE I
Curbs and Sidewalks
[Adopted 3-3-1982 by Ord. No. 12-1982]
§ 260-1. Permit required; revocation; issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
§ 260-2. Application requirements.
All applicants for permits shall give at least 24 hours' notice, in writing, to
the City Engineer, including a sketch, drawing or plan drawn and signed
by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer, showing all pertinent lines
and grades proposed, in addition to any existing utilities and public facilities
located within 50 feet of the proposed installation.
§ 260-3. Construction specifications.
All sidewalks shall be four-inch-thick portland cement concrete, Class C. All
driveways, including walkway crossings, shall be six-inch portland cement
concrete, Class C, and shall include six-by-six-inch, six-gauge wire-mesh
reinforcement. All sidewalk and driveway concrete shall be struck with
contraction joints every five feet maximum and have an approved expansion
joint each 25 feet maximum. Expansion joint material shall be either cork
or mastic materials or approved equal. Curbing shall be constructed to the
dimensions of six inches wide at the top and eight inches wide at the bottom
and 18 inches deep, with portland cement concrete, Class B. Expansion
joints of cork, mastic materials or approved equal shall be installed every
25 feet maximum.
§ 260-4. Condition of completed work areas.
All work areas shall be thoroughly cleaned up, backfilled, top-soiled and
seeded, paved as required by Chapter 165, Excavations, Article II, Street
Openings, to ensure a workmanlike condition when completed, all to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer and/or the Commissioners of the City of
Brigantine.
A. No person or corporation shall install or alter sidewalks, driveways and/
or curbing in the right-of-way of any street and/or public areas without
having first obtained and being in possession of a valid permit to do so,
issued by the City Engineer's office pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
B. Any such permit may be revoked at any time by the City Engineer and/
or the Commissioners of the City of Brigantine, New Jersey.
C. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to any new construction
unless curbs and sidewalks are installed in accordance with this article.
§ 260-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 260-5
1:819
§ 260-5. Guarding of work areas.
The applicant will be responsible for directing its contractor to keep all
work areas guarded and barricaded at all times to ensure the safe passage
of traffic, vehicular and pedestrian, and shall open no more area than is
reasonably necessary.
§ 260-6. City not to be liable. [Amended 10-18-2000 by Ord. No.
26-2000]
The applicant, as a requirement of receiving a permit, shall save harmless
the City of Brigantine, the City Commissioners and the employees and
consultants of the City of Brigantine, from any and all claims of any nature
arising out of the construction of any work authorized or unauthorized by
the issuing of a permit. Likewise, the City of Brigantine, its agents, officers
and employees are indemnified and held harmless from any liability arising
from any trip and fall or other type of accident on such sidewalk and curbing
whether said sidewalk and curbing is newly installed pursuant to a permit
or is otherwise already existing. The City of Brigantine, its agents, officers
and employees shall not be responsible for the maintenance of any such
sidewalks or curbing.
§ 260-7. Fees. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
A nonrefundable fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses,
Article II, Fees Schedule, shall accompany all applications for a permit,
including a portion for the permit and a portion for the engineering review.
§ 260-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
Any person, company or corporation violating any provision of this article,
upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine, shall be
punished for each offense by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days, or both, and each day on which said violation
exists shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 260-5 BRIGANTINE CODE § 260-8
1:820
Chapter 264
STRUCTURES, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 123.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 181.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Fees schedule — See Ch. 210, Art II.
Numbering of buildings and property — See
Ch. 224.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
§ 264-1. Compliance required; persons subject to provisions.
§ 264-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOCATION — A discreet tax lot, as shown on the Tax Maps of the City of
Brigantine.
STRUCTURE — Any structure which comes under the jurisdiction of the
Uniform Construction Code of the State of New Jersey. 173
§ 264-3. Application for permit.
Any person seeking to move any structure shall apply to the Construction
Official of the City of Brigantine, or his designated representative, for a
permit to move structures, which permit is authorized under this chapter.
§ 264-4. Permit requirements.
The requirements for issuance of a permit shall include, in an application
made by the structure owner and by any contractor sought to be employed
by such owner, the following:
A. No structure shall be moved from one location within the City of
Brigantine to another or moved into the City of Brigantine from a
location outside the City of Brigantine unless the procedures set forth
in this chapter are complied with by any person seeking to apply for
permission to move any structure.
B. Persons subject to this chapter include building owners (either in place
or in transit), moving contractors and their agents, servants and
employees.
A. Fourteen days' advance notice of any move.
173. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:23.
§ 260-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-4
1:821
§ 264-5. Limitations imposed by City; assessment of costs.
Within five working days after the submission of the application, the
Construction Official of the City of Brigantine, after consultation with the
Superintendent of Public Works, the City Engineer, the Chief of Police and
any other City official reasonably necessary to evaluate the application,
shall advise the persons making the application as to whether it is approved
and under what conditions the move shall take place. The advice shall
include a written description of any limitations placed on the move, along
with a listing of anticipated costs from the City of Brigantine. Such costs
shall list the number of police, fire, public works and other City employees
necessary to monitor the move and to protect the public safety. Costs shall
be charged as set forth in this chapter.
§ 264-6. Notification of Police Department and residents.
Not less than 48 hours prior to the move, the applicant shall deliver notices
to the Brigantine Police Department, advising residents along the route of
travel from its place of beginning to the place of its installation that the
movement of a structure will be taking place. The notice shall request all
vehicles be off the street not less than three hours prior to the start of
the move, and said notice shall clearly and specifically identify the name of
B. A completed application for a demolition permit for the site from which
the structure is to be moved, unless it's a new modular-type
construction.
C. A completed new site foundation and construction permit application
(all applicable subcodes) treating the proposed structure as new
construction using partially used materials, where applicable.
D. A letter of approval from Atlantic Electric, South Jersey Gas, Brigantine
Water Department, Brigantine Sewer Department, the cable franchisee
in the City of Brigantine, New Jersey Bell Telephone, the Brigantine
Police Department and the Brigantine Fire Department. The letter shall
make reference to a planned route of travel, dates and times of travel.
E. Insurance certificate, showing owner's and contractor's liability
insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000 each, along with
workers' compensation insurance. Such insurance certificate shall
name the City of Brigantine as an additional insured.
F. Payment of the required permit fee.
G. Payment of the required escrow deposit to the City of Brigantine in the
amount set forth in this chapter.
H. A complete description of the structure sought to be moved, including
height of the structure, width and length, and any other information
deemed to be necessary to evaluate the application.
I. A complete description of the planned times for and routes of travel.
§ 264-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 264-6
1:822
the owner of the structure while it is in transit, the owner of the structure
when it is placed on the property of destination (if different) and the name
of the contractor responsible for the move. As to all persons identified, the
complete business address and telephone number of the company or person
shall be listed. If a corporation, the registered office of the corporation,
along with the business address, shall be shown.
§ 264-7. Assignment of City officials to ensure safety; assessment of
costs.
To assist in the accomplishment of the move, the City of Brigantine will
assign not less than two public works employees and not less than two
Police Department officers. Any additional employees or services as are
determined to be necessary to ensure the public safety will be assigned by
the City of Brigantine. All costs incurred, in excess of the minimum services
described below in the fee portion of this chapter,174 will be charged to the
applicant at the rates which are determined by the superintendent or head
of the applicable department.
§ 264-8. Hold-harmless agreement with City required; repair of
damages.
The applicant shall provide to the City of Brigantine a hold-harmless
agreement, in addition to any insurance requirement set forth in this
chapter. That agreement shall provide that the persons applying for a
moving permit shall agree to hold the City of Brigantine harmless and
indemnify it for all costs, losses and expenses incurred, of any kind, and
defend the City of Brigantine in the event of any claim arising out of the
moving activity. Any damage done to City property or any public facility
shall be repaired according to the directions of the appropriate official of
the City of Brigantine. Any repairs done by the City itself will be charged to
the person applying for the permit.
§ 264-9. Compliance with other provisions required.
Any structure subject to this chapter shall comply in all respects to the
Uniform Construction Code175 and applicable subcodes in effect in the City
of Brigantine. All minimum room sizes and installations shall conform to
those applicable codes. The placement of any structure on a new location
shall comply in all respects with Chapter 198, Land Use.
§ 264-10. Condition of structure after move; release of escrow fee.
A. Upon the installation of any structure on a site in accordance with this
chapter, such structure shall immediately be secured, with all openings
such as windows and doors closed. In the event of damage to said
structure necessitated by the move or resulting in any manner from its
174. Editor's Note: For fees applicable to this chapter, see Ch. 210, Mercantile Businesses,
Article II, Fees Schedule.
175. Editor's Note: See N.J.A.C. 5:23.
§ 264-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 264-10
1:823
§ 264-11. Fees. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
The fees as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II,
Fees Schedule, shall be charged for movement of structures in the City of
Brigantine as follows:
§ 264-12. Citation of complaints for violations violations and
penalties.
§ 264-13. Seasonal limitations on issuance of permits.
No permit shall be issued for any proposed move during the period May
15 through September 15, unless good cause is shown in an additional
application to the Board of Commissioners of the City of Brigantine.
Chapter 270
movement, such damage shall immediately be repaired, and no
unsightly structures or structures with broken or improperly secured
areas or facilities will be permitted.
B. All siding and exterior covering must be completed in not less than 90
days. The escrow fee deposited pursuant to § 264-11E of this chapter
shall be retained in full by the City of Brigantine until certification by
the Construction Official that the requirements of this section have
been fulfilled. [Added 10-1-1986 by Ord. No. 25-1986]
A. For a moving permit application, which includes costs of public works
and police survey.
B. For employee services, which include two police and two public works'
employees and appropriate equipment during the move.
C. For additional employee services, per hour, per officer or public works'
employee, for Police Department notification along the route and any
additional services or labor which must be provided.
D. Any costs, losses or damage incurred shall be at the actual cost of
replacement, plus City employee time required for the repair.
E. For an escrow fee, to be deposited with the City of Brigantine, from
which all costs other than the application fee shall be deducted.
A. Any person or entity which violates this chapter shall be cited on
complaint by the appropriate official of the City of Brigantine and tried
in the Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine or in such other court
which has jurisdiction.
B. Any person or entity which violates this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment not to
exceed 90 days, or both. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
§ 264-10 BRIGANTINE CODE § 264-13
1:824
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mercantile businesses — See Ch. 210. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 284.
§ 270-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Brigantine.
DRIVER — Any person issued a taxicab driver's license pursuant to this
chapter who operates a taxicab.
LIMOUSINE — Includes any automobile or motor car used in the business
of carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged passenger
transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled, charter
basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating capacity of
more than 14 passengers in no event, not including the driver, provided that
such a vehicle shall not have a seating capacity in excess of four passengers,
not including the driver, beyond the maximum passenger seating capacity
of the vehicle, not including the driver, at the time of manufacture. Nothing
in this chapter contained shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel
buses, buses employed solely in transporting school children or teachers,
vehicles owned and operated directly or indirectly by businesses engaged in
the practice of mortuary science when those vehicles are used exclusively
for providing transportation related to the provision of funeral services,
autobuses which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation or interstate autobuses required by federal or state law or
regulations of the Department of Transportation to carry insurance against
loss from liability imposed by law on account of bodily injury or death.
(Note: This definition is from N.J.S.A. 48:16-13.)[Added 6-16-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-2010]
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE — Includes the business of carrying
passengers for hire by limousines. (Note: This definition is from N.J.S.A.
48:16-13.)[Added 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2010]
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Transporting in a taxicab one or more
persons for hire along any of the streets in this City, accepting a passenger
to be transported for hire within the City limits or from a point within the
City limits to a point outside of the City limits. The "operation of a taxicab,"
as above described, by one other than the owner of said cab shall be deemed
operation by the owner thereof as well as by the person actually driving said
cab.
OWNER — Any person who is the named titled holder of any taxicab
registered with the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles or who is listed
§ 264-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-1
1:825
in an application for licensure as the owner of a taxicab in the City of
Brigantine.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, lessee, trustee, assigns or receivers, or any other
such entity.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, highway or any other public
roadway, whether or not the same is improved.
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle or similar device commonly called a taxi
or cab which is duly licensed by the City of Brigantine and engaged in
the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced
or advertised to operate or run, or which is operated or run over any of
the streets within the City of Brigantine and which accepts passengers for
transportation from points or places within or without said City.
§ 270-2. Types of licenses.
There are hereby established two types of taxicab licenses to be known as
"taxicab owner's license" and "taxicab driver's license," which are described
as follows:
§ 270-3. License application requirements.
A. Taxicab owner's license. A taxicab owner's license shall be issued to any
person who can prove ownership of a vehicle which is intended to be
used as a taxicab and whose application for a taxicab owner's license
shall be approved pursuant to this chapter. A taxicab owner's license
shall entitle the individual licensed motor vehicle equipped as a taxicab
to pick up passengers within the City limits and to otherwise be lawfully
operated within the City by any individual with a duly authorized
taxicab driver's license until either of said licenses either expires or is
surrendered, suspended or revoked. A taxicab owner's license shall be
transferable to a successor owner by any person who holds said
licenses. A separate owner's license is required for each vehicle. The
City Council of the City of Brigantine may limit the total number of
taxicab owner's licenses to be issued within the City of Brigantine. No
such owner's license may be subleased, rented or otherwise used by
anyone other than the designated owner. Only the actual owner of the
vehicle which is to be used as a taxicab within the City of Brigantine
may be the holder of the taxicab owner's license regarding said taxicab.
[Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 17-1998]
B. Taxicab driver's license. A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the
person named therein to operate within this City any taxicab which has
been duly licensed hereunder and meets the requirements of this
chapter and the provisions of New Jersey State Statute and the New
Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles until either of said licenses expires or
is surrendered, suspended or revoked. Taxicab driver's licenses shall
not be transferable. There shall be no limit to the number of taxicab
driver's licenses issued within the City of Brigantine.
§ 270-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § 270-3
1:826
A. All applications for taxicab owner's licenses shall be in writing, in a
form established by the City Manager or his designee and shall contain
at least the full name and address, date of birth, social security number
and a photocopy of the driver's license of the owner, the serial number,
type, color, year and make of the taxicab to be operated pursuant to
said taxicab owner's license, the state vehicle registration card, proof of
existence of insurance coverage and the number of doors on said
vehicle. If the person applying for said taxicab owner's license is a
partnership, all partners shall be listed thereon, or, if a corporation, all
stockholders holding 10% or more of stock in said corporation shall be
listed thereon, or, if a joint venture, all participants shall be listed
thereon. All applications shall be filed with the City Manager or his
designee who shall, prior to submitting the application to the City
Council for approval, receive proof from the applicant that the applicant
is at least 18 years of age and a citizen of the United States of America
or a lawful resident of the United States. If the applicant is a
corporation, such corporation must be organized and existing under the
laws of the State of New Jersey and must present proof thereof or, if
organized and existing under the laws of another state, be officially
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey and must supply
the name and address of a New Jersey registered agent for said
corporation. All applications for a taxicab owner's license shall contain
a phone number where the applicant can be reached on a twenty-fourhour
emergency basis. It is the burden of the applicant to continually
inform the City of Brigantine as to any changes in said emergency
telephone number.
B. Each applicant for a taxi driver's license shall, on a form provided by
the City Manager as designated, provide proof that said individual is at
least 18 years of age and a citizen of the United States or lawfully a
resident of the United States. Each such applicant shall submit a
certificate from a licensed doctor in the State of New Jersey, at the
applicant's expense, certifying that the applicant has no physical or
mental impairment or deficiency which might render the applicant
unable to safely operate a taxicab. Said physician certificate shall be
presented at the time of the initial application and at each renewal
thereafter and shall include but not be limited to a certification that the
applicant for a taxicab driver's license has the visual acuity to safely
operate a motor vehicle. Any applicant for a taxicab driver's license
shall consent to an abstract for said individual being obtained by the
Police Department of the City of Brigantine as part of the application
review process. The City Manager or his designee reserves the right to
give a written test to any applicant, which said test is for the purpose of
determining that said individuals are fluent in the English language so
as to enable them to communicate with the passengers and to prove
they have an adequate knowledge of all City streets and of City and
state traffic regulations. There must be furnished with any such
application three passport photographs not less than 60 days old which
will be attached to the City-issued identification card as further set
forth in this chapter. No person shall drive any taxicab in the City until
§ 270-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:827
§ 270-4. Insurance requirements.
the license to drive the same, as herein provided, is issued to such
driver. Further, no owner of a taxicab owner's license shall let any
individual operate a taxicab unless said individual has received a
taxicab driver's license. It is the responsibility of the applicant for the
taxicab driver's license to submit any changes in information contained
on the initial registration to the City Manager's designee within 10 days
of the date of said change. All applicants for a taxi driver's license
must show proof of the intention of a taxi owner licensee to hire said
individual at the time of licensure.
C. Filing; background investigations; renewal applications. [Amended
6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2010]
(1) All applications as stated herein shall be filed with the City of
Brigantine, which shall assign the responsible entity within the City
of Brigantine as the agent of the governing body and City Manager
for the receipt of such applications.
(2) All applicants for a taxicab owner's license and a taxicab driver's
license, and any other person requiring a background check for
issuance of taxi or limousine license, shall submit to such
background investigations as are designated by this Subsection C,
including but not limited to the form of public background
investigation established by the New Jersey State Police known as
the "live scan" non-criminal-justice fingerprint, background and
identification process. Applicants shall pay the fee of the vendor,
known at the time of the adoption of this Code as Morpho Trak
(Sagem Morpho), or its successor as so designated, for provision of
the service. Such fee shall be in addition to the fee or fees specified
in the fee schedule of the City of Brigantine.176
(3) Annual applications for renewal of licenses shall be on file and
completed not later than 15 days prior to the commencement of the
calendar year. (Temporary note: In the year of adoption of these
changes, a later date may be specified due to the availability of the
vendor services, giving all parties additional time without penalty
to obtain the vendor service now required.) At the commencement
of the first full annual year in which this Subsection C is effective,
the City of Brigantine shall charge a penalty for late renewal
applications in the amount of 25% of the license fee for processing
a renewal application after the designated date.
D. Limousine licenses as required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-17 shall be issued in a
form determined by the Mercantile Official of the City of Brigantine and
pursuant to the requirements of such statute. [Added 6-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-2010]
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Mercantile Businesses, Art. II, Fees Schedule.
§ 270-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 270-4
1:828
§ 270-5. Lost articles.
It shall be the responsibility of the holder of any taxicab owner's license
and the holder of any taxicab driver's license to inspect each taxicab at
the end of every eight-hour shift. At that time, if any articles are found in
said vehicle, a report must be made within 24 hours to the Police Chief of
the City of Brigantine or his designee that said articles have been lost or
otherwise left in said taxicab, and any holder of a taxicab owner's license
or a taxicab driver's license shall cooperate with and assist the Police
Department of the City of Brigantine in all efforts to determine the true
owner of said articles and to return the same to the rightful owner.
§ 270-6. Revocation, suspension or failure to renew license.
[Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 17-1998]
The City Council of the City of Brigantine may, in its discretion, refuse
to issue or renew or may, after notice and hearing to license holder or
applicant for a renewal, revoke or suspend any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter if any of the following occur:
A. Each applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall be accompanied by
proof of the issuance of a policy of insurance, with the premium prepaid
thereon, written by an insurance company duly licensed to transact
business under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey, which
shall be submitted to the City Manager or his designee. The proof of
insurance shall name the City of Brigantine as an additional insured,
with the provision that notice is to be given to the City in the event of
cancellation of the policy for any reason at least 30 days in advance.
Such insurance policy must be in the amount of at least $100,000 per
each occurrence.
B. Such policy shall provide coverage for every driver of each vehicle
listed in the policy as well as said vehicles. Issuance of the taxicab
owner's license by the City of Brigantine shall constitute an agreement
binding between the applicant and the City that the applicant agrees to
indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all claims or
damages arising out of personal injury and/or property damage made
by third parties as a result of or incidental to the issuance of said
license and the operation of any such taxicab. An owner's license may
be deemed to have been surrendered on receipt of notice of
cancellation of the insurance policy and shall be deemed surrendered if
the policy is not renewed or replaced with regard to a particular vehicle
within 30 days thereof.
C. Insurance requirements for limousines shall be satisfied as required by
N.J.S.A. 39:5G-1 and N.J.S.A. 48:16-16 by provision of proof of same to
the designated officer prior to issuance of any mercantile license for
limousines. [Added 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2010]
A. Any applicant has violated any sections of this chapter.
§ 270-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-6
1:829
§ 270-7. Display and filing of fares; vehicle capacity; conveyance of
passengers.
B. Any applicant has been convicted of any crime, disorderly persons
offense or petty disorderly persons offense in this or any other state.
C. Any applicant has been convicted of a violation of Title 39, Motor
Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, of the statutes of the State of New
Jersey.
D. Any applicant has any judgment unsatisfied of record arising out of any
automobile accident whether the same involved a taxicab or otherwise.
E. Any applicant submits any document which is false or contains
misleading information, including any documents submitted as part of
an application for an owner's license or as part of an application for a
driver's license pursuant to this section or any renewal thereof.
F. Any applicant has otherwise not complied with the licensure
requirements of this chapter.
G. Any applicant has, in any degree, contributed to any injury to a person
or damaged property arising out of the negligent operation of any
taxicab licensed to said individual pursuant to this chapter.
A. No taxicab shall be operated in the City unless and until there is
prominently displayed in the interior thereof, within full view of any
passengers therein, a complete list of fares, charges or tariff rates
charged for the transportation of passengers, which fares, charges or
tariff rates so displayed shall be those to be charged to any passengers
so transported, and no other fares, rates or tariffs shall be charged.
Each taxicab owner shall file a list of fares to be charged with the City
Clerk, and no other fares, rates or tariffs shall be charged unless so
filed.
B. No taxicab at any time shall carry more than five passengers at any time
within the City of Brigantine. All proof of insurance as required by this
chapter shall include proof that any motor vehicle used as a taxicab in
the City of Brigantine is authorized to transport up to five passengers.
C. Every driver of a taxicab in the City of Brigantine shall have the right to
demand payment of legal fare in advance and may refuse employment
unless so prepaid. No driver of such vehicle shall otherwise refuse or
neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request,
anywhere in the City unless previously engaged or unable to do so. No
driver of any such taxicab shall carry any other person than the first
passenger employing him, without the consent of said first passenger.
Every holder of an owner's license shall require the driver of each
taxicab to keep a trip sheet or trip log. The said trip sheet or trip log
shall identify the taxicab number, owner's license under which said
taxicab is being operated and the license plate number of said taxicab
and shall include the time and place when and where a passenger was
§ 270-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 270-7
1:830
§ 270-8. Taxicab driver identification.
§ 270-9. Manner of receiving and discharging passengers.
Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadways, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as near as possible or,
in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and
there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets, where
passengers may be received or discharged on either the right- or left-hand
sidewalk or side of the roadway.
§ 270-10. Reinspection of vehicles. [Amended 12-21-2011 by Ord.
No. 28-2011]
Each taxicab operating within the City of Brigantine shall be inspected as
set forth herein by the City Manager or his designee. Said inspection shall
insure that each taxicab has a valid, current New Jersey inspection sticker,
a current New Jersey registration and current insurance policy which is in
effect. The exterior and interior of the taxicab must also be in a clean and
neat condition, and the trunk must be capable of securing a passenger’s
baggage. Further, all exterior and interior modes of identification and other
numbering and lettering required by this chapter must be visible and in
place. The inspection of the taxicab shall occur at the time of application
for a taxicab owner’s license and at each renewal thereof. In addition, all
taxicabs must be free of visible dents, rust and other defects.
accepted as well as the time and place of discharge. Said records must
be kept for at least a one-year period and shall be open at all times for
inspection by any duly authorized law enforcement officer.
A. There shall be affixed in every taxicab, in such a manner that the same
shall be conveniently read by any person in the taxicab, a card supplied
by the City at the time of licensing, at least three inches in height by at
least five inches in length, containing the name of the owner, the license
number of the vehicle and the year of issuance.
B. Every taxicab so licensed shall have on the outside of the taxicab, on
both sides thereof, the word "taxi," "cab" or "taxicab" in letters at least
four inches in height, as well as a name under which the owner is
operating the said vehicle.
C. Each driver of a taxicab shall have displayed, in a prominent place in
the interior of the taxicab, the individual taxicab driver's license, with a
photo of the driver affixed thereto so that the driver is clearly
identifiable by the photo identification.
D. The holder of any taxicab owner's license shall apply for renewal on
January first of each year. If said license renewal is approved, then the
City of Brigantine will issue a medallion or insignia which must be
placed for external identification on the taxicab for which the taxicab
owner's license has been issued or renewed.
§ 270-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-11
1:831
§ 270-11. Responsibilities of drivers and owners.
A. No holder of a taxicab owner's license shall dispatch a taxicab for hire
that is not currently licensed or that otherwise does not comply with
this chapter.
B. No person who does not hold a valid taxicab owner's license shall
advertise or otherwise indicate that he is doing business as a taxi
company within the City of Brigantine.
C. No owner shall dispatch a taxicab unless the driver thereof has a
current taxicab driver's license issued by the City of Brigantine and a
valid unrevoked driver's license issued by the State of New Jersey.
D. No holder of a taxicab owner's license, while performing his duties and
responsibilities as a taxicab owner, shall commit or attempt to commit,
alone or in concert with others, any act of fraud, misrepresentation,
larceny or other criminal violation or otherwise perform any willful act
which is against the best interest of the public, even though not
specifically prescribed in this chapter.
E. No holder of a taxicab owner's license shall knowingly use or permit
another to use his taxicab, garage or office of record for any unlawful
purpose.
F. No holder of a taxicab owner's license or taxicab driver's license shall
knowingly conceal any evidence of crime connected with any taxicab,
garage or office of record.
G. Any holder of a taxicab owner's license or taxicab driver's license issued
by the City of Brigantine shall immediately report to the police any
attempt to use any taxicab to commit a crime or escape from a scene of
a crime.
H. Any person holding a taxicab owner's license in the City of Brigantine
shall comply with all provisions of this chapter as well as all other laws,
rules or regulations governing taxicab owners.
I. Any person holding a taxicab owner's license or taxicab driver's license
shall inspect the interior of each taxicab immediately after the
termination of a shift to ensure that the interior and exterior are in a
clean and neat condition.
J. No holder of a taxicab owner's license or taxicab driver's license issued
by the City of Brigantine shall induce any person to employ him by
knowingly misinforming or misleading any such person as to the time
and place of the arrival or departure of any taxicab.
K. Each holder of a taxicab owner's license and taxicab driver's license
issued by the City of Brigantine shall bear the responsibility that all
passengers are carried in a safe and responsible manner and shall use
the most reasonable and direct route from point of origin to point of
destination.
§ 270-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 270-11
1:832
§ 270-12. Fees.
§ 270-13. Violations and penalties; forfeiture of license upon
repeated violations.
L. No holder of a taxicab owner's license or taxicab driver's license issued
by the City of Brigantine shall allow the operation of any taxicab unless
the same has been equipped to adequately provide for the safety of
children under the age of five years who are passengers in any such
taxicab. When applying for a taxicab owner's license, each applicant
shall provide evidence that he is adequately equipped to provide for
said child safety by showing proof of possession of at least one federally
approved child safety seat for each taxicab owner's license to be issued.
No driver shall operate a taxicab in which a child five years of age or
younger is a passenger unless any child 18 months of age or younger is
in a car seat, regardless of whether such child is in the front or rear of
the vehicle, and any child over 18 months of age and less than five years
is in a car seat or is in a lap and shoulder harness in the rear of the
vehicle.
M. No applicant for a taxicab driver's or taxicab owner's license shall
submit any documentation with said application which is fraudulent,
misleading or untrue nor shall any such applicant complete the
application in a manner which is fraudulent, misleading or untrue.
[Added 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 17-1998]
N. Only taxicab vehicles, marked and inspected as such pursuant to this
Code, may be utilized in the provision of taxicab service. It shall be a
specific violation of this chapter to substitute any other vehicle,
whether licensed as a limousine or not, in the provision of taxicab
service. [Added 6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2010]
A. The annual taxicab owner's license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter
210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, per taxicab. The
license shall be effective for a one-year period beginning January 1 and
ending December 31 of each year.
B. There shall be an administrative transfer fee as set forth in Chapter
210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, for transfer of
any taxicab owner's license.
C. There shall be an administrative fee as set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, for the issuance of a
taxicab owner's license for a vehicle replacing that originally licensed.
In addition, the actual cost of replacement of any medallion or insignia
issued by the City of Brigantine shall be charged.
D. The annual taxicab driver's license shall be as set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule.
§ 270-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-13
1:833
§ 270-14. Nonexemption from state law.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to exempt any person, firm or
corporation owning or operating a taxicab from complying with the laws
relating to the ownership, regulation and operation of automobiles in the
State of New Jersey.
§ 270-15. Investigation of applicants.
No application for a taxicab owner's license or a taxicab driver's license
shall be submitted to the City Council for approval until such time as
the applicant has completed all application materials and has executed a
form of consent and release so as to permit the Chief of Police or any
designated member of the City of Brigantine Police Department to conduct
such investigation of criminal and driving records as may be required
in order to determine that the applicant substantially complies with the
meaning, intent and purpose of this chapter.
§ 270-16. Penalties for unlicensed drivers and owners. [Amended
6-16-2010 by Ord. No. 10-2010]
In the event that a taxicab is being operated by a person who does not have
a taxicab driver's license as required by this chapter, both the driver and the
owner of the taxicab shall be subject to the penalty provisions as set forth
in this chapter. In the event that any vehicle is operated as if it is a taxicab
or is used in violation of the terms and conditions of this chapter, both the
driver and the owner of the vehicle shall be subject to the penalty provisions
as set forth in this chapter. If any driver of a taxicab is convicted of driving
while intoxicated while driving a taxicab, in addition to the penalties as set
forth in this chapter, the individual so charged shall lose his right to obtain
a taxicab driver's license in the City of Brigantine for a period of 10 years,
and the taxicab owner's license for said vehicle shall be revoked and/or
suspended by the City Council of the City of Brigantine.
§ 270-17. Limitation on number of licenses issued. [Amended
10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 17-1998; 3-20-2019 by Ord. No. 4-2019]
The City of Brigantine will issue no more than six taxicab owner's licenses
pursuant to this chapter. No more than 50% of said owner's licenses may
be owned and operated by any one person. For the purpose of this section,
A. Every person or persons, firm or corporation found guilty in a municipal
court of competent jurisdiction of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,000 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both.
Each succeeding day of violation may be construed as a new violation.
B. One violation of this chapter in a period of one year may entitle the City
Council of the City of Brigantine to hold a hearing to determine whether
any taxicab owner's license should be suspended, revoked or forfeited.
[Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 17-1998]
§ 270-13 BRIGANTINE CODE § 270-17
1:834
an applicant will be considered the same person as a holder of an existing
owner's license if said applicant is the same person, or the applicant is
a corporation or other business entity that has, as an officer, agent
stockholder, director or partner, a person who already holds a valid and
existing taxicab owner's license, or the applicant is a corporation or other
business entity that has any of the same officers, agents, stockholders,
directors or partners as a corporation or other business entity that has been
issued a valid existing taxicab owner's license.
§ 270-18. Resale of owner's licenses; inactive licenses to be
surrendered. [Amended 10-7-1998 by Ord. No. 17-1998]
§ 270-19. Livery distinguished. [Amended 6-16-2010 by Ord. No.
10-2010]
Any motor vehicle operating in the City of Brigantine which has a livery
tag must contain within said vehicle at all times a trip sheet or trip log
indicating the time and place where passengers have been picked up and
dropped off. Any such livery vehicle may only transport passengers which
have previously made arrangements, which are prearranged as opposed to
immediate hire (as if for taxi service), from a designated place to another
designated place for a prearranged set fee. Any livery vehicle providing
services in violation of this section or otherwise operating in the ordinary
course of business as a taxicab shall be in violation of this chapter.
A. Where any surrendered, revoked or suspended taxicab owner's licenses
is offered for resale by the City, the applicant shall pay the taxicab
owner's license fee then in effect. No deduction shall be given for any
portion of any year which may have expired at the time of the
application for said taxicab owner's license. The City Council of the City
of Brigantine shall either approve or deny all sales, transfers and
renewals of taxicab owner's licenses. Whenever a license is
surrendered or revoked so that the City Council of the City of
Brigantine comes into possession of the same, the City Council shall
have the option of retiring said license so that the same may not be used
in the future or holding an auction for said license and awarding the
same to the highest bidder after the receipt of sealed bids at a regularly
scheduled and announced bid opening. The minimum bid for such
license shall be established by the City Council but in no event shall be
less then the than existing taxicab owner's fee.
B. If any taxicab owner's license is inactive for a period of 60 days after its
issuance, it shall be deemed to have been surrendered to the City
Council. An inactive license is one which is issued but for which no cab
is operating within the City of Brigantine or for which no vehicle is
licensed or for which no vehicle is insured or for which no vehicle
otherwise complies with this chapter for a period of 60 days.
§ 270-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-20
1:835
§ 270-20. Uniform color for taxicabs required.
Each holder of a taxicab owner's license must have all the taxicabs owned
and operated by said person one uniform color. All the taxicabs owned by
any person and operated in the City of Brigantine must be the same color as
all other cabs owned by said person and operated in the City of Brigantine.
§ 270-21. Commercial place of business required. [Amended
7-3-1996 by Ord. No. 15-1996]
Each person or entity that operates taxicabs in the City of Brigantine may
not have its dispatching operations located at or otherwise operate out of
a residential property. Any dispatching operations located in the City of
Brigantine must be in a permissible commercial district within the City of
Brigantine. Any and all taxicabs which are operated in the City of Brigantine
and which shall be parked in the City of Brigantine must be parked in an
adequate off-street parking area located within a permissible commercial
zone within the City of Brigantine. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit
a taxicab validly licensed in the City of Brigantine from being dispatched
within the City of Brigantine but being parked and/or stored in another
municipality.
§ 270-22. Medical livery.
Any vehicle operating under the designation "medical livery" within the City
of Brigantine may only transport patients who have any type of illness or
disease, and then may only transport said patients from one medical facility
to another or from said individual's place of residence to a medical facility,
and may in no way act as a taxicab or delivery service.
§ 270-23. Parking of taxicabs on streets within City prohibited.
[Added 7-3-1996 by Ord. No. 15-1996]
No taxicab of any nature, whether licensed by the City of Brigantine or
otherwise, shall be parked on or in any street, boulevard, avenue, road,
highway, cul-de-sac, alley or other area of public travel within the City of
Brigantine except for the purpose of picking up or dropping off passengers.
This section is specifically intended to prevent the parking of taxicabs in the
City of Brigantine in any district, whether it be residential or commercial,
except for the stated purpose of picking up or dropping off passengers.
§ 270-24. Issuance of temporary taxicab license for the New Year's
holiday. [Added 12-21-2005 by Ord. No. 30-2005]
Temporary licenses for taxicabs shall be issued during the New Year's
holiday under the following conditions:
A. Said temporary taxicab licenses shall only be issued to taxicab
companies located in the City of Brigantine and actively conducting
business within the City of Brigantine in compliance with the City of
Brigantine Code § 270-1 et seq.
§ 270-20 BRIGANTINE CODE § 270-24
1:836
B. There shall be no more than three such temporary licenses issued to
each such taxicab business which is licensed and actively conducting
business within the City of Brigantine.
C. Said temporary licenses shall be valid ONLY from 12:00 noon on
December 31 of the year said licenses were issued until 12:00 noon of
the following day. [Amended 12-20-2006 by Ord. No. 31-2006]
D. Any taxicab company seeking to receive a temporary license for the
time period as set forth above must make an application to the
Brigantine Police Department in a form designed by said Police
Department and approved by the City Manager of the City of Brigantine
no later than December 15 of the year for which said licenses are
applied.
E. There shall be an administrative cost for the issuance of said licenses
and the processing of said applications of $25 per each temporary
license sought.
F. In order to be eligible to receive a temporary license for a taxicab, proof
must be presented satisfactory to the Brigantine Police Department
that such taxicab vehicle is covered under the insurance policy
maintained by said taxicab company pursuant to § 270-4 of the Code of
the City of Brigantine.
G. Prior to the Police Department issuing any temporary license for a
taxicab, said taxicab must complete and pass the inspection required by
§ 270-10 of the Code of the City of Brigantine.
H. Said taxicabs operated pursuant to a temporary license for the New
Year's holiday shall only be operated by individuals who hold a valid,
current taxicab driver's license issued by the City of Brigantine.
I. All requirements contained in the Code of the City of Brigantine, as set
forth in § 270-1 et seq., shall be applicable to all drivers and taxicab
vehicles operated pursuant to any temporary license issued by the City
of Brigantine.
J. Any taxicab company operating a taxicab pursuant to a temporary
license other than on the dates and times as set forth above shall be
subject to the penalty requirements of § 270-13 of the Code of the City
of Brigantine, and said taxicab company shall further forfeit the right to
ever receive a temporary license in the future.
K. To the extent that an actual physical temporary license is issued, the
same must be returned to the Brigantine Police Department no later
than January 3.
§ 270-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-24
1:837
Chapter 272
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 175.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 238.
§ 272-1. Radio frequency emissions.
The Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications
Act of 1996, grants the Federal Communications Commission exclusive
jurisdiction over the regulation of the environmental effects of radio
frequency (RF) emissions from telecommunications facilities; and the
regulation of radio signal interference among users of the RF spectrum.
Therefore, the City of Brigantine's regulation of towers and
telecommunications facilities in said municipality will not have the effect
of prohibiting any person from providing wireless telecommunications
services in violation of said Act.
§ 272-2. Purpose.
The general purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement,
construction and modification of towers and telecommunications facilities
in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, while
at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of
a competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City.
Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are: to regulate the location of
towers and telecommunications facilities within the City of Brigantine;
to protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impact
of towers and telecommunications facilities; to minimize adverse visual
impact of towers and telecommunications facilities through careful design,
siting, landscaping and innovative camouflaging techniques; to promote and
encourage shared use/collocation of towers and antenna support structures
as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
to promote and encourage the utilization of technological designs that will
either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new tower structures
to support antenna and telecommunication facilities; to avoid potential
damage to property caused by towers and telecommunications facilities by
ensuring such structures are soundly and carefully designed, constructed,
modified, maintained and removed when no longer used or are determined
to be structurally unsound; to ensure that towers and telecommunications
facilities within the City of Brigantine are compatible with surrounding land
uses.
§ 270-24 BRIGANTINE CODE § 272-3
1:838
§ 272-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings described to them in this section except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE — Any building or structure other than
a tower which can be used for location of telecommunications facilities,
including any water tower located within the City of Brigantine.
APPLICANT — Any person who applies for the necessary permits and
zoning approval to erect a tower within the City of Brigantine.
APPLICATION — The process by which the owner of the parcel of land
within the City of Brigantine submits a request to develop, construct, build,
modify or erect a tower upon such parcel of land. Application includes all
written documentation, verbal statements and representations, in whatever
form or forum, made by an applicant to the City of Brigantine concerning
such request.
ENGINEER — Any engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey.
OWNER — Any person with fee title or long-term leasehold, equal or
exceeding 10 years in length, for any parcel of land within the City of
Brigantine who desires to develop or construct, build, modify or erect a
tower upon such parcel of land.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or other legal entity, private or public, whether for profit or not for
profit.
STEALTH — Any tower or telecommunications facility which is designed to
enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including but not limited to
architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements and towers designed to look other than like a tower
such as light poles, power poles and trees. The term "stealth" does not
necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed or monopole
tower designs.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES — Any cables, wires, lines, wave
guides, antennas and any other equipment or facilities associated with
the transmission or reception of communications which a person seeks to
locate or has installed upon or near a tower or antenna support structure.
However, telecommunications facilities shall not include:
TOWER — A self-supporting lattice, guyed or monopole structure
constructed from grade which supports telecommunications facilities. The
term "tower" shall not include amateur radio operators' equipment, as
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
Any satellite earth station antenna two meters in diameter or less which
is located in an area zoned industrial or commercial.
A.
Any satellite earth station antenna one meter or less in diameter,
regardless of zoning category.
B.
§ 272-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-4
1:839
§ 272-4. Development of towers.
A. Towers shall be a conditional use in all zoning districts within the City of
Brigantine. No person shall build, erect or construct a tower upon any
parcel of land within the City of Brigantine unless all requirements of
this chapter and all other zoning requirements are made.
B. No person shall build, erect or construct a tower upon any parcel of
land within any zoning district within the City of Brigantine unless an
application has been filed to the Planning Board of the City of
Brigantine pursuant to this chapter and an applicant has met all
requirements herein as well as meeting the requirement of any and all
site plan approval as deemed necessary by said Planning Board. Any
application for permission to build a tower and application for site plan
approval shall, to the greatest extent possible, be submitted and heard
as part of one application.
C. Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the
districts where located. Towers shall be permitted to a height of 150
feet.
D. No new tower shall be built, constructed or erected in the City unless
the tower is capable of supporting another person's operating
telecommunications facility comparable in weight, size and surface
area to the telecommunications facility installed by the applicant on the
tower within six months of completion of the tower's construction.
E. An application to develop a tower shall include:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner and lessee
of the parcel of land upon which the tower is situated. If the
applicant is not the owner of the parcel of land upon which the
tower is situated, the written consent of the owner shall be
evidenced in the application.
(2) The legal description, folio number and address of the parcel of
land upon which the tower is to be situated.
(3) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of
other towers or usable antenna support structures within a fivemile
radius of the proposed new tower site, including any Cityowned
property.
(4) A description of the design plans proposed by the applicant. The
applicant must identify its utilization of the most technological
design, including microcell design, as part of the design plan. The
applicant must demonstrate the need for towers and why design
alternatives, such as the use of microcell, cannot be utilized to
accomplish the provision of the applicant's telecommunications
services.
§ 272-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 272-4
1:840
(5) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent,
but unsuccessful, efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate
the applicant's telecommunications facilities on City-owned towers
or usable antenna support structures located within a five-mile
radius of the proposed tower site.
(6) An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made diligent,
but unsuccessful, efforts to install or collocate the applicant's
telecommunications facilities on towers or usable antenna support
structures owned by other persons located within a five-mile radius
of the proposed tower site.
(7) Written technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed
tower or telecommunications facility cannot be installed or
collocated on another person's tower or usable antenna support
structures owned by other persons located within a five-mile radius
of the proposed tower site.
(8) A written statement from an engineer that the construction and
placement of the tower will not interfere with public safety
communications and the usual and customary transmission or
reception of radio, television or other communications services
enjoyed by adjacent residential and nonresidential properties.
(9) Written, technical evidence from an engineer that the proposed
structure meets the standards set forth in the section of this
chapter entitled "Structural requirements" (see § 272-6).
(10)Written, technical evidence from a qualified engineer acceptable to
the appropriate members of the Brigantine Fire Department and
the Brigantine construction office that the proposed site of the
tower or telecommunications facility does not pose a risk of
explosion, fire or other danger to life or property due to its
proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials
such as liquified petroleum (LP) gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas
or corrosive or other dangerous chemicals.
(11) In order to assist the personnel of the City of Brigantine and the
Planning Board in evaluating the visual impact of the application,
the applicant shall submit color photo simulation showing the
proposed site of the tower with a photo-realistic representation of
the proposed tower as it would appear from the closest residential
property and from adjacent roadways.
(12) The Act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field of regulation of
RF emissions and does not allow the City to condition or deny on
the basis of RF impacts the approval of any telecommunications
facilities, whether mounted on towers or antenna support
structures, which meet FCC standards. In order to provide
information to its citizens, the City shall make available, upon
request, copies of ongoing FCC information and RF emissions
standards for telecommunications facility transmitting from towers
§ 272-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-4
1:841
§ 272-5. Setbacks.
The City of Brigantine is desirous of ensuring that towers may be sited in
the City of Brigantine pursuant to the Telecommunications Act while at the
same time balancing the safety, health and well-being of the residents of
the City of Brigantine. Therefore, setbacks for any towers must be such
that they minimize the potential for property damage, personal injury or
loss of life due to tower failure or collapse. This is particularly important
in a community such as the City of Brigantine which is often victimized by
hurricanes and/or northeastern storms. Therefore, the setbacks from any
and all property lines in the City of Brigantine (i.e., side yard setbacks, front
yard setbacks and rear yard setbacks) shall be two feet for every one foot in
height of said tower. For example:
§ 272-6. Structural requirements.
All towers must be designed and certified by an engineer to be structurally
sound and, at a minimum, be in conformance with the Uniform Construction
Code178 and any other codes, ordinances, laws or regulations governing
such towers. All towers in operation shall be fixed to land or fixed to an
antenna support structure which is fixed to land.
§ 272-7. Separation or buffer requirements.
For the purpose of this section of the chapter, the separation distances
between towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line
between the base of the existing or approved structure and the proposed
base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed tower. Tower separation
or antenna support structures. The applicant shall be required to
submit information on the proposed power density of the proposed
telecommunications facilities and demonstrate how this meets FCC
standards. The Planning Board may require an applicant to
supplement any information that the Board considers inadequate
or that the applicant has failed to supply. The Board may deny
an application on the basis that an applicant has not satisfactorily
supplied the information required of this chapter. Applications shall
be reviewed by the Planning Board pursuant to the Municipal Land
Use Law177 and all decisions shall be supported in writing setting
forth the reason for approval or denial. Any such reasons in writing
setting forth the reasons for approval or denial shall be attached to
any resolution of the Board granting or denying such application.
A. One-hundred-foot tower would require two-hundred-foot setbacks in all
directions.
B. Setback requirements for towers shall be measured from the base of
the tower to property lines of the parcel of land on which it is located.
177. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
178. Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 272-4 BRIGANTINE CODE § 272-7
1:842
distances from residentially zoned lands shall be measured from the base
of the tower to the closest point of residentially zoned properties. The
minimum tower separation distances from residentially zoned land and
from other towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of the
jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Brigantine.
§ 272-8. Method to determine tower height.
Measurement of the tower height for the purpose of determining
compliance with all requirements of this chapter shall include the tower
structure itself, the base pad and any other telecommunications facilities
attached thereto which extend more then 20 feet over the top of the tower
structure itself. Tower heights shall be measured from grade.
§ 272-9. Illumination.
Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA). Upon commencement of construction of a
tower, in cases where there are residential uses located within a distance
which is 300% of the height of the tower from the tower and when required
by federal law, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA.
§ 272-10. Exterior finish.
Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish
which enhances the compatibility with adjacent land uses as approved by
the Planning Board.
§ 272-11. Landscaping.
All landscaping on a parcel of land containing towers, antenna support
structures or telecommunications facilities shall be in accordance with the
A. Towers shall be separated from any residential zone by a minimum of
200 feet or 200 percent of the height of the proposed tower, which ever
is greater.
B. Proposed towers must meet the following minimum separation
requirements from existing towers or towers which have a development
permit but are not yet constructed at the time a development permit is
granted pursuant to this chapter:
(1) Monopole tower structures shall be separated from all other
towers, whether monopole, self-supporting lattice or guyed by a
minimum of 750 feet.
(2) Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be
separated from all other self-supporting guyed towers by a
minimum of 1,500 feet.
(3) Self-supporting lattice or guyed tower structures shall be
separated from all monopole towers by a minimum of 750 feet.
§ 272-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-11
1:843
applicable landscaping requirements as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Brigantine for commercial uses. The Planning Board may require
landscaping in excess of the requirements contained in the Municipal Land
Use Ordinance179 in order to enhance the compatibility of the tower with
adjacent land uses. The Planning Board may also require a fence around the
perimeter of the tower and any landscaping shall be installed outside of any
such fencing.
§ 272-12. Access.
The parcel of land upon which a tower is located must provide access via
a paved bituminous driveway or at least one paved vehicular parking space
on site with sufficient room for a normal sized vehicle to be able to make a
K-turn or otherwise turn around.
§ 272-13. Stealth design.
All towers approved as a conditional use shall be of stealth design.
§ 272-14. Antennas on antenna support structures.
Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be permitted on any
antenna support structure when said support structure is at least 125
feet tall, regardless of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning
district where the structure is located. Antennas are prohibited on all other
structures. The owner of such structure shall, by written certification to the
Zoning Officer, establish the following at the time plans are submitted for a
building permit:
§ 272-15. Modification of towers.
A tower existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, which was in
compliance with the City of Brigantine's zoning regulations immediately
prior to the effective date of this chapter, may continue in existence as
a nonconforming structure. Such nonconforming structures may only be
modified pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Ordinance,180 and if any
A. That the height from grade of the antenna shall not exceed the height
from grade of the antenna support structure by more than 20 feet.
B. That any antenna and the appurtenances thereto, located on any
building above the primary roof of said building, shall be set back one
foot from the edge of the roof of said building for each one foot in height
above the roof of the antenna. This setback requirement shall not apply
to any water towers located in the City of Brigantine, and any antenna
no greater in height than 20 feet may be located on any such water
towers without regard to any setback requirements as set forth herein.
No antennas shall be allowed to be mounted on the exterior of an
antenna support structure below the primary roof thereof.
179. Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Land Use.
§ 272-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 272-15
1:844
such structure is totally destroyed, the same will not be able to be rebuilt
unless it meets the then existing requirements of the Municipal Land Use
Ordinance and also meets the requirements of this chapter, as amended.
Any antenna, tower or telecommunication facility which is not in use for any
period of 180 days shall be considered abandoned under the Municipal Land
Use Law of the State of New Jersey.181 Additionally, any antenna, tower or
telecommunications facility which was existing but not in use for 180 days
prior to the adoption of this chapter shall not be considered a preexisting
conforming use or structure.
§ 272-16. Certifications and inspections.
§ 272-17. Maintenance.
A. All towers shall be certified by an engineer to be structurally sound and
in conformance with the requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code and all other construction, fire and property maintenance codes
and ordinances182 in effect in the City of Brigantine, County of Atlantic,
and State of New Jersey, including any state and federal law. For new
monopole towers, such certification shall be submitted with the
application for the same and a certification shall be submitted every five
years thereafter. For existing monopole towers, certification shall be
submitted within 60 days of the effective date of this chapter and shall
then be submitted every five years thereafter. For new lattice or guyed
towers, such certification shall be submitted with the application made
pursuant to this chapter and every two years thereafter. For existing
lattice of guyed towers, certification shall be submitted within 60 days
of the effective date of this chapter and every two years thereafter. The
tower owner may be required by the City of Brigantine to submit more
frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the
structural and electrical integrity of the tower is jeopardized or in any
way compromised.
B. The City of Brigantine or its agents and employees shall have the
authority to enter onto the property upon which a tower is located, at
any time between the inspections and certifications required above, to
inspect the tower for purposes of determining whether it complies with
the Uniform Construction Code183 and all other codes and standards
which are applicable, including any City ordinance or federal or state
law. Such entry upon such property shall be with prior notice where the
tower owner has registered a current address to receive such
communication with the City Manager of the City of Brigantine.
C. All expenses related to such inspections by the City of Brigantine shall
be borne by the owner of such tower.
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 198, Land Use.
181. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
182. Editor's Note: See Chs. 143, Construction Codes, Uniform, 175, Fire Prevention, and 238,
Property Maintenance, respectively.
183. Editor's Note: See Ch. 143, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 272-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 272-17
1:845
§ 272-18. Abandonment.
A. Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care
and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly
accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public.
B. Tower owners shall install and maintain towers, telecommunications
facilities, wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in substantial
compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Safety Code
and all FCC, state and local regulations and in such manner that will not
interfere with the use of the property.
C. All towers, telecommunications facilities and antenna support
structures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition,
order and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life
or property of any person.
D. All maintenance or construction of towers, telecommunications
facilities or antenna support structures shall be performed by licensed
maintenance and construction personnel.
E. All towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission as
promulgated by the FCC or other body with jurisdiction regarding the
same.
F. In the event that the use of the tower is discontinued by the tower
owner, the tower owner shall provide written notice to the City of its
intent to discontinue use and the date when said use shall be
discontinued.
A. If any tower shall cease to be used for a period of 180 consecutive days
and the City of Brigantine has not been notified of the same pursuant to
§ 272-17F, the City of Brigantine shall notify the owner, with a copy to
the applicant if other than the owner, that the site will be subject to a
determination by the City of Brigantine that said site is no longer in use.
The owner shall have 30 days from the receipt of such notice to request
a hearing from the City of Brigantine and at said hearing, which shall be
held before the City Council of the City of Brigantine, show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the tower has been in use or under
necessary repair during said time period. If the owner fails to show that
the tower has been in use or under necessary repair during said time
period, the City Council shall issue a final determination that the site is
not in use. Upon the issue of such determination, the owner shall have
75 days to dismantle or remove the tower. If the owner or applicant fails
to request a hearing as set forth herein, they shall be deemed to have
waived such rights.
B. Whenever a tower has been abandoned, the same must be dismantled
within 75 days of the date of such abandonment.
§ 272-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 272-18
1:846
Chapter 274
TENNIS COURTS, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees schedule — See Ch. 210, Art. II.
§ 274-1. Fee.
In order to provide the necessary funds to improve, maintain and repair the
municipal tennis courts on Block 7B in the City of Brigantine, a fee as set
forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, per
60 minutes or 90 minutes, per court, shall be charged. Such fee shall be
deposited in the meter or paid to the attendant prior to and as a condition
of entry upon the court.
§ 274-2. Hours of operation.
The tennis courts in the City of Brigantine will be open on a daily basis from
7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
§ 274-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any of the
rules and regulations adopted hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 274-4. Reserved courts.
Reserved courts will only be held open for 10 minutes past the scheduled
reservation time. Any time which has been reserved and which is rained out
will be forfeited.
§ 274-5. Reservations.
Any person may make reservations and the same may be made by either
phone or in person. Reservations may only be made a maximum of one week
prior to the reserved time.
C. For security obligations set forth in this section, the applicant and/or
owner shall post a bond in an amount to be determined by the office of
the City Engineer. Such amount shall be determined by the City
Engineer based upon the anticipated cost of removal of said tower.
§ 272-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-6
1:847
§ 274-6. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations shall be applicable to all tennis courts
in the City of Brigantine and shall be in addition to any and all general
rules and regulations promulgated for recreational facilities within the City
of Brigantine:
Chapter 278
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Mercantile businesses — See Ch. 210. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 284.
A. No motor vehicles of any type shall be allowed on the courts or in the
court area in any location other than a designated parking area.
B. No alcoholic beverages or other intoxicants shall be permitted to be
brought or consumed on or near the tennis court area.
C. No glass containers of any kind, including but not limited to beverage
containers, may be used on or near the tennis court areas.
D. Tennis shoes or other permissible athletic shoes must be worn at all
times when playing on the tennis courts in the City of Brigantine.
E. All players and guests are requested to be courteous at all times, obey
the rules and regulations as herein established and as otherwise
existing in the City of Brigantine and should not engage in any rude or
offensive behavior.
F. Proper tennis attire is encouraged and shirts are required to be worn at
all times.
G. Once a court assignment has been made, no changing to another court
may occur.
H. The Director of Recreation and the tennis court attendants on duty have
the authority to revoke tennis privileges of any group or individual for
any violations of the rules and regulations established by this chapter or
otherwise in effect in the ordinances of the City of Brigantine.
I. No criminal behavior shall be permitted in or near the tennis court
area.
J. The tennis court attendant shall have full and exclusive authority to
decide and resolve any scheduling problems, and the decision of said
tennis court attendants shall be final.
§ 274-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 274-6
1:848
ARTICLE I
Towing From Private Property
[Adopted 4-2-1992 by Ord. No. 11-1992184]
§ 278-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings
herein indicated:
PARK — To stand or stop a vehicle for a period of time in locations which
are prohibited by law or otherwise on private property.
PARKING FACILITY — Any building, structure, garage, outdoor space,
place, driveway, yard or enclosure, or any portion thereof, where vehicles
may be parked, stored, housed or otherwise kept.
TOWING OPERATOR — Any person, company, corporation, partnership or
other entity that has obtained a mercantile license to tow vehicles within
the City of Brigantine or that tows vehicles within the City of Brigantine.
TOWING OPERATOR EMPLOYEE — Any person who operates a tow truck
or is in any way employed by a towing operator.
VEHICLE — Any motorized device upon or by which any person or property
may be transported from one place to another.
§ 278-2. License required.
§ 278-3. Insurance.
A. All towing operators who wish to perform towing services within the
City of Brigantine must apply for and receive a mercantile license by
said City of Brigantine.
B. Any applicant for a mercantile license to operate a towing company
performing services within the City of Brigantine shall, in addition to all
information required by the Mercantile Officer, also provide the
following:
(1) The full name of the applicant, date of birth and social security
number.
(2) The residential address of the applicant or, if said applicant is a
corporation or other business entity, the residential address of the
president or managing officer.
(3) If the applicant is a corporation, the address of the registered agent
within the State of New Jersey for said corporation.
(4) The address of said towing operator's base of service/storage area.
184. Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. 278, Towing, adopted 2-4-1987 by
Ord. No. 1-1987.
§ 278-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-3
1:849
§ 278-4. Removal without owner's consent.
The towing or removal of any vehicle from private property without the
consent of the registered owner or other legally authorized person in
control of said vehicle is subject to the following conditions:
A. All towing operators providing services within the City of Brigantine
shall maintain adequate insurance to cover any and all personal injury,
property damage or other loss which may occur.
B. All towing operators providing services within the City of Brigantine
shall indemnify and hold harmless said City of Brigantine for any and all
personal injury, property damage or other loss which occurs as the
result of the performance of towing services within such City.
A. Any towed or removed vehicle must be stored at the towing operator's
place of business in a secured facility. This facility must have business
hours which are open to the public during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday.
B. Prior to removing any vehicle from private property without the consent
of the registered owner or other person in control of said vehicle, the
towing operator must contact the Brigantine Police Department and
advise said Police Department of the license plate number, make and
model of the vehicle and, if possible, the owner and/or registrant of said
vehicle. This procedure is required so that the City of Brigantine Police
Department may determine if said vehicle is in any way connected with
a wanted criminal or criminal activity. Said towing operator may only
then remove said vehicle upon being advised by said Brigantine Police
Department that said vehicle, to the best of its knowledge, is not stolen,
owned by any wanted criminal nor involved with any criminal activity.
C. Prior to towing or removing any vehicle, the towing operator, in
accordance with Subsection B above, shall notify the Brigantine Police
Department and make known to said Police Department the location
where said vehicle will be stored, the time said vehicle was towed and
the make, model, color and license plate number of said vehicle. This is
to allow said Police Department to respond to any vehicle owner who
indicates his vehicle is stolen or otherwise missing.
D. If the registered owner or person in control of a vehicle arrives at such
vehicle at a time when said vehicle is scheduled to be towed but prior to
the actual removal of the vehicle, said vehicle shall be disconnected
from the towing or removing apparatus and returned to the vehicle
owner upon the payment by said owner of a reasonable fee, not to
exceed half of the normal rate for towing services provided by the
towing operator. However, if said person indicates to said licensed
towing operator that he will refuse to remove the vehicle and the same
is parked illegally, then said licensed towing operator shall be permitted
to tow and remove said vehicle.
§ 278-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-5
1:850
§ 278-5. Payment of third-party commission prohibited.
It is the purpose and intention of this article that no towing operator may
pay any third party a commission or other percentage of money earned for
any tow in return for said individual's calling in or advising said towing
operator that any vehicle is parked illegally. This includes but is not limited
to the owners or operators of any premises from which vehicles are to be
towed.
§ 278-6. Standards for employees.
§ 278-7. Standards for equipment.
§ 278-8. Storage.
No towed vehicle may be stored upon any public street, alleyway or yard
within the City of Brigantine. All vehicles towed by a towing operator must
be removed to a protected storage facility unless the same are towed to an
auto repair or auto body repair shop. No said towed vehicle taken to an
auto repair or auto body repair shop within the City of Brigantine is allowed
to remain for more than a thirty-day period unless the same is completely
covered by a protected material or repairs have begun thereon and will be
diligently and expeditiously completed.
§ 278-9. Towing and storage fees.
A. All drivers of towing operators must possess a current valid New Jersey
driver's license which will allow said individual to operate a tow vehicle
and must have a current valid commercial driver's license if necessary.
B. All employees of the towing operator shall be clean and neat and shall
be courteous to the general public.
A. All towing operators must have equipment adequate to perform the
satisfactory services pursuant to this article.
B. The towing operator or his employees may not in any way represent or
indicate that they are employees of the City of Brigantine and shall save
and hold harmless the City of Brigantine from any and all damage
incurred while performing towing services. Said damage will be the
liability of the towing operator or other individuals according to law, but
in no event will be the responsibility of the City of Brigantine.
C. All towing vehicles shall at all times be in conformance with all New
Jersey State statutes, regulations and other laws.
D. All tow vehicles will have the name, address and phone number of the
towing operator painted or permanently attached to both sides of any
tow vehicles used pursuant to this article.
E. All tow vehicles shall be permanently permitted by the State of New
Jersey to use a flashing amber emergency light.
§ 278-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-9
1:851
§ 278-10. Inspection of records.
§ 278-11. Reporting of crimes.
Any towing operator who observes in plain view any instrumentality or
evidence of criminal activity shall immediately report the same to the
Brigantine Police Department. Failure to do so shall be cause for immediate
revocation of said towing operator's mercantile license required pursuant
to this article.
§ 278-12. Signs.
A. All towing and storage fees charged for services performed pursuant to
this article must be posted in a clear and conspicuous place at the base
of service of any towing operator, and no such fee for towing or storage
shall be charged in excess of said posted rates.
B. All towing operators shall provide to the City of Brigantine for the City
of Brigantine's records a copy of the current towing and storage fees to
be charged for towing services performed pursuant to this article.
C. All towing operators upon request shall prepare a bill for all towing and
storage services and shall maintain a copy of said bill on file and
provide at least one copy of the same to any owner or other individual
redeeming a vehicle. Said bills or invoices should include the name,
address and telephone number of the towing operator and a complete
list of services performed and charges therefor. In addition, said bills or
invoices must include the make, model and year of the vehicle towed, as
well as the name, address and telephone number of the record owner if
ascertained, and the license plate number of the vehicle.
D. The City of Brigantine hereby specifically reserves the right to not
renew any mercantile license of a towing operator based upon said
towing operator's fee schedule's being excessive when compared to
other prevailing prices for similar services among other towing
operators.
E. All invoices mentioned above shall be numerically numbered in
consecutive order. An invoice shall be prepared for each vehicle towed
and/or stored pursuant to this article.
A. The towing operator shall make available to the Brigantine Police
Department a record of all vehicles towed from the City of Brigantine
and shall provide any and all invoices requested by the City of
Brigantine concerning towing services provided in the City of
Brigantine upon written request of said Police Department.
B. All records which are required to be maintained pursuant to this article
shall be kept for a period of not less than four years by a towing
operator.
§ 278-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-12
1:852
§ 278-13. Improper removal.
When an owner of private property or his agent improperly causes a motor
vehicle to be towed or removed from said private property, said property
owner shall be liable to the owner of said towed vehicle for all accrued
costs, including but not limited to the costs of towing, storage, attorneys'
fees and court costs, if applicable.
A. Except for property appurtenant to and obviously a part of a singlefamily
residence and except in instances where notice is given
personally to the person in control of the vehicle if the vehicle is
considered to be parked illegally, no vehicle may be towed pursuant to
this article unless the property owner of the property where said
vehicle is to be towed from meets the following requirements
concerning the posting of signs relative to towing:
(1) A sign giving notice as required in Subsection A must be
prominently placed at each driveway, accessway or curb cut
allowing vehicular access to the property within five feet of the
public right-of-way line.
(2) If no driveway or curb cut exists, a sign giving notice as required in
Subsection A must be prominently placed where the same is clearly
visible to the general parking public. Said signs must at a minimum
be placed at a distance of no greater than one sign per 30 feet in
any parking facility.
(3) Said signs giving notice to the general parking public must clearly
state in lettering not less than two inches high and on a contrasting
background that unauthorized vehicles will be towed at the vehicle
owner's expense. The specific words "unauthorized vehicles will be
towed at the vehicle owner's expense" must be included on any
such sign in letters which are two inches or larger. Said sign must
also provide the name, address and phone number of the towing
operator authorized to tow the vehicles from such private property.
(4) The sign should also state in letters two inches or greater the fee
for the towing of vehicles from such private property.
B. All such signs posted pursuant to this article must be permanently
installed. The bottom portion of any said sign shall not be less than four
feet above ground level and should be placed in a position which makes
the same as visible as possible while conforming to the requirements of
this article. Any sign must be continuously posted and maintained on
the private property for not less than 48 hours prior to the towing or
removing of any vehicles from said private property unless said
vehicle(s) must be towed to avoid an emergency situation.
C. Nothing herein shall allow any sign to be posted in violation of Chapter
198, Land Use.
§ 278-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-14
1:853
§ 278-14. Notice to owners of towed vehicles.
If any vehicle which has been properly towed pursuant to this article
remains unclaimed for a period of 48 hours from the time of the towing
or removal of said vehicle, the towing operator shall send notice to the
registered owner of the vehicle that the same has been towed and the
location of said vehicle. If after being notified the registered owner still does
not claim said vehicle within 96 hours, then the towing operator must send
out a letter by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the registered
owner of the vehicle indicating that the vehicle has been towed and the
location of said vehicle.
§ 278-15. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this article shall subject the towing operator or any other
such violator to one or more of the following penalties, as determined by the
Municipal Court Judge with jurisdiction over violations of this article:
§ 278-16. Revocation of license.
Any towing operator who refuses or fails after two or more written notices
from the City of Brigantine to abide by the terms of this article may have
his or its mercantile license revoked and shall no longer perform towing
services in the City of Brigantine until a new mercantile license has been
issued.
A. Imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days;
B. A fine not exceeding $1,000; or
C. A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 278-14 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-16
1:854
ARTICLE II
Rotating List
[Adopted 5-20-1992 by Ord. No. 10-1992]
§ 278-17. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this article, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AUTOMOBILE — A private passenger automobile of a private passenger or
station wagon type that is owned or leased and is neither used as a public
or livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a driver;
and a motor vehicle with a pickup body; or a delivery sedan, a van or a
panel truck or a camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned
by an individual or by a husband and wife who are residents of the same
household, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the owner(s).
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — The removal and transportation of an
automobile which has been damaged in an accident or recovered after being
stolen from a highway, street or other public or private road or a parking
area or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident thereto,
but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position beyond the
right-of-way or berm or from being impaled upon any other object within
the right-of-way or berm. Basic towing service shall include the removal
and transportation of any automobile from any alley way within the City
of Brigantine but shall not include the removal and transportation of any
automobile from the beach and/or bay surrounding the City of Brigantine
and shall not include the removal of any automobile from private property.
BEACH OR BAY TOWING — The towing of any automobile from the beach,
bay or water contiguous to and surrounding the island of Brigantine.
CITY LOT STORAGE — Vehicle storage facility owned by the City of
Brigantine.
INSIDE BUILDINGS — A vehicle storage facility that is completely indoors,
having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal of
vehicles and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a private
passenger automobile comes in contact with any other object for which the
private passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in
a storage facility. This includes all situations which are accidental to one
person even if caused by the intentional acts of another.
NONBASIC TOWING SERVICES — All towing services of automobiles which
are not basic towing services, beach or bay towing services or towing
services provided on or from private property.
OUTSIDE SECURE — Any automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is at least
six feet high and is installed with a passive alarm system or a similar on-site
security measure. The facility is to be lighted at night.
§ 278-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-17
1:855
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — An automobile storage facility that is not indoors
and is not secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier and all other
storage facilities not defined above as inside building or outside secured.
STORAGE CHARGES FOR TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — The maximum
allowable amount to be charged by a storage facility for a twenty-four-hour
period or a fraction thereof. Each new twenty-four-hour period begins at
12:01 a.m.
TOWING CONTRACTOR — Any individual or entity placed on the rotating
list established by this article who performs or shall perform towing
services pursuant thereto and who has been licensed according to this
article.
TOW VEHICLE — Only those vehicles equipped with a boom or booms,
winches, slings, tiltbeds, wheel lifts or underreach equipment specifically
designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of private
passenger automobiles.
TOW VEHICLE'S BASE OF SERVICE — The towing operator's principal
place of business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in
use.[Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010]
§ 278-18. Effect of article on bidding process.
This article allows the hiring of towing and storage services by the City of
Brigantine without submitting the same to the formal bidding process.
§ 278-19. Establishment of rotating list.
A. The City of Brigantine, by this article, hereby establishes a rotating list
of towing contractors who the City shall use the services of and who
shall be called on a rotating basis for any towing services required
pursuant to this article within the City of Brigantine. For any towing
entity to be contracted with and placed upon the rotating list herein
described pursuant to this article, said towing entity must fully comply
with all the terms and conditions of this article which said compliance is
to be determined by the City Manager of the City of Brigantine or his
designee. Said rotating list established by this article, shall be rotated
on a weekly basis.
B. A towing contractor shall be placed on the rotating list established by
this article in the order in which its completed application is approved.
Each new addition to the list will be placed at the bottom of said list.
C. Once a list has been established, the City of Brigantine will request
towing services from said list on a rotating basis. If a towing contractor
is called and for any reason does not or cannot perform the requested
towing service, such towing contractor will be placed on the bottom of
the rotating list, and the next towing contractor on the list will be called
to perform the towing services.
§ 278-17 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-19
1:856
§ 278-20. Fees.
The following fees are established as the maximum rates which can be
charged for towing and storage fees pursuant to this article:
D. If no towing contractor on the rotating list is able to perform towing
services when necessary, the City is entitled to have said services
performed by a towing contractor not contained on the rotating list.
E. During adverse weather conditions or other emergency conditions, all
towing contractors on the rotating list shall give priority to requests for
towing services made by the City of Brigantine as compared to requests
made by third parties.
A. Towing services:
(1) Basic towing services provided at the day rate: [Amended
5-19-1998 by Ord. No. 7-1998; 5-19-2004 by Ord. No.
15-2004]
(a) First mile or less: $85.
(b) Each additional mile: $1.75.
(2) Basic towing services provided on nights, weekends or New Jersey
State holidays: [Amended 5-19-1998 by Ord. No. 7-1998;
5-19-2004 by Ord. No. 15-2004]
(a) First mile or less: $95.
(b) Each additional mile: $1.75.
(3) Nonbasic towing services provided at the day rate: $50 for all tows.
(4) Nonbasic towing services provided on nights, weekends and New
Jersey State holidays: $60 for all tows.
(5) Beach or bay towing services provided during days: $150 for all
tows. Towing contractors may charge an hourly rate over and
above the basic rate of $150 for beach or bay towing services for
any portion of an hour over the first hour spent completing a beach
or bay tow.
(6) Beach or bay towing services provided on nights, weekends and
New Jersey State holidays: $200 for all tows. Towing contractors
may charge an hourly rate over and above the basic rate of $200 for
beach or bay towing services for any portion of an hour over the
first hour spent completing a beach or bay tow.
B. Storage fees.
(1) Inside building storage/storage facility capacity:
(a) Twenty-one or more spaces: $13.
§ 278-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-20
1:857
§ 278-21. Application of fee schedule. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord.
No. 9-2010]
No person shall be liable to any other person or entity who tows or stores
a private passenger automobile pursuant to the provisions of this article for
any fees in excess of those permitted by the towing and storage fee schedule
established by this article. Pursuant to law, fee schedules or parts thereof
shall be reviewed by the New Jersey Commissioner of Insurance on an
annual basis and may be revised if necessary. In the event that any portion
of the above schedules are revised by the Commissioner of Insurance, the
revised fee shall be the maximum fee that may be charged by a towing
contractor, and this section shall be amended accordingly.
§ 278-22. Maximum charges.
§ 278-23. Calculation of towing and storage rates.
(b) Ten to 20 spaces: $18.
(c) Fewer than 10 spaces: $22.
(2) Outside storage facility capacity:
(a) Twenty-one or more spaces: $9.
(b) Ten to 20 spaces: $11.
(c) Fewer than 10 spaces: $25. [Amended 5-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 10-2009]
(3) Outside unsecured storage facility capacity:
(a) Twenty-one or more spaces: $7.
(b) Ten to 20 spaces: $9.
(c) Fewer than 10 spaces: $10.
(4) Storage within a City lot: $7.
A. The fees set forth in this article for towing rates are the maximum
charges that shall apply to private passenger automobiles for basic and
nonbasic towing services rendered pursuant to this article. There shall
be no additional charges other than provided herein, including but not
limited to separate charges for flat bedding, waiting time, wenching,
cleanup costs and additional labor, when towing services are provided
pursuant to this article.
B. The fees set forth in this article for storage fees are the maximum
storage fees chargeable per twenty-four-hour period for any private
passenger automobile which is stored pursuant to the provisions of this
article.
§ 278-20 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-23
1:858
§ 278-24. Regulation of trucks, buses and motorcycles.
This article is not intended to regulate or set fees for the towing or storage
of trucks, busses or motorcycles or the provision of emergency road service.
Such service, if requested, shall be billed at the provider's normal and
customary rate or as otherwise agreed upon.
§ 278-25. Application for license.
A. When towing services are required to the scene of an automobile
accident, the day rate shall apply when the time of the accident occurs
between 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday excluding
New Jersey State holidays. The night, weekend and holiday rate shall
otherwise apply to all towing services provided at the scene of an
automobile accident.
B. When towing services are required for other than an automobile
accident, the day rate shall apply when the vehicle is transported
(pickup to delivery) entirely between the hours of 8:00 am. and 6:00
p.m., Monday through Friday except on New Jersey State holidays. The
night, weekend and holiday rate shall otherwise apply to towing
services provided.
C. Towing rates shall be calculated based on the total distance traveled
from the tow vehicles base of service to the job site and return by way of
the shortest route available. A fraction shall be rounded up to the
nearest whole mile.
D. Tow vehicles transporting multiple passenger cars at one time shall
receive the applicable fees for each vehicle transported.
A. In order to be placed on the rotating list of towing contractors
established by this article, a towing contractor must first receive a
towing contractors license from the City of Brigantine.
B. Said license, if issued, shall be valid for a period of one year.
C. Applications for license pursuant to this article shall be submitted to the
City Manager or his designee.
D. An administrative fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fee Schedule, shall be paid to the City of
Brigantine as part of the application process. All said administrative
fees collected will be accounted for and deposited in the local treasury
as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:5-15.
E. All applications shall include the following:
(1) The name of the towing contractor.
(2) The business address of the towing contractor.
§ 278-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-25
1:859
§ 278-26. Requirements for towing contractors.
All towing contractors who wish to be licensed and placed on the rotating
list pursuant to this article must meet the following requirements:
(3) The residence address of the towing contractor or the President or
managing partner of said towing contractor.
(4) The business telephone number of the towing contractor.
(5) The home telephone number of the towing contractor or the
President or managing partner of said towing contractor.
(6) If a corporation, all shareholders owning 10% or more of said
corporation.
(7) Any documentation concerning equipment as required by this
article.
(8) The records and information concerning employees as required by
this article.
(9) All certificates of insurance as required by this article.
(10) A hold-harmless agreement as required by this article.
F. Upon the submission of a complete application, a satisfactory police
records check and a satisfactory inspection of equipment (if deemed
necessary), the City Manager may recommend to the Mayor and
Council that a towing contractor be granted a license and placed on the
rotating list of towing contractors established by this article.
G. The Mayor and Council may approve such a recommendation by
resolution at any properly noticed meeting of the City Council.
H. Each license or a copy thereof shall be prominently displayed in each
piece of equipment used in performing services pursuant to this article.
I. Any false, misleading or fraudulent statements made in an application
for license or contained in any of the documents attached thereto is
cause for immediate removal of any towing contractor from the rotating
list established by this article.
A. All towing contractors must have a legally permissible base of service
where the towing vehicles required pursuant to this article may be
stored in a safe and aesthetically pleasing manner and in compliance
with all laws, regulations, ordinances, rules or other promulgations by
municipal, county, state and federal entities. A towing contractor's base
of service cannot be a home or residence. [Amended 6-2-2010 by
Ord. No. 9-2010]
B. All towing contractors must be subjected to a check by the City of
Brigantine Police Department, and a conviction for any felony will be
considered reason to eliminate said towing contractor from the rotating
§ 278-25 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-26
1:860
§ 278-27. Requirements concerning employees.
All towing contractors who wish to be licensed and placed on the rotating
list pursuant to this article must meet the following requirements
concerning employees:
list of towing contractors in the City of Brigantine. Likewise, the names
of all employees and drivers of the towing vehicles which are to be
utilized by each towing contractor must be submitted to the City of
Brigantine Police Department along with a copy of a current driver's
license for each individual. Said Police Department shall run a Division
of Motor Vehicles license check on said individuals. Any towing
contractor (and their employees) consents to said checks upon the
filing of an application for a license pursuant to this article by any
said towing contractor. If any towing contractor continues to let any
employee continue to perform towing services that has a revoked or
suspended license, said towing contractor may be removed from the
rotating list as established by this article.
C. Any applicant to be placed on the rotating towing list must sign an
agreement with the Police Department regarding the same. Said
agreement shall specifically state that if there are two negative
complaints against the towing operator within a one-year period, the
City Manager, after consultation with the Chief of Police, may remove
said towing operator from the rotating list without the necessity of a
hearing. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010]
D. Each towing contractor shall provide the City of Brigantine the
telephone number at which said towing contractor can be contacted to
perform towing services along with the address of the base of operation
of said towing contractor. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010]
E. Towing contractors' equipment, personnel lists and base of service are
subject to periodic inspections and approval by the City of Brigantine.
Said inspections will be performed by the City Manager or his designee.
F. All towing contractors shall comply with all federal and state laws and
regulations concerning wages, hours and any and all other terms of
employment.
G. Each towing contractor prior to being placed on the rotating list
established by this article shall provide proof to the City of Brigantine
that they have engaged in the services of emergency police towing and
recovery for a period of one year prior to their being placed on the
rotating list. This record of performance shall be verified by the Chief of
Police of the City of Brigantine.
H. Subcontracting of or for any towing services to be performed pursuant
to this article is strictly prohibited.
A. Each towing contractor must employ a sufficient number of employees
to comply with the provisions of this article. No person shall be
§ 278-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-27
1:861
employed by a towing contractor for the purpose of this article unless
they have submitted to a record check and Division of Motor Vehicles
license check and have been approved by the City of Brigantine Chief
of Police after said Chief of Police has reviewed results of said checks.
Any individual who has a suspended or revoked license in this or any
other state shall immediately cease and desist from performing towing
services pursuant to this article.
B. All drivers of towing contractors licensed pursuant to this article shall
be over the age of 18 years and must have a current valid New Jersey
State driver's license or current valid commercial driver's license if
necessary.
C. The towing contractor, at the time he wishes to be placed on the
rotating list, shall submit to the City of Brigantine the names, addresses
and any driver's license of all proposed drivers and employees who will
be performing towing services pursuant to this article. It will be the sole
and exclusive obligation of the towing contractor to update and
supplement this list as any change in personnel occurs with said towing
contractor. No driver shall perform towing services pursuant to this
article unless previously listed by the contractor in the list of employees
supplied to the City. Failure to submit or keep this list updated will
subject said towing contractor to immediate removal from the rotating
list established by this article.
D. All complaints of any kind, including but not limited to complaints
relative to service, overcharging, theft of parts, damage to towed or
stored vehicles, discourteous treatment and the like shall be referred to
the City Manager or his designee in writing. Any two complaints which
are deemed to be true shall subject the towing contractor to removal
from the rotating list in the discretion of the City Manager, without the
necessity of a hearing, after consultation with the Chief of Police.
[Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010]
E. All employees of towing contractors placed on the rotating list pursuant
to this article shall be clean, neat and make a good appearance and
treat all individuals with whom they come in contact in a kind and
courteous manner.
F. All towing contractors placed on the rotating list implemented by this
article agree, understand and consent to the fact that by being placed
on said rotating list they assume responsibility, unless otherwise
provided by law, for any and all careless, intentional, negligent or other
acts of themselves or their employees while acting in the performance
of any duties prescribed by this article.
G. Nothing contained in this article shall allow any towing contractor or
any employee thereof to in any way indicate to the public or act in such
a manner so as to represent to the public that said towing contractor or
its employees are employees of the City of Brigantine or
representatives thereof.
§ 278-27 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-27
1:862
§ 278-28. Equipment requirements.
Each towing contractor who wishes to be licensed and placed upon the
rotating list established with this article must meet the following
requirements concerning equipment:
H. All employees of towing contractors shall obey all traffic laws and
regulations when performing towing services, including adherence to
all speed limits, and shall submit to the orders and instructions of
members of the Brigantine Police Department at the scene of any
accident.
I. All employees of towing contractors, when possible, should be
competent mechanics able to provide roadside service.
A. A detailed listing of the equipment to be utilized in the performance of
services pursuant to this article, provided to the City of Brigantine,
including:
(1) The type of vehicle(s).
(2) The storage location of vehicle(s).
(3) Whether vehicle(s) are owned or leased.
(4) If leased, the company from whom said vehicle(s) are leased.
B. In addition to the above, all vehicle(s) when not in use must be
permanently located at the towing contractor's base of service. Each
piece of equipment must meet the minimum standards set forth herein
as well as all minimum safety requirements as established by state and
federal law. [Amended 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010]
C. The towing contractor is solely responsible for the safety, maintenance
and operation of each piece of equipment utilized pursuant to this
article.
D. All towing contractors must have equipment adequate to perform
satisfactory towing services pursuant to this article. If any towing
contractor causes any damage, personal injury or other harm to any
person or property because of the use of inadequate equipment, said
towing contractor will be solely liable for the same, and the City of
Brigantine shall in no way be liable.
E. The towing contractor shall supply, upon request, the manufacturer's
certification of the lifting capacities of any devices for each vehicle
which said towing contractor plans to use pursuant to this article.
F. All vehicles used as equipment pursuant to this article shall be
equipped at all times with safety vests for operators, first aid kits, a
receipt book for services rendered, hand tools, lockout kits, flashlight,
broom, shovel, work gloves and flares or other necessary warning
devices.
§ 278-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-28
1:863
§ 278-29. Storage of towed vehicles on public streets prohibited.
No vehicle which is towed pursuant to this article may be stored upon any
public street, alley or passageway within the City of Brigantine and may
only be stored in a storage area acceptable to the City of Brigantine as
determined by the City Manager or his designee. Any towing contractor
who stores vehicles in a prohibited storage area is subject to immediate
removal from the rotating list established by this article.
§ 278-30. Contractor's responsibility for towed vehicles.
Towing contractors shall be responsible for the reasonable care, custody
and control of vehicles and the contents therein during the time that towing
services are provided. Towing contractors who are placed on the rotating
list hereby indemnify and hold harmless the City of Brigantine, its agents,
servants and employees concerning any and all damage, theft, vandalism
or other acts of destruction which occur on any vehicles towed and/or
stored by said towing contractor unless said damage and/or destruction
was caused exclusively by the negligence of the City of Brigantine or its
employees.
§ 278-31. Processing procedure.
The Brigantine Police Department shall be responsible for the processing
and disposal of each vehicle which is transported and stored at the City
storage facility until final disposition and removal of said vehicle as
consented to by the City of Brigantine. It is the responsibility of each
towing contractor to cooperate fully with the City of Brigantine and said
City of Brigantine Police Department and to provide any and all information
which said towing contractor may have concerning the name, address and
telephone number of the owner of the vehicle, the driver of the vehicle,
if it can be determined at the time towing services were required, and
any holders of a security interest concerning said vehicle. In addition, the
towing contractor may be requested to assist the City of Brigantine in
notification of the owners and/or drivers of said vehicles and any holders
of security interest therein. This procedure shall be determined and as
directed by the Chief of Police of the City of Brigantine. Prior to the release
G. All towing equipment shall be kept in a clean and neat fashion so as to
be reasonably accommodating to the persons who may come upon said
tow vehicles. Equipment used pursuant to this article shall have the
name, address and phone number of the towing contractor painted or
otherwise permanently attached to both sides of said equipment and
shall be in compliance with all other motor vehicle statutes of the State
of New Jersey, including being properly permitted by said state for the
use of flashing amber emergency lights.
H. All equipment used pursuant to this article shall be registered in the
name of the towing contractor.
§ 278-28 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-31
1:864
of any vehicle from the City of Brigantine's storage facility, an individual
must provide:
§ 278-32. Sale of abandoned vehicles.
The City will take all proper and necessary steps pursuant to New Jersey
statute to sell at public auction any vehicle which is considered abandoned.
If and when requested by the City of Brigantine, the towing contractor shall
be responsible for moving any vehicles contained in the City of Brigantine
storage area, at a prearranged charge, in order for the City to conduct any
auction and properly dispose of said vehicles pursuant to this article.
§ 278-33. Services to be performed by towing contractors.
A. Proof of ownership of the vehicle satisfactory to the Brigantine Police
Department.
B. A paid receipt from the towing contractor for services performed by
said towing contractor.
C. A paid receipt from the City of Brigantine for any storage fees.
D. A release from the City of Brigantine Police Department.
A. All towing contractors placed on the rotating list established by this
article shall remove and tow any and all vehicles as directed by the
Brigantine Police Department under the Supervision of the Chief of
Police and the Director of Public Safety.
B. All towing contractors placed on the rotating list established by the City
of Brigantine pursuant to this article shall be responsible for the towing
of vehicles pursuant to this article on a twenty-four-hour day, seven-daya-
week basis.
C. Towing contractors shall respond promptly to any and all requests for
towing services by the City of Brigantine, and in any event said towing
contractor shall respond and be present at the location where towing
services are required within a period of no more than 10 minutes after
receipt of the request for towing services. Failure of a towing contractor
to arrive within the guidelines delineated above can be considered
cause for removing said towing contractor from the rotating list
established by this article in the discretion of the City Manager of the
City of Brigantine.
D. If the towing contractor is summoned by the City of Brigantine for the
purposes of providing towing services pursuant to this article and the
owner of the vehicle which is to be towed arrives on the scene prior to
the removal of said vehicle by the towing contractor, said owner may be
charged an unloading and showup charge which in no event shall be in
excess of 1/2 the maximum fee established pursuant to this article for a
day rate basic towing service.
§ 278-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-33
1:865
§ 278-34. Cleanup at accident scenes.
Any towing contractor placed upon the rotating list established by this
article will be responsible for the clean up of any and all accident scenes
to which said towing contractor provides towing services. This shall include
but not be limited to the clean up of all broken glass, debris and other
clean up as required at said site. Notwithstanding this section, the towing
contractor shall not be responsible for the clean up of any hazardous-type
materials such as fuel, oil, chemicals, etc.
§ 278-35. Payment of fees; release of vehicle.
E. Any contractor placed on the rotating list established by this article
shall be responsible for the towing of any disabled City-owned vehicle
when requested by said City. This service will be furnished to the City of
Brigantine for an amount not to exceed the following maximum
charges:
(1) Towing City vehicles within City limits:
(a) Day rate: $25.
(b) Night, weekend and holiday rate: $35.
(2) Towing City vehicles outside of City limits:
(a) Day rate: $50.
(b) Night, weekend and holiday rate: $60.
(3) Towing City vehicles, beach tows: rate of $100 plus $75 per hour
for each hour after the first hour.
A. Each towing contractor shall prepare a bill for towing and/or storage
fees for each vehicle towed pursuant to this article. All such fees shall
be in conformity with the requirements and conditions as imposed by
this article. Prior to the release of any vehicle by the towing contractor
from said towing contractor's storage facility, the towing contractor
shall obtain full payment of the amount due and owing to said towing
contractor for any and all towing and/or storage fees. In addition, the
towing contractor prior to the release of any vehicle shall obtain a
release form executed by the City of Brigantine Police Department
pursuant to procedures established by the Chief of Police of the City of
Brigantine.
B. Notwithstanding any provisions of this article, nothing herein shall be
construed as requiring or allowing any towing contractor to charge the
City of Brigantine fees in excess of those established pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49, 40:48-2.50 and other applicable statutes.
§ 278-33 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-36
1:866
§ 278-36. Provision of service during certain emergencies.
In addition to the services required by this article, the towing contractor
will be required to furnish all available equipment and service during
storm periods, periods of snow emergencies, traffic emergencies, special
events, disasters or any other acts of God or other reasons which cause
emergency conditions as determined by the City Manager, Chief of Police
and/or Emergency Management Director. Said periods will be referred to as
"standby periods" in which standby service is to be provided by all towing
contractors who are on the rotating list established by this article.
§ 278-37. Standby service.
§ 278-38. Insurance.
A. Any standby period shall begin when determined by the City Manager,
Chief of Police or Emergency Management Director and shall be
terminated at the discretion of the same.
B. The City of Brigantine pursuant to this article hereby reserves the right,
during any standby period, to designate temporary areas owned or
leased by the City of Brigantine for the storage of any and all vehicles at
the direction of the City Manager, Chief of Police or Emergency
Management Director.
C. The City Manager, Chief of Police or Emergency Management Director
shall determine the type and number of tow vehicles and personnel to
be used during any standby period. The charges for the services
performed during any standby period will be computed on an hourly
basis at the rate of $40 per hour for all special events and $60 per hour
during any snowstorm, flood, hurricane or other act of God to be paid to
the towing contractor upon submission of an itemized invoice of said
towing contractor detailing the hours they were on standby to the City
of Brigantine.
A. All insurance required pursuant to this article shall be furnished by an
insurance company with a B+ or better rating, as published in the most
recent edition of the Best Insurance Key Rating Guide, and all said
insurance companies issuing insurance to be obtained pursuant to this
article must be authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey. All
towing contractors placed on the rotating list established by this article
will be required to purchase and maintain during the time they remain
on said rotating list comprehensive automobile liability insurance,
garage keepers liability insurance, comprehensive risk insurance for
any storage building and/or facility and workers' compensation
insurance with limits not less than those listed below:
(1) Automobile liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property
damage). All such liability insurance policies shall be specifically
endorsed to provide collision insurance for vehicles in tow.
§ 278-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-38
1:867
§ 278-39. Maintenance of records.
(2) Garage keepers liability insurance in an amount not less than
$60,000 per location.
(3) Comprehensive garage liability insurance in an amount not less
than $1,000,000 combined single limit.
(4) Workers' compensation insurance as required by law.
B. The City of Brigantine shall be named as an additional insured on all
policies of insurance required by this article.
C. The towing contractors through their insurance companies shall
indemnify and hold harmless the City of Brigantine against any and all
loss due to injuries, accidents or other damages of any character
whatsoever, caused as a result of an act or omission of the towing
contractor, his agents or employees in the execution of any towing
services or other services performed pursuant to this article.
D. The towing contractor shall provide the City of Brigantine with certain
certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this
article. This requirement will include separate certificates which must
be produced for each tow vehicle owned by a towing contractor. All
such policies shall include a clause which shall provide the City of
Brigantine at least 30 days' written notice prior to the cancellation of or
the intention not to renew or any material change in said policies. The
failure to submit any said certificate or failure to include said clause
shall subject a towing contractor to immediate removal from the
rotating list.
E. Any interruption of coverage of insurance required by this article shall
be deemed sufficient reason to remove any towing contractor from the
rotating list established by this article.
A. Each towing contractor placed upon the rotating list established by this
article shall keep a clear record of all vehicles towed which clearly
state:
(1) The name and address of the owner of said vehicle.
(2) The insurance carrier pertaining to said vehicle.
(3) The vehicle make, model and identification number.
(4) The telephone number of the owner.
(5) The name and address of the driver.
(6) The license plate number of said vehicle.
B. All said records shall be kept for at least a four-year period from the
date that towing services are provided for said vehicle. A copy of each
said record for any vehicle towed pursuant to this article shall be
§ 278-38 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-39
1:868
§ 278-40. Posting and filing of fees.
All fees as outlined by this article must be posted by the towing contractor
in an easily visible location at said towing contractor's base of service and
shall also be kept on file in the Clerk's office of the City of Brigantine.
§ 278-41. Enforcement personnel. [Amended 5-19-1998 by Ord. No.
7-1998; 6-2-2010 by Ord. No. 9-2010]
For the purposes of this article, the City Manager is designated as the
person responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of this article and
shall be responsible for resolving any disputes or receiving any complaints
regarding this article.
§ 278-42. Conflict with insurance regulations.
Nothing herein is in any way meant to conflict or contradict any of the
regulations adopted or to be adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance
pertaining to towing services and regulations.
§ 278-43. Contracts in excess of one year.
If the licenses entered into pursuant to this article shall be for a period in
excess of one year, said contract shall contain a clause making them subject
to the availability and appropriation annually of sufficient funds as may be
required to meet the extended obligation or, in the alternative, shall contain
an annual cancellation clause.
provided to the City of Brigantine if any such vehicle is stored in the
City storage area.
C. Towing operators shall maintain, if at all reasonably possible, a record
of all personal property contained in a towed vehicle that can be
observed in plain view at the time the towing services are performed.
All towing operators will have a duty pursuant to this article to report
any suspected illegal activities, contraband or evidence of crime
observed by said towing contractor and/or its employees immediately to
the City of Brigantine Police Department.
D. The Chief of Police of the City of Brigantine or his designee shall have
access to any of the records required to be kept by the towing
contractor pursuant to this article.
E. All invoices kept pursuant to this article shall be consecutively
numbered and shall display the name, addresses and telephone number
of the towing contractor on the same. Such invoice shall be prepared
for each vehicle towed and/or stored pursuant to this article and must
state at a minimum the date of service, the type of service, itemization
of charges and the identifying characteristics of the vehicle as stated
herein before.
§ 278-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-44
1:869
§ 278-44. Dispatching capability.
All towing equipment required pursuant to this article shall have twoway
radio capability which will allow the dispatching center of the towing
contractor to contact said truck on a twenty-four-hour basis. All said towing
contractors must have said dispatching capability so as to be able to contact
said trucks other than via the telephone on a twenty-four-hour basis.
§ 278-45. Release of vehicles involved in crimes.
No towing contractor shall release, without prior authorization of the
Department of Police of the City of Brigantine, any vehicle which is involved
in any crime or suspected of being involved in a crime.
§ 278-46. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person or entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to imprisonment in the county jail for any term
not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not exceeding $1,000; or by a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. Each violation of any provisions of this article and each day the same is
violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
§ 278-44 BRIGANTINE CODE § 278-46
1:870
Chapter 284
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and dune protection — See Ch. 101.
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Boats — See Ch. 111.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 204, Art. II.
Parking lots — See Ch. 234.
Permit parking — See Ch. 235.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 270.
Towing — See Ch. 278.
§ 278-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-46
1:871

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 284-1. Definitions.185
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectfully ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 284-1.1. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 284-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances regulating the operation of vehicles on public
streets of the City of Brigantine are hereby repealed, except that this repeal
shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for
any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed
prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 284-3. Authorization for closing of any street.
A. The City Manager or, in his absence, disability or inability to act, the
Director of Public Safety or, in the event of his absence, disability or
inability to act, then the Chief of Police of the municipality is hereby
authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street or
portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during
specified hours on any day or days whenever he finds that such closing
is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
B. Any regulations promulgated by the City Manager and in accordance
with Subsection A above shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
C. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
D. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
185. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1-1997 also repealed former Ch. 284, Vehicles and Traffic, as
amended, adopted 1-17-1996 by Ord. No. 1-1996. The form of the proposed codification
which is attached to this ordinance and specifically made a part of the same by this
reference has been approved by the State of New Jersey via letter of William E. Anderson,
Manager, Bureau of Traffic Engineering and Safety Programs dated November 20, 1995;
and the Atlantic County Board of Chosen Freeholders has adopted a resolution consenting
to the same, said resolution dated October 29, 1996.
§ 284-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-3
1:873
§ 284-4. Tow-away of vehicles in violation.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 284-5. Violations and penalties.
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
A. Unless another penalty, lesser or greater, is expressly provided by New
Jersey statute, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of
this chapter or supplement thereto shall be liable for a penalty of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or
both, upon conviction by the Municipal Court of the City of Brigantine
or such other court of law as has jurisdiction over such offenses.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138o and 39:4-197(3)c, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any supplement
thereto of those regulations set forth to reserve spaces on public or
private property for physically handicapped persons shall be liable for a
penalty or fine of at least $100 for the first offense and for subsequent
offenses a fine of at least $100 and up to 90 days' community service on
such terms and in such form as the Municipal Court of the City of
Brigantine or such other court of law as has jurisdiction shall deem
appropriate, or any combination thereof.
C. In addition to any fine or penalty authorized by this chapter for any
offense, the court having jurisdiction shall impose such costs as are
authorized by law or by the rules of court.
D. In addition to any fine, penalty or cost authorized by this chapter for
any offense, the court having jurisdiction shall impose such surcharges
as are authorized by law or by the rules of the court.
E. The presumptive or standard fines, penalties, costs and surcharges as
are intended to be charged in and under the Statewide Violations
Bureau schedule or under the regulations solely found within this
chapter for offenses not requiring any appearance in court shall be
listed and set forth in an order of the Municipal Court, in accordance
with the rules of court, by the Assignment Judge for the Atlantic - Cape
May vicinage of the Superior Court of New Jersey from time to time, as
required by law and the rules of court.
§ 284-3 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-6
1:874
§ 284-6. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 284-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-6
1:875

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 284-7. Traffic control signals.
§ 284-8. Speed limits.
§ 284-9. One-way streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 284-39), included
herein and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way
streets in the direction indicated.
§ 284-10. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any streets or parts thereof, except upon
those streets or parts thereof described in Schedule IV (§ 284-40), included
herein and made a part of this chapter.
§ 284-11. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right or all) at
any of the locations described in Schedule V (§ 284-41), included herein and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 284-12. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule VI (§ 284-42),
included herein and made a part of this chapter.
A. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of those streets described in Schedule I (§ 284-37), included herein and
made a part of this chapter.
B. The traffic signal installations shall be in accordance with the
provisions of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Laws,
Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and shall
conform to the design and shall be maintained in operation as
authorized by the Department of Transportation of the State of New
Jersey.
A. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule II (§ 284-38) included herein and made a
part of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
B. All other streets, roads and highways in the City of Brigantine shall be
considered residential, and the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour.
C. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above-designated speed limits.
§ 284-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-13
1:877
§ 284-13. Through streets.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 284-43), included
herein and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street
intersecting the through street except where yield signs are provided for in
the designations.
§ 284-14. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VIII (§ 284-44), included herein and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Stop signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 284-15. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule IX (§ 284-45), included herein and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections.
Yield signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 284-16. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule X (§ 284-46), included herein and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as lane use reservations,
and traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 284-17. No-passing zones.
No passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained along
those streets or parts of streets described in Scheduled XI (§ 284-47),
included herein and made a part of this chapter as authorized by the New
Jersey Department of Transportation.
§ 284-18. Vehicles over certain weights excluded from certain
streets.
Trucks in excess of the registered gross weights indicated are hereby
excluded from the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XII
(§ 284-48), except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets.
§ 284-19. Truck route system.
A. A truck route system upon which all trucks having a total gross weight
in excess of four tons are permitted to travel and operate shall be as set
forth in Schedule XIII (§ 284-49).
B. All trucks having a total gross weight in excess of four tons are hereby
excluded from all streets except those streets listed in Schedule XIII,
except that this exclusion shall not be construed to prevent the delivery
or pickup of merchandise or other property along the street from which
such vehicles are excluded.
§ 284-13 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-19
1:878
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 284-20. Regulations not exclusive.
§ 284-21. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIV (§ 284-50), included herein and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 284-22. No stopping or standing.
No person shall stop or stand a motor vehicle upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule XV (§ 284-51), included herein and
made a part of this chapter.
§ 284-23. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule XVI
(§ 284-52), of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule XVI, included herein and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 284-24. No stopping or standing certain hours.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the times specified in
Schedule XVII (§ 284-53), of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XVII, included herein
and made a part of this chapter.
A. The provisions of this article imposing a time limit or other restrictions
on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other and
more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping,
standing or parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any
other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter provided.
B. The provisions of this article shall not relieve any person of the duty nor
limit the penalty for failure to observe specific regulations adopted by
ordinance or otherwise in accordance with law concerning the parking
or operating of vehicles on municipally owned real property not located
within the right-of way of any public street or upon those areas of the
City of Brigantine designated as public beaches, dune areas or other
regulated areas. Regulations concerning such municipal parking lots,
beaches and dune areas are found in other chapters of the Code186 and
the duties and penalties established thereby shall not be affected by the
adoption of this article and shall remain in effect until such specific
Code sections are altered, amended or repealed.
186. Editor's Note: For regulations concerning municipal parking lots, beaches and dune areas,
see Ch. 101, Beach and Dune Protection, Ch. 105, Beaches and Recreational Facilities,
and Ch. 234, Parking Lots.
§ 284-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-25
1:879
§ 284-25. Parking prohibited certain hours for commercial vehicles.
[Amended 11-1-2006 by Ord. No. 27-2006; 3-18-2009 by Ord. No.
4-2009]
The parking of any trucks, box trucks or other commercial vehicles of any
kind having a gross weight in excess of 8,100 pounds or a cargo capacity
in excess of one ton net, or any motor homes, camping trailers or other
mobile residential-type trailers shall be prohibited on the streets of the
City of Brigantine between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless
being actively used in commercial activity or emergency during said time.
A stand-alone construction trailer shall be a trailer used in the construction
industry which is not attached on a permanent basis to any truck or other
motor vehicle. Stand-alone construction trailers must be located on the
actual lot where construction occurs and cannot be left on any City street,
highway, alley, lane or boulevard for a period in excess of 24 hours without
advanced notice to the Police Department of the City of Brigantine and
permission being granted by the Chief of Police or his designee. The City of
Brigantine may remove any such stand-alone construction trailer or vehicle
if the owner of the same cannot be contacted or if any public emergency
arises requiring said vehicle to be removed. The cost of any such removal
shall be borne by the owner of said vehicle or the contractor using said
vehicle. The owner, general contractor or other individual using the vehicle
or construction trailer may be cited for any violation of this section.
§ 284-26. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XVIII (§ 284-54), at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XVIII of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule XVIII, included herein
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 284-27. Time limit parking based on property ownership.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in the public
streets of the City of Brigantine for a continuous period of more than 48
hours in such places as parking is authorized, unless the owner or operator
of said motor vehicle owns, leases or occupies the property in front of which
said motor vehicle is parked.
§ 284-28. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any streets or parts thereof described
in Schedule XIX (§ 284-55), except at the angle designated and only within
the painted white stall lines.
§ 284-29. Loading zones.
The locations described in Schedule XX (§ 284-56), included herein and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones. No
§ 284-25 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-29
1:880
person shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other
than for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
§ 284-30. Taxi stands.
The locations described in Schedule XXI (§ 284-57), included herein and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 284-31. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 284-58), included herein and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 284-32. Handicapped parking.
The locations described in Schedule XXIII (§ 284-59), included herein and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as handicapped parking
spots.
§ 284-33. Boat and trailer parking. [Amended 12-1-1999 by Ord.
No. 17-1999; 8-2-2000 by Ord. No. 12-2000; 12-16-2015 by Ord. No.
18-2015]
The parking of boats and/or trailers shall be prohibited within the City of
Brigantine from December 1 through and including May 1 of each and every
year. Between May 2 and November 30 of any year, it shall be unlawful
for any person to park any boat or trailer in the City of Brigantine for
a continuous period of more than 48 hours in such places as parking is
authorized unless the owner or operator of said boat or trailer owns or
leases the property in front of which said boat or trailer is so parked.
Between May 2 and November 30 of any year, boats may be parked for
longer than a period of 48 hours in any street in front of any legally operated
and licensed marina on the same side of said street as said marina but only
within the area between the property lines of said marina property if said
lines were extended into said street in front of said property.187
§ 284-34. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 284-35. Posting of signs.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that is covers
the streets or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any
of the streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XXV (§ 284-61),
included herein and made a part of this chapter.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
187. Editor's Note: See also § 284-60, Schedule XXIV: Boat and Trailer Parking.
§ 284-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-35
1:881
§ 284-36. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent upon signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or parts of streets where temporary emergency no-parking signs
are displayed. The Director of Public Safety, or his designee, is
authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting of said
emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions, accidents, fires
or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or
other conditions which interfere with the free flow of traffic, or to take
appropriate steps to eliminate parking or travel over public streets or
portions thereof.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs whenever possible or
practical, given the nature of the emergency.
§ 284-35 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-36
1:882
ARTICLE IV
Schedules
§ 284-37. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-7, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard (County Route 638) and Harbor Beach
Boulevard West Brigantine Avenue
Brigantine Avenue and 14th Street South
38th Street South and Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard (County Road 638)
§ 284-38. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-8A, speed limits are hereby
established upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Brigantine Boulevard
(County Route 638)
35 Harbor Beach Boulevard to
Bayshore Avenue
Brigantine Boulevard
(County Route 638)
45 From NJ Route 87 (Bridge) to
Harbor Beach
Brigantine Boulevard
(County Route 638)
30 Bayshore Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue
Brigantine Boulevard
(County Route 638)
30 Entire length of Brigantine
Avenue
§ 284-39. Schedule III: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-9, the following described streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of
Street Direction of Travel Limits
6th Street
South
West From Brigantine Avenue to
Bayshore Avenue
8th Street
South
East From Ocean Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue
9th Street
South
East From West Beach Avenue to
Brigantine Avenue
10th Street
South
West From Brigantine Avenue to Beach
Avenue
§ 284-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-39
1:883
Name of
Street Direction of Travel Limits
12th Street
South [Added
9-20-2006 by
Ord. No.
25-2006]
East From Brigantine Avenue to Ocean
Avenue
12th Street
South
East From Ocean Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue
13th Street
North
East From East Beach Avenue to
Brigantine Avenue
13th Street
South
East From Ocean Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue
13th Street
South [Added
9-20-2006 by
Ord. No.
25-2006]
West From Ocean Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue
14th Street
North
West From Brigantine Avenue to East
Beach Avenue
31st Street
South
East From Revere Boulevard to
Brigantine Avenue
33rd Street
South [Added
9-4-2019 by
Ord. No.
17-2019]
East From Brigantine Boulevard to
Brigantine Avenue (200 Block)
Beach Avenue North From/15th Street South to 14th
Street South
Evans
Boulevard
South From 6th Street North to Lafayette
Place
Lincoln Drive
Boulevard
West From Roosevelt Boulevard to
Sheridan
Ocean Avenue South From 8th Street South to 9th
Street South
Sheridan Place
[Added
8-16-2006 by
Ord. No.
22-2006]
West (away from the
beach)
Between West Evans Boulevard
and Roosevelt Boulevard
Unnamed street North From unnamed street (Golf Course
Drive) to unnamed street (Golf
Course Drive)
§ 284-39 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-39
1:884
Name of
Street Direction of Travel Limits
Unnamed street South From unnamed street (Golf Course
Drive) to unnamed street (Golf
Course Drive)
Unnamed street
(Golf Course
Drive)
East From unnamed street to Roosevelt
Boulevard/Lincoln Drive
Unnamed street
(Golf Course
Drive)
West From Roosevelt Boulevard to
unnamed street
Washington
Drive
West From the circle to Sheridan
Boulevard
§ 284-40. Schedule IV: U-Turns.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-10, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
Location Limits
Atlantic Brigantine Boulevard
(County Road 638)
Between Monroe Avenue to Bayshore
Avenue
Atlantic Brigantine Boulevard
Access Road
From access road at 43rd Street
south onto southbound Atlantic-
Brigantine Boulevard
Atlantic Brigantine Boulevard
Access Road
From access road at 45th Street south
onto southbound Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard
Brigantine Avenue (County Road
638)
From 1200 Block to 1400 Block
§ 284-41. Schedule V: Prohibited Turns at Intersections. [Amended
8-10-1998 by Ord. No. 12-1998; 8-2-2017 by Ord. No. 22-2017]
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-11, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Location Prohibition Movement Prohibited
13th Street South and
Brigantine Avenue
No Left Turn
From 5/15
through 9/15
of each year
Eastbound on 13th Street South
to Northbound on Brigantine
Avenue
13th Street South and
Brigantine Avenue
No Left Turn
From 5/15
through 9/15
of each year
Westbound on 13th Street to
Southbound on Brigantine
Avenue
§ 284-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-42
1:885
§ 284-42. Schedule VI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-12, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
14th Street South South/North Brigantine Avenue
Brigantine
Avenue (County
Road 638)
East/West 14th Street South
§ 284-43. Schedule VII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provision of § 284-13, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets, except
for certain intersections as designated in § 284-44, Schedule VIII, Stop
Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed on the near right side of each
street intersecting the through street, except where yield signs are provided
in lieu of a stop sign, as posted per § 284-45, Schedule IX, Yield
Intersections:
Name of Street Through Street
11th Street North Beach Avenue to East Shore Drive
12th Street North Beach Avenue to East Shore Drive
Bayshore Avenue a. Harbor Beach Boulevard to Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard
b. Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard to Roosevelt
Boulevard
Beach Avenue a. Bayshore Avenue to Roosevelt Boulevard
b. Roosevelt Boulevard to 14th Street North
Bobby Jones Road Entire length
Brigantine Avenue
(County Road 638)
Harbor Beach Boulevard to Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard
East Shore -
Travers Place
Sheridan Place to its easterly terminus with East
Shore Drive
Evans Boulevard Roosevelt Boulevard to 11th Street North
Harbor Beach
Boulevard
Entire length
a. Roosevelt Boulevard to Bayshore Avenue
b. Caverly Drive to its southerly intersection with
West Shore Drive
Lafayette
Boulevard
[Amended
2-1-2017 by Ord.
No. 1-2017] c. Between its northerly intersection with West
Shore Drive and North Shore Drive
§ 284-42 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-43
1:886
Name of Street Through Street
Lagoon Boulevard Entire length
Ocean Avenue From 9th Street South to its southerly terminus
Sailfish Drive Entire length
Sarazen
Boulevard
Lafayette Boulevard to Sheridan Boulevard
Sheridan
Boulevard - and
Sheridan Place
a. Between Lafayette Boulevard and Roosevelt
Boulevard
b. Between Roosevelt Boulevard and its most
southerly intersection with Roosevelt Boulevard
Shipmaster Drive a. Harbor Beach Boulevard to Lagoon Boulevard
b. Lagoon Boulevard to northern terminus
Vardon Road Sarazen to Sheridan Boulevard
West Shore Drive Bayshore Drive to 50 feet east of North Shore Drive
§ 284-44. Schedule VIII: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Intersection Stop Sign On
38th Street South and Amherst
Avenue
Amherst Avenue
Brady Place and Cummings Place Brady Place
East Evans Boulevard and 11th Street
North [Added 8-18-2010 by Ord.
No. 13-2010]
East Evans Boulevard and 11th
Street North (4-way stop
intersection)
East Shore Drive (also known as Golf
Course Drive) and Travers Place
[Added 11-13-2002 by Ord. No.
18-2002]
East Shore Drive (also known as
Golf Course Drive)
Lafayette Boulevard and Caverly
Drive [Added 2-1-2017 by Ord. No.
1-2017]
Lafayette Boulevard and Caverly
Drive (4-way stop)
Lagoon Boulevard and Harbor Beach
Boulevard [Added 7-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 14-2011]
Northeast and northwest corners
of Lagoon Boulevard
Lagoon Boulevard and Harbor Beach
Cove [Added 12-18-2019 by Ord.
No. 25-2019]
Northwest corner of Lagoon
Boulevard
§ 284-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-44
1:887
Intersection Stop Sign On
Lagoon Boulevard and Ocean Drive
West [Added 7-20-2011 by Ord. No.
14-2011]
Northeast and northwest corners
of Lagoon Boulevard
Revere Boulevard and Brigantine
Boulevard [Added 5-18-2011 by
Ord. No. 10-2011; amended
2-1-2017 by Ord. No. 1-2017]
Revere Boulevard
Risley Road and Caverly Drive Risley Road
West Evans Boulevard and Bayshore
Avenue [Added 11-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 24-2007]
West Evans Boulevard
§ 284-45. Schedule IX: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-15, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on Direction of Travel At Intersection of
12th Street North West East Shore Drive
Evans Boulevard
[Repealed
11-7-2007 by Ord.
No. 24-2007]
Heald Road East 8th Street North
Lafayette Boulevard
(600 Block)
East West Shore Drive
Revere Boulevard
[Repealed 2-1-2017
by Ord. No. 1-2017]
§ 284-46. Schedule X: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-16, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
§ 284-44 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-46
1:888
Intersection
(Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Brigantine Boulevard and
Harbor Beach Boulevard
Left lane of easterly
approach of Harbor
Beach Boulevard
Left turns only
Brigantine Boulevard and
Harbor Beach Boulevard
Center lane of easterly
approach of Harbor
Beach Boulevard
Left turns only
Brigantine Boulevard and
Harbor Beach Boulevard
Right lane of easterly
approach of Harbor
Beach Boulevard
Right turns only
§ 284-47. Schedule XI: No-Passing Zones.
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
38th Street
South
Both Brigantine Boulevard (County Road
638) to Bayshore Drive
Bayshore
Avenue
Both Northerly curbline of Brigantine
Boulevard (County Rd. 638) to
Roosevelt Boulevard
Bayshore
Avenue
Both 38th Street South to the southerly
curbline of Brigantine Boulevard
(County Road 638)
Brigantine
Boulevard
(County Road
638)
Both Entire length
East Beach
Avenue
Both Roosevelt Boulevard circle to 2nd
Street North
East Evans
Boulevard
Both East Beach Avenue to Quay
Boulevard/6th Street North
Lincoln Drive Both Sheridan Boulevard to the
northerly intersection of Roosevelt
Boulevard
Ocean Avenue Both 40th Street South to 9th Street
South
Revere
Boulevard
Both Brigantine Boulevard (County Road
638) to 15th Street South
Roosevelt
Boulevard
Both Intersection of Heald Circle/
Washington Drive/Lincoln Drive to
the channelizing island at the
approach to the divided roadway
§ 284-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-47
1:889
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Limits
West Beach
Avenue
Both 14th Street South to Roosevelt
Boulevard circle
West Evans
Boulevard
Both Bayshore Avenue/6th Street South
to West Beach Avenue
§ 284-48. Schedule XII: Vehicle Over Certain Weights Excluded
From Certain Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-18, trucks in excess of the gross
weights indicated are hereby excluded from the following streets or parts of
streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
(Reserved)
§ 284-49. Schedule XIII: Truck Route System.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-19, a truck route system upon
which trucks in excess of four tons' gross weight may travel is hereby
established on the following streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Location
Brigantine Avenue (County Road 638) Entire length
Brigantine Boulevard (County Road
638)
Entire length
§ 284-50. Schedule XIV: Parking Prohibited at all Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-21, no person shall park a vehicle
in violation of any section of N.J.S.A. 39:4-135 through 39:4-138 or at any
time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Block/Side Location
2nd Street North -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
2nd Street South -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
3rd Street North -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
4th Street North Both From Brigantine Avenue to end of street
at beach
4th Street South -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
5th Street North Both From Brigantine Avenue to end of street
at beach
5th Street South -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
§ 284-47 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-50
1:890
Name of Street Block/Side Location
6th Street North -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
6th Street South -/Both From Bayshore Avenue to end (bay)
6th Street South -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
6th Street South Both From Brigantine Avenue to end of street
at beach
7th Street North -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
7th Street South Both From Brigantine Avenue to end of street
at beach
7th Street South -/North From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
7th Street South
[Added
11-7-2001 by
Ord. No.
22-2001]
-/South Bayshore Avenue to Bulkhead at Bay
8th Street South -/North From Brigantine Avenue to Ocean
Avenue
9th Street South -/North From Brigantine Avenue to Ocean
Avenue
9th Street South 200/North From end of WaWa driveway to point 25
feet west thereof
11th Street North -/North From Brigantine Avenue to Beach
Avenue
12th Street North -/North From Brigantine Avenue to end (bay)
13th Street North -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to Beach
Avenue, then Beach Avenue to end (bay)
14th Street North 200/North From Brigantine Avenue to Beach
Avenue
14th Street South [Repealed 5-20-2009 by Ord. No. 11-2009]
14th Street South -/North From Beach Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue
14th Street South -/South From Brigantine Avenue to Ocean
Avenue, the 75-foot area beginning at a
point 125 feet from Brigantine Avenue
14th Street South
[Added
5-20-2009 by
Ord. No.
11-2009]
-/South From Ocean Avenue to ocean bulkhead
15th Street North -/Both At the beach entrance
§ 284-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-50
1:891
Name of Street Block/Side Location
15th Street South -/Both From Ocean Avenue to bulkhead with the
exception of designated handicap
parking
16th Street South 400/Both Ocean Avenue to dune line
17th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
18th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
19th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
20th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
21st Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
22nd Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
23rd Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
24th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
24th Street South -/South From Brigantine Avenue to Ocean
Avenue
25th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
26th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
26th Street South -/North From Brigantine Avenue to Ocean
Avenue
27th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
28th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
29th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
30th Street South -/Both From Bayshore Avenue to end (bay)
31st Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
32nd Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
32nd Street South -/South From Brigantine Avenue to Atlantic-
Brigantine Boulevard
§ 284-50 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-50
1:892
Name of Street Block/Side Location
33rd Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
33rd Street South -/South From Ocean Avenue to Atlantic-
Brigantine Boulevard
33rd Street South
[Added 9-4-2019
by Ord. No.
17-2019]
300/South From Ocean Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue
34th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
34th Street South -/South From Ocean Avenue to Atlantic-
Brigantine Boulevard
35th Street South -/Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
36th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
36th Street South -/North From Ocean Avenue to Bayshore Avenue
37th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to end of street at
beach
37th Street South -/South From Ocean Avenue to Bayshore Avenue
38th Street South
38th Street South
-/North -
/South
From Bayshore Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue From Ocean Avenue to Bayshore
Avenue
39th Street South -/Both From Bayshore Avenue to end
39th Street South -/South From Ocean Avenue to Bayshore Avenue
40th Street and
Ocean Avenue
Both From Ocean Avenue to bulkhead
signifying dead end
40th Street South -/Both From Bayshore Avenue to end
40th Street South -/North From Ocean Avenue to Bayshore Avenue
41st Street South -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to 42nd Street
South
42nd Street South -/Both From Brigantine Avenue to end (beach)
42nd Street South -/North From Bayshore Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue
44th Street South -/South From Bayshore Avenue to Brigantine
Avenue
Amherst Avenue -/East Block 3704 (from 37th Street South to
38th Street South)
Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard (County Road 638) [Repealed 8-18-2004
by Ord. No. 26-2004]
§ 284-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-50
1:893
Name of Street Block/Side Location
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638)
3900/West From Lighthouse Circle to Monroe
Avenue
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638)
4100/Both From Harbor Beach Boulevard to
Edgewater Drive
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638)
4200/East From Edgewater Drive to Cherokee
Boulevard
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638) Atlantic-
Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638)
4300/East
4400/East
From Cherokee Boulevard to Magnolia
Way From Magnolia Way to Hydrangea
Way
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638)
4500/East From Hydrangea Way to Lilac Way
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638)
4600/East From Lilac Way to to City Border
Bay Road -/East Entire length
Bayshore Avenue
[Added
8-15-2018 by
Ord. No.
20-2018]
-/West 35th Street to 36th Street
Bayshore Avenue 400/West Block 6705 (from West Shore Drive to
6th Street South)
Bayshore Avenue 500/Both Block 1201 (from 5th Street South to 6th
Street South)
Bayshore Avenue 600/Both Block 1202 (from 6th Street South to
Sheridan Square)
Bayshore Avenue 700/ Block 1206 (from Sheridan East Square
to 8th Street South)
Bayshore Avenue 900/East Block 1303 (from 9th Street South to
10th Street South)
Bayshore Avenue 1000/East Block 1705 (from 10th Street South to
11th Street South)
Bayshore Avenue 1100/East Block 1704 (from 11th Street South to
12th South)
§ 284-50 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-50
1:894
Name of Street Block/Side Location
Bayshore Avenue 2500/Any Blocks 2602 and 2604 (from 25th Street
South to 26th Street South)
Bayshore Avenue 2600/West Blocks 2601 and 2603 (from 26th Street
South to 27th Street South)
Brant Road -/South Entire length (from Harbor Beach
Boulevard to end)
Casa Court -/Both Entire length
503 Casa Drive
[Added
10-20-2010 by
Ord. No.
23-2010]
-- Twenty-two-foot area starting at the
southern property line, northward to the
requested handicap parking space in
front of property located at 503 Casa
Drive
Delmar Court -/Both Entire length
East Beach Avenue 1300/West Block 1502 (from 13th Street South to
14th Street South)
East Brigantine
Avenue [Added
5-17-2006 by
Ord. No.
15-2006]
/West Between 14th Street north to dead-end
bulkhead on westerly curbline of East
Brigantine Avenue
Gull Cove [Repealed 11-25-1997 by Ord. No. 15-1997]
Hackney Place -/Both From West Shore Drive to Bay Block only
to bulkhead (bay block only)
Harbor Beach
Boulevard
4300/Both Both sides of street
Harbor Beach
Boulevard [Added
8-15-2018 by
Ord. No.
19-2018]
4700/East Corner of Ross Drive East northbound
along Harbor Beach Boulevard for 150
feet
Harbor Beach
Boulevard
3804/North Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard to
intersection of Bayshore Avenue
Harbor Beach
Boulevard
5002/South Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard to
intersection of Lagoon Boulevard
Harbor Beach
Boulevard [Added
6-5-2019 by Ord.
No. 11-2019]
4700/- Northbound corner of Brant Road
southbound along Harbor Beach
Boulevard for 50 feet
Lagoon Boulevard 5300/Both Block 5301 (from Shipmaster to Gull)
Lagoon Boulevard 5300/Both Block 5303 (from Gull to end lot)
Lagoon Boulevard -/Both Block 4700
§ 284-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-50
1:895
Name of Street Block/Side Location
Lagoon Boulevard
[Added 8-1-2012
by Ord. No.
23-2012]
-/East From Ocean Drive south to end of street
Lagoon Boulevard
[Added 8-1-2012
by Ord. No.
23-2012]
-/West From Brighton Court south to end of
street
Magnolia Drive
[Repealed
2-7-2018 by Ord.
No. 2-2018]
Marc Lane -/Both From Bayshore Avenue to end
Marsden Place -/Both From West Shore Drive to bulkhead (bay
block only)
Monroe Avenue -/Both From Brigantine Boulevard to Amherst
Avenue
Ocean Avenue 800/Both Block 803 (from 8th Street South to 9th
Street South)
Ocean Avenue Both 800 Block
Sandy Lane -/Both Entire length (from Harbor Beach
Boulevard to Ocean Drive South)
Seaside Road -/West Entire length (from Harbor Beach
Boulevard to end)
Sea Spray Road -/Both Entire length (from Sandy Lane to Ocean
Drive West)
Sunset Court -/Both Entire length
West Brigantine
Avenue
1300/West Block 1502 (from 13th Street South to
14th Street South)
West Brigantine
Avenue
1400/West Block 1504 (from 14th Street South to
15th Street/South)
West Evans
Boulevard
500/West Median
West Shore Drive -/North From Bayshore Avenue to a point 255
feet from the intersection of Bayshore
Avenue and West Shore Drive
§ 284-51. Schedule XV: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-22, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
§ 284-50 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-51
1:896
Name of Street Side Location
14th Street South Both From the easterly curbline of Brigantine
Boulevard (Route 638) to a point 100
feet east thereof
14th Street South Both From the westerly curbline of Brigantine
Boulevard (Route 638) to a point 100
feet west thereof
31st Street Any From Brigantine Boulevard to Brigantine
Avenue (area in front of Jack's Pharmacy
and Bayside Video)
38th Street South Both From the easterly curbline of Brigantine
Boulevard (Route 638) to a point 100
feet east thereof
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638)
East From Jefferson Avenue to Harbor Beach
Boulevard
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638)
East From Monroe Avenue to Jefferson
Avenue
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard (County
Road 638)
[Repealed
8-18-2004 by Ord.
No. 26-2004]
Harbor Beach
Boulevard
North From easterly curbline of Brigantine
Boulevard (Route 638) to a point 100
feet east thereof
Ocean Avenue East From 9th Street South to 10th Street
South
§ 284-52. Schedule XVI: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-23, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 284-53. Schedule XVII: No Stopping or Standing Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions § 284-24, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
§ 284-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-53
1:897
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 284-54. Schedule XVIII: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-26, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
6th Street
South
North 15 mins.; 24 hrs. Bayshore Avenue to
bulkhead
8th Street
South [Added
9-20-2006 by
Ord. No.
23-2006]
North 20 mins. In front of St. Thomas
Rectory
14th Street
South
Both 30 mins.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Brigantine Avenue to
Beach Avenue
14th Street
South [Added
5-20-2009 by
Ord. No.
11-2009;
repealed
2-1-2017 by
Ord. No.
1-2017]
14th Street
South [Added
5-16-2001 by
Ord. No.
5-2001]
South 200
Block
2 hrs./all The area starting 100
feet west of the
southwestern corner of
the intersection of
Brigantine Avenue and
14th Street South and
ending 20 feet east of
the easterly point of
the driveway entrance
to the Police and Fire
Safety Building located
on 14th Street South
14th Street
South [Added
9-20-2006 by
Ord. No.
24-2006]
South 2 hrs. 300 Block: Beginning
40 feet east of
Brigantine Avenue for
a total length of 35
feet
§ 284-53 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-54
1:898
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
15th Street
South
Both 30 mins.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Brigantine Avenue to
Beach Avenue
33rd Street
South [Added
4-5-2007 by
Ord. No.
9-2007]
North 30 mins. 200 block, beginning
100 feet from
Brigantine Boulevard
34th Street
South
North 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./All
Between signs as
posted
Atlantic-
Brigantine
Boulevard
(County Road
638) [Added
8-18-2004 by
Ord. No.
26-2004]
West 2 hours; 9:00 a.m
to 5:00 p.m./All
Alley between 30th
Street and 31st Street
to 32nd Street
Brigantine
Avenue (County
Road 638)
Both, except
west side of
West Brigantine
Avenue
between 10th
Street South
and 11th
Street South
2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./All
10th Street South to
14th Street South
Brigantine
Avenue (County
Road (638)
Both 30 mins.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All
14th Street South to
15th Street South
Brigantine
Avenue (County
Road 638)
West 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./All
32nd Street South to
34th Street South
Brigantine
Municipal
Parking Lot
located at the
southeast
intersection of
13th Street
South and
Brigantine
Avenue [Added
10-4-2000 by
Ord. No.
23-2000]
All No vehicle may
be parked for a
period longer in
duration than 2
consecutive hours
Entire lot
§ 284-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-54
1:899
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
Jackson Avenue
[Added
7-1-1998 by
Ord. No.
11-1998]
North 30 mins.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Entire length
Revere
Boulevard
Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./All
31st Street to 32nd
Street
West Brigantine
Avenue (County
Road 638)
Both 30 mins.; 9:00
a.m. to 5:00
p.m./All
14th Street South to
15th Street South
Revere
Boulevard
[Added
2-19-2003 by
Ord. No.
3-2003]
East 30 mins.; all/all Beginning at point
which is 25 feet
northwesterly from the
northeast curbline of
the intersection of 31st
Street South and
Revere Boulevard to a
point which is 25 feet
southeast from the
southeastern curbline
of the intersection of
Revere Boulevard and
the alley which exists
between 30th Street
South and 31st Street
South
Revere
Boulevard
[Added
10-3-2018 by
Ord. No.
22-2018]
West 2 hrs; all/all Beginning at a point
which is 40 feet north
from the west curbline
of the intersection of
31st Street and Revere
Boulevard to a point
which is 40 feet north
on the western
curbline of Revere
Boulevard
West Brigantine
Avenue
Both 2 hrs.; 9:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m./All
30th Street South to
34th Street South
West Brigantine
Avenue
East 30 mins.; 10:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m./All
34th Street to alley
situated between 33rd
Street and 34th Street
§ 284-54 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-54
1:900
Name of
Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
West Shore
Drive [Added
8-16-2000 by
Ord. No.
13-2000]
East 30 mins. All/All Beginning at the
center line of Hackney
Place where the same
intersects the easterly
extended curbline of
West Shore Drive and
extending thence
southeastwardly along
the easterly curbline of
West Shore Drive a
distance of 260.64 feet
to the common
property line between
510 Hackney Place
and 467 West Shore
Drive
§ 284-55. Schedule XIX: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions § 284-27, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the streets or parts thereof described below, except at the angle
designated:
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
7th Street South
[Added 8-15-2001 by
Ord. No. 15-2001;
amended 11-7-2001
by Ord. No. 22-2001]
North 60º From Bayshore Avenue
to the bulkhead at the
bay
10th Street South
[Added 8-15-2001 by
Ord. No. 15-2001]
North 60º From Bayshore Avenue
to the bulkhead at the
bay
§ 284-56. Schedule XX: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-29, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Location
12th Street South 302 South 12th Street, Joe's Seaside
Market
Bayshore Avenue 1400 Bayshore Avenue, Brigantine/
Atlantic County Library
§ 284-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-56
1:901
Name of Street Location
Bayshore Avenue 3100 Bayshore Avenue, Brigantine
Civic Center
Bayshore Avenue City Public Dock (opposite 26th
Street), for the entire length of
depressed curb
Ocean Avenue 1400 Ocean Avenue (400 Block 15th
Street South), Brigantine Inn
§ 284-57. Schedule XXI: Taxi Stands.
In accordance with the provisions § 284-30, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 284-58. Schedule XXII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-31, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
Delmar Drive [Added
Ord. No. 1-2019]
Far Along Lagoon Boulevard,
northbound, on the easterly side
thereof, beginning at the northerly
curbline of Delmar Drive and
extending 100 feet northerly
therefrom
§ 284-59. Schedule XXIII: Handicapped Parking.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 284-32, the following described
locations are hereby designated as handicapped parking spots:
Name of Street Location
2nd Street South No. 212 southwesterly side/
beginning at a point 275 feet
northwestwardly of the
northwesterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet northwestwardly
thereof
3rd Street South [Added
8-20-2003 by Ord. No.
10-2003; repealed 8-1-2007 by
Ord. No. 15-2007]
§ 284-56 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-59
1:902
Name of Street Location
3rd Street South [Added
9-18-2002 by Ord. No.
15-2002]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 301 West
Brigantine Ave. #5
3rd Street South [Added
6-5-2019 by Ord. No. 10-2019]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 200 3rd Street
South
3rd Street South [Added
8-6-2008 by Ord. No. 18-2008]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 209 3rd Street
South
3rd Street South [Added
5-7-2014 by Ord. No. 8-2014]
Twenty-foot area in front of the
property located at 216 3rd Street
South
6th Street North [Added
4-7-2004 by Ord. No. 11-2004]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 214 6th
Street North
6th Street North [Added
8-2-2000 by Ord. No. 9-2000;
repealed 5-15-2002 by Ord.
No. 8-2002]
8th Street North [Added
6-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000;
amended 7-19-2000 by Ord.
No. 7-2000]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 210 8th
Street North
8th Street South [Added
5-3-2006 by Ord. No. 14-2006]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 124 8th
Street South
8th Street South No. 301 northeasterly side/
beginning at a point 289 feet
southeastwardly of the
southeasterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet southeastwardly
thereof
8th Street South [Added
10-18-2000 by Ord. No.
27-2000; repealed 4-19-2006
by Ord. No. 13-2006]
9th Street North [Added
1-17-2001 by Ord. No. 1-2001]
A twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 112 9th
Street North
§ 284-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-59
1:903
Name of Street Location
9th Street North East Brigantine Avenue/beginning
at a point 18 feet notheastwardly
of the extended northeasterly
curbline of 9th Street North and
the southeasterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet northeastwardly
thereof
9th Street South [Added
6-18-2009 by Ord. No.
13-2009; repealed 11-6-2019
by Ord. No. 20-2019]
10th Street South [Added
5-15-2002 by Ord. No. 8-2002;
repealed 8-20-2003 by Ord.
No. 10-2003]
10th Street South No. 313 northeasterly side/
northeasterly side beginning at a
point 141 feet southeastwardly of
the southeasterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet southeastwardly
thereof
10th Street South [Added
8-2-2000 by Ord. No. 9-2000]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of Unit No. 1 of the property
located at 1000 West Brigantine
Avenue
11th Street South Northeasterly side/beginning at a
point 30 feet southeastwardly of
the southeasterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet southeastwardly
thereof (in favor of 1018
Brigantine Avenue)
11th Street South [Added
5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 13-2005]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 131 11th
Street South
11th Street South [Added
6-7-2006 by Ord. No. 18-2006;
repealed 10-5-2011 by Ord.
No. 24-2011]
§ 284-59 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-59
1:904
Name of Street Location
12th Street North and East
Brigantine Avenue
Beginning at a point 6 feet
northeastwardly of the intersection
of the extended northeasterly
curbline of 12th Street North and
the southeasterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet northeastwardly
thereof
12th Street North and East
Brigantine Avenue [Added
6-7-2000 by Ord. No. 2-2000]
Space to be located immediately
adjacent to the currently existing
handicapped space located on 12th
Street North. Space is to be used
for the occupant of 1101 East
Brigantine Avenue, Unit 12
12th Street South Southwesterly side/beginning at a
point 30 feet southeastwardly of
the southeasterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet southeastwardly
thereof (in favor of 1200
Brigantine Avenue)
13th Street South [Added
9-3-2008 by Ord. No. 22-2008]
Twenty-foot area in front of the
property located at 313 13th Street
South
13th Street South [Added
2-15-2006 by Ord. No. 8-2006;
repealed 5-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 10-2015]
15th Street South No. 1417 Brigantine Avenue/
northeasterly side beginning at a
point 50 feet northwestwardly of
the northwesterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet northwestwardly
thereof
17th Street [Added 9-2-2009 by
Ord. No. 20-2009]
Twenty-foot area in front of
property located at 310 17th Street
17th Street South [Added
7-20-2011 by Ord. No.
12-2011]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 304 17th Street
South
21st Street South [Added
5-6-2009 by Ord. No. 9-2009]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 107 21st Street
South
§ 284-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-59
1:905
Name of Street Location
27th Street South [Added
7-16-2008 by Ord. No.
17-2008]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 321 27th Street
South
28th Street South [Added
11-4-2015 by Ord. No.
16-2015]
Twenty-foot area in front of the
property located at 311 28th Street
South
28th Street South No. 313 northeasterly side/
beginning at a point 386 feet
southeastwardly of the
southeasterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet southeastwardly
thereof
28th Street South No. 317 northeasterly side/
beginning at a point 445 feet
southeastwardly of the
southeasterly curbline of
Brigantine Avenue and extending
to a point 20 feet southeastwardly
thereof
31st Street South [Added
9-19-2012 by Ord. No.
25-2012]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 348 31st Street
31st Street South Northwesterly side/beginning at a
point 60 feet southeastwardly of
the southeasterly curbline of
Bayshore Avenue and extending to
a point 20 feet southeastwardly
thereof
32nd Street South [Added
5-16-2018 by Ord. No.
13-2018]
Twenty-foot area in front of the
property located at 340 32nd
Street South
33rd Street South [Added
11-2-2005 by Ord. No.
27-2005]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 231 33rd
Street South
34th Street South No. 3418 beginning at a point 20
feet eastwardly of the intersection
of the southerly curbline of
Atlantic-Brigantine Boulevard and
the southeasterly curbline of
Bayshore Avenue extending to a
point 20 feet eastwardly thereof
§ 284-59 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-59
1:906
Name of Street Location
300 35th Street [Added
6-21-2017 by Ord. No.
21-2017]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 300 35th Street
35th Street South [Added
3-19-2008 by Ord. No. 8-2008]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 3500 Bayshore
Avenue
36th Street South [Repealed
6-20-2007 by Ord. No.
10-2007]
36th Street South [Added
8-3-2005 by Ord. No. 20-2005]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 348 36th
Street South
37th Street South [Added
1-4-2006 by Ord. No. 33-2005]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 237 37th Street
40th Street [Added 6-18-2008
by Ord. No. 15-2008; repealed
9-15-2010 by Ord. No.
17-2010]
40th Street South [Added
5-15-2002 by Ord. No. 8-2002]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 274 40th
Street South
41st Street [Added 8-2-2000 by
Ord. No. 9-2000]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 334 41st
Street
2904 Bayshore Avenue [Added
11-4-2015 by Ord. No.
17-2015]
Twenty-foot area in front of the
property located at 2904 Bayshore
Avenue
Bayshore Avenue [Added
9-5-2007 by Ord. No. 18-2007]
Twenty-foot area in front of the
property located at 3618 B
Bayshore Avenue
Brigantine Avenue No. 1501 northwesterly side/
beginning at a point 48 feet
southwestwardly of the
southwesterly curbline of 15th
Street South and extending to a
point 20 feet southwestwardly
thereof
503 Casa Drive [Added
10-20-2010 by Ord. No.
23-2010]
Twenty-foot area in front of
property located at 503 Casa Drive
§ 284-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-59
1:907
Name of Street Location
Lagoon Boulevard [Added
8-1-2012 by Ord. No. 24-2012]
At the southerly end of Lagoon
Boulevard at an area immediately
west of the entrance to the Cove
Beach
220 Quay Boulevard [Added
8-3-2016 by Ord. No. 9-2016]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 220 Quay
Boulevard.
Sheridan Boulevard No. 206 westerly side/beginning at
a point 36 feet southwardly of the
southerly curbline of Hamilton
Place and extending to a point 20
feet southwardly thereof
726 Sheridan Boulevard [Added
4-5-2017 by Ord. No. 11-2017]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 726 Sheridan
Boulevard
Sheridan Square [Repealed
9-20-2000 by Ord. No.
20-2000]
Vardon Road [Added 8-6-2003
by Ord. No. 8-2003]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 1321 Vardon
Road
1315 Vardon Road [Added
2-20-2008 by Ord. No. 5-2008]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 1315 Vardon
Road
208 Vernon Place [Added
6-21-2006 by Ord. No.
19-2006]
Twenty-foot area on the side of the
property located at 208 Vernon
Place
Washington Drive No. 119 easterly side/beginning at
a point 5 feet northwardly (of the
northerly property line) of Lot 32,
Block 8401 on the easterly
curbline of Washington Drive and
extending to a point 20 feet
northwardly thereof
West Beach Avenue [Added
5-4-2011 by Ord. No. 8-2011]
Twenty-foot area in front of
property located at 101 West
Beach Avenue
West Brigantine Avenue [Added
11-12-2003 by Ord. No.
21-2003]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 307 West
Brigantine Avenue
West Evans Boulevard [Added
10-5-2005 by Ord. No.
25-2005]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 306 West
Evans Boulevard
§ 284-59 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-59
1:908
§ 284-60. Schedule XXIV: Boat and Trailer Parking. 188 [Amended
12-1-1999 by Ord. No. 17-1999]
Notwithstanding any other regulation contained herein to the contrary, no
person or other entity shall park a boat or trailer at any of the following
described locations at any time during any year within the City of
Brigantine:
Name of Street Side Location
Atlantic-Brigantine
Boulevard
Both From NJ Route 87 (Bridge) to Bayshore
Avenue
Bayshore Avenue Both From Lafayette Boulevard to 5th Street
South
Club Drive Both From Brigantine Avenue to the
development restriction line
Hackney Place Both Entire length
Ocean Avenue Both Entire length
West Evans
Boulevard
Both From 4th Street South to 5th Street
South
West Shore Drive Both From Hackney Place to Risley Road
Name of Street Location
West Evans Boulevard [Added
8-7-2002 by Ord. No. 10-2002]
Twenty-foot area directly in front
of property located at 407 East
Evans Boulevard
B. If any person or entity violates this specific section of the Code of the
City of Brigantine or otherwise parks in any space on public or private
property appropriately marked for vehicles for the physically
handicapped when said vehicle being parked therein has not been
appropriately marked or otherwise designated as a vehicle allowed to
be parked in a handicapped space, the fine for a first violation shall be
$250, and for any subsequent offense the fine shall be at least $250 and
up to 90 days' community service on such terms and in such form as
deemed appropriate in the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge, or
any combination thereof. [Added 4-21-1999 by Ord. No. 4-1999;
amended 10-15-2003 by Ord. No. 20-2003; 5-5-2004 by Ord. No.
13-2004]
188. Editor's Note: See also § 284-33, Boat and trailer parking.
§ 284-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-60
1:909
Name of Street Side Location
West Shore Drive
[Added 8-16-2000
by Ord. No.
13-2000]
East Beginning at the center line of the
westerly end of Hackney Place where
the road intersects the easterly
extended curbline of West Shore Drive
and extending thence southeasterly
along the easterly curbline of West
Shore Drive a distance of 812.90 feet to
the common property line between
Block 7003, Lot 13 (453 West Shore
Drive) and Block 7003, Lot 12 (451
West Shore Drive)
West Shore Drive
[Added 8-16-2000
by Ord. No.
13-2000]
East Beginning at the center line of the
westerly end of Hackney Place where
said road intersects the easterly
extended curbline of West Shore Drive
and extending thence northwestwardly
a distance of 240 feet to common
property line between Block 7001, Lot
18 (517 West Shore Drive) and Block
7001, Lot 1 (520 Risely Road)
West Shore Drive
[Added 8-16-2000
by Ord. No.
13-2000]
West Beginning at the center line of Hackney
Place where said center line intersects
the westerly curbline of West Shore
Drive and extending thence
northwestwardly a distance of 275 feet
to the common property line between
Block 7103, Lot 5 (508 West Shore
Drive) and Block 7013, Lot 6 (510 West
Shore Drive)
§ 284-61. Schedule XXV: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
In accordance with the provisions of § 284-34, no person shall park a vehicle
upon either side of any of the streets or parts of streets thereof whenever
snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the street or
highway, as follows:
A. Upon the streets as listed below:
Name of Street Side Location
Bayshore Avenue Both Entire length
Brigantine Avenue (County
Road 638)
Both Entire length
Brigantine Boulevard (County
Road 638)
Both Entire length
East Beach Avenue Both Entire length
§ 284-60 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-61
1:910
Name of Street Side Location
East Shore Drive Both Entire length
Harbor Beach Boulevard Both Entire length
Lafayette Boulevard Both Entire length
Lagoon Boulevard Both Entire length
North Shore Drive Both Entire length
Ocean Avenue Both Entire length
Ocean Drive East Both Entire length
Ocean Drive South Both Entire length
Ocean Drive West Both Entire length
Roosevelt Boulevard Both Entire length
West Beach Avenue Both Entire length
West Shore Drive Both Entire length
B. Upon all other streets marked "no parking" on the even-numbered side
of the street.
§ 284-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-61
1:911

ARTICLE V
Bicycle Lanes
[Added 3-2-2005 by Ord. No. 5-2005]
§ 284-62. Bicycle routes/lanes.
The lane locations described below are hereby designated as icycle routes.
Bicycle routes shall conform to the current edition of the "Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways."
Name of Street Side(s) Limits
24th Street South Between Brigantine
Boulevard (County Road
638) and Ocean Avenue
40th Street North Between Ocean Avenue
and West Brigantine
Avenue
Brigantine Boulevard
(County Road 638)
Both Between 30th Street
and North End Seawall
Harbor Beach
Boulevard [Added
6-7-2006 by Ord. No.
16-2006]
North Between Lagoon
Boulevard and Bayshore
Avenue
Harbor Beach
Boulevard [Added
6-7-2006 by Ord. No.
16-2006; amended
12-20-2006 by Ord.
No. 29-2006]
Both From the eastern point
of the northernmost
intersection of Harbor
Beach Boulevard with
Lagoon Boulevard to the
westernmost point of
the southernmost
intersection of Harbor
Beach Boulevard with
Lagoon Boulevard
Lagoon Boulevard
[Added 6-7-2006 by
Ord. No. 16-2006;
amended 12-20-2006
by Ord. No. 29-2006]
Both Entire length
Ocean Avenue West Between 24th Street
and 40th Street
W. Brigantine Avenue Both Between Harbor Beach
Boulevard and 30th
Street
§ 284-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 284-62
1:913
Chapter 290
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 119.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 143.
Excavations — See Ch. 165.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 181.
Land use — See Ch. 198.
Fees schedule — See Ch. 210, Art. II.
Sewers — See Ch. 252.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 260.
§ 284-62 BRIGANTINE CODE § 284-62
1:914
ARTICLE I
Use of Water
[Adopted 6-1-1955 by Ord. No. 9-1955]
§ 290-1. Watering only pursuant to authorization. [Amended
8-3-1955 by Ord. No. 10-1995; 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
No water from the municipal supply system shall be used for watering lawns
and gardens in the City of Brigantine except pursuant to any rules and
regulations as established by the City Manager of the City of Brigantine
with the advice and consent of the City Council of the City of Brigantine.
This includes the ability to limit the amount of water used, the time period
of water used and the method of water used for watering lawns, washing
motor vehicles and other such activities. Further, the City of Brigantine
reserves the right to impose emergency measures as further set forth in the
Code of the City of Brigantine.
§ 290-2. (Reserved)189
§ 290-3. (Reserved)190
§ 290-4. Wasting of water prohibited.
No person in the possession of property receiving water from the municipal
water supply system shall waste, or permit to be wasted, any such water.
§ 290-5. Inspections authorized; notification of violation. [Amended
9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
The Supervisor of the Department of Public Works, or his designee, shall be
authorized to go upon any property in the City of Brigantine receiving water
from the municipal water supply system for any purpose, including that of
inspecting said property to determine whether any water is being wasted
thereon, and any person or entity being advised that they are wasting water
and ordered to discontinue the same will be found in violation of this article
if they have not abated such waste of water pursuant to the instructions of
the Director of Public Works or his designee within 24 hours of receiving
such notice.
§ 290-6. Consent to provisions. [Amended 9-6-2000 by Ord. No.
15-2000]
Any person or entity in possession of property in the City of Brigantine
receiving water from the municipal water supply system shall, by the act
of receiving such water, agree and consent to any and all provisions of this
Code, including § 290-5 hereof, and if any such person shall attempt to deny
189. Editor's Note: Former § 290-2, Usage of permanently installed sprinklers restricted, was
repealed 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000.
190. Editor's Note: Former § 290-3, Usage of other than permanently installed sprinklers
restricted, was repealed 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000.
§ 290-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-6
1:915
or to revoke such consent, or to refuse to act as directed pursuant to any
restriction on the use of water or abatement of the waste of water, he or she
shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
§ 290-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be subject to
a fine in an amount not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment for not more
than 90 days in the City or county jail, or both, for each offense or violation.
Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 290-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § 290-7
1:916
ARTICLE II
Rules and Regulations; Rates
[Adopted 11-3-1965 by Ord. No. 15-1965]
§ 290-8. Supervision of water plant. [Amended 9-6-2000 by Ord. No.
15-2000]
The operation of the Water Department of the City of Brigantine shall be
under the supervision of the Director of Public Works, who shall report to
the City Manager of the City of Brigantine.
§ 290-9. Supervision of Water Department. [Amended 9-6-2000 by
Ord. No. 15-2000]
The supervision of the Water Department of the City of Brigantine shall be
vested in the City Manager of the City of Brigantine by and through the
Director of Public Works.
§ 290-10. Service connections.
§ 290-11. Application for service; termination; service through
pipes on adjoining property.
A. Written application for service connection shall be made to the City
before any such connection shall be installed.
B. All applications shall be understood to embody all rules and regulations
and this article pertaining to the water plant, whether this article is
fully set forth in the application or not.
C. Upon receipt of proper application by the owner of the property to be
supplied, or his duly authorized agent, or purchasers under contract, or
mortgagees in possession, or duly authorized receivers or trustees, the
City will make the main tap and permit the applicant to install the
service connection and service line from the main to the curb.
D. A service line will be used to supply a single customer only, and no
customer shall be supplied by more than one service line unless agreed
upon between the customer and the City. However, nothing herein shall
be interpreted to negate the requirement that every newly constructed
dwelling unit within the City of Brigantine shall have its own separate
individual water and sewer service and shutoff valve. [Amended
9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
E. "Customer" or "consumer" as used herein shall be the party receiving
services from the City of Brigantine. Every newly constructed dwelling
unit in the City of Brigantine shall have its own separate individual
water and sewer service and identified shutoff valve. [Amended
9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
§ 290-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-11
1:917
§ 290-12. Water main taps; supplies and materials; size of service
lines.
A. When a water connection has been previously installed and water is
desired, a proper application must be signed as set forth in § 290-10B.
B. All contracts and agreements covering water supply shall expire on the
first day of January next succeeding the date of application, but all such
contracts and agreements shall continue in force and effect from year
to year after expiration of that date, unless 30 days' notice in writing
shall be given by the customer of his desire to so terminate the same;
provided, however, that nothing herein shall operate to prevent the City
from discontinuing service at any time, and under conditions and for
reasons laid down in its rules and regulations or in this article, and
provided, further, that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
making of contracts for extensions of service or other special
conditions. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as allowing an
individual property owner or other customer receiving water from the
City water supply of leaving said City water system and establishing
their own well, septic system or receipt of the provision of water
sources from another source. [Amended 9-6-2000 by Ord. No.
15-2000]
C. A supply of water for building or other special purposes, except on a lot
or premises already supplied with water by meter, must be specially
applied for.
D. All use of water other than by the applicant, or for any purpose, or upon
any premises not stated or described in the application, must be
presented by him. No owner or tenant of any premises supplied with
water by the City shall supply other persons or families or other
premises, except as may be stated in the application. The applicant
shall be liable for the amount of water used in conformity with the
schedule or rates of the City.
E. The City will not furnish service through a service pipe installed in
adjoining or adjacent property to that of the owner of the premises to be
served unless such owner obtains a perpetual easement for the
installation and maintenance of said service line in a form satisfactory
to the City.
A. Water main taps will be made by the City or its authorized agent only in
every case. Notice by the customer or his authorized agent shall be
delivered to the office of the City on the day before any service is to be
installed, which notice shall set forth the exact time when the trench
will be open and ready for the making of the tap.
B. The City shall furnish and deliver to the premises of any customer
acquiring new water service any and all equipment necessary so that
the City may provide a connection to said property as well as meter the
use of said water at the premises, all at the expense of the customer as
§ 290-11 BRIGANTINE CODE § 290-12
1:918
§ 290-13. Maintenance of facilities by City; permit required to
connect; customer to protect meter.
§ 290-14. Refusal of City to connect.
The City may refuse to connect with any customer's piping system, or
furnish water through one already connected, when it is not in accordance
with the plumbing rules of the City and those of the water plant, or when the
piping system on the premises is not at sufficient depth to prevent freezing.
§ 290-15. Inadequate service resulting from unauthorized
alterations by customers.
The City will not be held responsible for resulting inadequacy of service if
customers make additions or alterations to the equipment on their premises
without notifying the City of the proposed changes or additions before they
are made and obtaining the City's assent thereto.
set forth in various sections of this Code of the City of Brigantine. All
such equipment, supplies and materials shall at all times, remain the
property of the City of Brigantine. [Amended 9-6-2000 by Ord. No.
15-2000]
C. Size of service line. The service line installed by the customer from the
property line shall be of a type of pipe and size of pipe as designated
and accepted by the City. [Amended 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
A. The installation of the service pipe shall be subject to the approval of
the City, and the installation shall be and remain the property of the
City and shall be maintained by the City.
B. The curb stop shall be for the exclusive use and under the control of the
City, and under no circumstances shall any persons (other than a
licensed or registered plumber) not authorized by the City, turn off, turn
on or in any way tamper with said stop.
C. No person or persons except the Superintendent or other person
authorized by an official of the City shall, without permission, connect
or disconnect the meter, pipe or conduits of the City, or in any other
manner without such permit, tamper or interfere with the meters or
dials thereof, pipes or conduits, or shall without permit connect with
the meter, pipes or conduits of the City by pipes, conduits or other
instruments for the purpose of obtaining water.
D. It shall be the duty of the customer to have installed and properly
protect the meter from injury, and the customer shall be liable for
damage to or for the loss of the meter or meters occurring by reason of
the customer's negligence.
§ 290-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-16
1:919
§ 290-16. Right of access to property for inspections.
The City shall have the right of access to the customer's premises and to
all property furnished by it at reasonable times for the purpose of reading
meters or inspecting or replacing appliances used in connection with the
supply of water, or for the removal of its property at the time service is to be
terminated. The customer shall obtain or cause to be obtained all necessary
permission to enable the City to gain access to the appliances referred to.
Customers shall not permit access to the meter and other appliances of
the City except by authorized employees of the City or properly qualified
state or local inspectors. In case of defective service, customers should not
interfere with the apparatus belonging to the City but immediately notify
the office of the City.
§ 290-17. Discontinuance of water service; charges for turning
water off and on; renewal of service.
A. The City undertakes only to use reasonable care and diligence to
provide a constant supply of water through its pipes, but does not
undertake to render any special service or to maintain any fixed or
definite quantity of pressure, and in the event of the occurrence of any
break, failure or accident, or injury by act of God or the public enemy,
the City shall not be liable for any damages resulting therefrom. The
City, however, reserves the right, at any time without notice, to shut off
the water in its mains for the purpose of making repairs or extensions
or for other purposes. [Amended 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
B. Service under an application may be discontinued for any of the
following reasons:
(1) For the use of water for any other property or purpose than that
described in the application.
(2) For willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures or otherwise.
(3) For failure to maintain in good order connections, service lines or
fixtures owned by the applicant.
(4) For molesting any service pipe, meter, curb stopcock, seal or any
other appliance of the City.
(5) In case of vacancy of premises.
(6) For neglecting to make payments or for nonpayment for water
service or any other charges accruing under the application.
(7) For refusal of reasonable access to property for purpose of
inspecting or for reading, caring for or removing meters.
C. (Reserved)191
§ 290-16 BRIGANTINE CODE § 290-17
1:920
§ 290-18. Installation and maintenance of meters; change of
meters.
D. Charges for turning water on and off; temporary water shutoff.
[Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 2-1981; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992; 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
(1) Charges as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, shall
be applicable for any water services or connections in the City of
Brigantine.
(2) In the case of breakdown, emergency or for any other unavoidable
or unexpected cause, the City shall have the right to temporarily
terminate water supply to any property and to take any necessary
action, including repairs, connections or otherwise. In such event,
the City will use all reasonable measures to notify any customers of
the discontinuance of service and the probable duration of such
discontinuance. In the event that the water supply fails or is turned
off for any reason, any customer owning hot water faucets shall
open the same at once. Any persons having boilers within their
premises which depend upon water pressure in the pipes from
water supplied by the City of Brigantine shall be responsible for
any and all damage in the event of termination or temporary shut
down of water services. The City is specifically indemnified and
held harmless from any damages or inconvenience regarding the
same.
E. Service will be renewed when the conditions under which service was
discontinued are corrected and upon payment of all charges provided in
the schedule of rates, rules and regulations of the City due from the
applicant.
F. As necessity may arise in case of breakdown, emergency or for any
other unavoidable cause, the City shall have the right to temporarily cut
off the water supply to make necessary repairs, connections, etc., using
all reasonable and practicable measures to notify the customer of such
discontinuance of service and the probable duration of the
discontinuance.
G. All persons having boilers within their premises which depend upon the
pressure in the pipes of the City to keep them supplied are hereby
cautioned against collapse. In such case, the City shall not be liable for
any damages or inconvenience suffered.
H. In the event of failure of water supply, hot-water faucets shall be opened
at once.
A. All new service shall be metered at the time or before the water is
turned on for regular use.
191. Editor's Note: Former § 290-17C, regarding effects on existing agreement for service, was
repealed 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000.
§ 290-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-18
1:921
§ 290-19. Meter required. [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 2-1981;
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992; 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
Where water is furnished by the City of Brigantine, a meter shall be in
place recording the quantity of the amount of water passing pursuant to
said meter. Where a meter has been found to be registering inaccurately
or has ceased to register, the quantity of water usage may be determined
by the average registration of the meter when in order or by such fair and
reasonable method as shall be based upon the best information of the City
of Brigantine. Such determination of the City of Brigantine as to the amount
of water used shall be final and binding.
§ 290-20. Billing; failure to pay.
B. The City will furnish and install for each customer supplied with water,
on a measured basis, a suitable meter and will keep the same in repair,
except in case of misuse, in which case the expense of repair shall be
paid for by the customer.
C. A stopcock or gate valve shall be placed on the service line on the
streetside of and near the meter. A suitable check valve shall be placed
on the building side of the meter, and within the meter box. If a stopand-
waste cock or valve is installed on the building side of the meter, it
shall be placed within the building property line of the owner's plot.
D. (Reserved)192
A. Metered service. Bills for metered service shall be rendered
semiannually with the first bill showing a minimum flat fee charge and
the second bill showing a minimum flat fee charge plus an additional
charge for any excess water usage for the entire year. [Amended
9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
B. Customers will be held responsible for all charges accruing for water
service until written notice has been given to the office of the City to
discontinue the supply or notice has been given of a change of
occupancy of said premises.
C. If any bill issued for water or sewer services remains unpaid, interest
will be charged at the maximum allowable rate pursuant to law. Any
property where water or sewer is supplied and there is an outstanding
bill may be subject to sale pursuant to law or any other remedy
pursuant to law to be enforced by the Office of the Tax Collector of the
City of Brigantine. [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 2-1981;
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992; 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
192. Editor's Note: Former § 290-18D, Change of meters, was repealed 9-6-2000 by Ord. No.
15-2000.
§ 290-18 BRIGANTINE CODE § 290-21
1:922
§ 290-21. Cross-connections and interconnections.
No cross-connections or interconnections connecting the pipelines or
facilities or the City with other pipelines or facilities supplied with water
from other sources shall be permitted without the express consent of the
City and subject to the City requirements as to valves, pipe and fittings to
be used for such purpose, after permission granted by the New Jersey State
Department of Health.
§ 290-22. Inspection of pipes, meters and facilities; consent of City
required prior to certain alterations.
All pipes, meters and fixtures shall be subject at all reasonable hours
to inspection by employees of the City identified by proper badges or
credentials. No plumber, owner or other unauthorized personnel shall turn
the water on or off at any corporation stop or curb stop, or disconnect or
remove the meter without the consent of the City. No agent or employee
of the City shall have authority to bind it by any promise, agreement or
representation not provided for in this article.
§ 290-23. Notification to be given when water shut off.
When the supply of water is to be temporarily cut off, notice will be given
when practicable to all customers affected by the shutting off, stating the
probable duration of the interruption of service and also the purpose for
which the shutoff is made.
§ 290-24. Use of one service pipe and one meter for each dwelling
unit. [Amended 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
Every newly constructed dwelling unit in the City of Brigantine shall have
its own separate individual water and sewer service and identified shutoff
valve.
§ 290-25. Rates and service charges; private fire protection
facilities.
A. General meter service.
(1) Effective June 1, 1994, the minimum charges, with quantities of
water allowed, payable semiannually on June 1 and December 1,
shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article
II, Fees Schedule. [Amended 5-1-1968 by Ord. No. 4-1968;
2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 2-1981; 4-15-1981 by Ord. No. 1981;
3-19-1986 by Ord. No. 5-1986; 2-2-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989;
12-19-1990 by Ord. No. 21-1990; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No.
28-1992; 9-7-1994 by Ord. No. 22-1994]
(2) In addition to the semiannual minimum charge, there shall be an
annual charge for water used in excess of the above allowance,
which will be included in the June 1 billing. The rates at which
§ 290-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-25
1:923
water will be furnished, in excess of the minimum allowable
consumption, pursuant to application of excess water meter
readings, shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule. [Amended 5-1-1968 by
Ord. No. 4-1968; 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 2-1981; 3-19-1986 by
Ord. No. 5-1986; 2-2-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989; 12-19-1990 by
Ord. No. 21-1990; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992; 9-7-1994
by Ord. No. 22-1994]
(3) Terms of payment. All bills for service under the schedule are to be
rendered semiannually or at the option of the City, and such bills
are due and payable in full within 30 days from the date rendered.
B. Meter installation service.
(1) Effective May 1, 1981, the charges for the service by the City to the
customer for the installation of meters, including all materials,
meter and labor therefor, shall be as set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule. [Amended
10-21-1970 by Ord. No. 11-1970; 2-18-1981 by Ord. No.
2-1981; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(2) In addition to the charges scheduled above, there shall be an
additional charge for restoration of streets where excavation is
necessary as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses,
Article II, Fees Schedule. [Added 10-21-1970 by Ord. No.
11-1970; amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 2-1981;
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(3) Terms of payment. Payment for installation of meters shall be in
advance and accompany the application therefor.
C. Service to private fire protection facilities.
(1) Effective January 1, 1966, and henceforth, each person requiring
private fire protection facilities shall pay for each connection to be
used exclusively for the extinguishment of fires, in addition to the
charges as set forth in this article for the installation of the service
connection from the main to the curb, the sum as set forth in
Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule,
quarter annually. [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 2-1981;
12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(2) No additional charges shall be made for sprinkler heads, fire
hydrants or other firefighting facilities which may be attached to a
private fire service connection, and no charge shall be made for
water in extinguishing fires where service is furnished under this
section.
(3) The size of a private fire service connection shall in no case exceed
eight inches in diameter.
§ 290-25 BRIGANTINE CODE § 290-25
1:924
(4) The rate provided in Chapter 210, Mercantile Businesses, Article II,
Fee Schedule, shall be available only for service connections used
exclusively for the extinguishment of fires. No service for fire
extinguishing purposes may be used for any other purpose such as
the general supply of water. All fire suppression systems installed
in the City of Brigantine after the effective date of this article, will
be engineered to include a meter so that the Department of Public
Works may determine the amount of usage for such fire
suppression system. Such system must be designed in such a way
that the meter will not compromise the fire extinguishing
performance of said fire suppression system in any fashion.
[Amended 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
(5) Terms of payment. All charges for private fire protection service
furnished under this section are to be rendered quarterly or at the
option of the City, and such bills are due and payable in full within
30 days of the date rendered.
D. Miscellaneous charges. [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 2-1981]
(1) Where water is furnished for building purposes, it shall, wherever
practical, be supplied through a meter and the rates and charges to
be made and terms of payment shall be those provided at basic
minimum charges as set forth in Subsection A, General meter
service.
(2) Whenever a meter is physically taken from a property by the City of
Brigantine, there shall be a charge for the same, and, additionally,
the customer shall be responsible for the payment of any and all
maintenance and/or cleaning which must be performed concerning
said meter prior to its replacement. [Amended 12-28-1992 by
Ord. No. 28-1992; 9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
(3) Hydrant and foundation permits. The charge for water usage for
hydrant and foundation permits shall be set forth in Chapter 210,
Mercantile Businesses, Article II, Fee Schedule. In addition to the
same, no hydrant or foundation permit or connection shall be made
without notification being provided by the individual or entity
which is to make said connection to the Department of Public
Works of the City of Brigantine and the Brigantine Construction
Office. At the time of the request for such service, a deposit of $500
shall be paid for the meter which is to be placed upon the hydrant
so that said water usage can be metered. Upon the payment of the
deposit of $500 and a fee as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fee Schedule, and the completion of any
application, said applicant will be provided a plaque or other
permit indicating that a valid permit has been received, and it will
be the responsibility of said applicant to place said plaque or permit
on the hydrant during use so that all members of the Public Works
Department of the City of Brigantine, Brigantine Fire Department
and Brigantine Construction Office will know that a valid permit
§ 290-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-25
1:925
§ 290-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-18-1981 by Ord. No.
2-1981; 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be liable, upon
conviction thereof, to a fine of not more than $1,000 or to imprisonment in
the City or county jail for a term of not more than 90 days, or both.
has been issued and obtained. Any permits issued pursuant to this
section of the Code of the City of Brigantine shall be valid for only
15 days from the date of issuance, and the same shall expire after
15 days, and a renewal permit must be obtained. Said fifteen-day
time period may be extended for good cause in the sole discretion
of the Director of the Department of Public Works. Payment of any
and all fees and deposits required by this section of the Code of the
City of Brigantine shall be made at the Construction Code Office
at the time of the application for any permits which are obtained
for the jetting or driving of pilings or the placement of foundations
or cement mixing. Members of the Brigantine Police Department,
Director of Public Works or his designee or the Chief of the Fire
Department of the City of Brigantine or his designee and/or the
Construction Official will have the power to issue summons for
violations of this article. Any damage which occurs to any hydrant
during use pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to this section of
the Code of the City of Brigantine shall be the sole responsibility
of the applicant using such fire hydrant, and the cost of any such
damage may be deducted from the five-hundred-dollar deposit. If
any such damage exceeds $500, the applicant will be responsible
for the same, and no further permits for use of hydrants will be
issued to said applicant or any subsidiary or successor corporation
of the same until the damage not covered by said deposit has
been paid in full. [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992;
9-6-2000 by Ord. No. 15-2000]
(4) Where an account is canceled for more than one full calendar year,
a reconnection charge as set forth in § 290-17D shall be made in
addition to the charge for the proportionate part of the full
semiannual minimum.
(5) Hydrant permits. Fees as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fees Schedule, shall be charged for the
following: [Amended 12-28-1992 by Ord. No. 28-1992]
(a) Foundation cement mixing.
(b) Jetting in piling; a service charge for hydrants and an
additional charge for jetting in piling for piling 15 feet or more
in length and for piling under 15 feet in length.
(c) Connecting well points to hydrants, for each well point.
§ 290-25 BRIGANTINE CODE § 290-26
1:926
ARTICLE III
Emergency Water Use Restrictions
[Adopted 6-5-1991 by Ord. No. 6-1991]
§ 290-27. Authority to prohibit certain water uses.
Whenever the municipality of the City of Brigantine or the State of New
Jersey shall declare that a drought or water supply emergency exists, said
municipality of Brigantine is enabled to prohibit and in any way restrict the
following water uses:
§ 290-28. Notification of emergency.
Whenever the City of Brigantine determines that a drought or water supply
emergency exists or is informed by the State of New Jersey that a drought
or water supply emergency exists, notification shall be placed in a paper of
general circulation within the municipality or a paper of general circulation
in the county where said municipality is located and be posted in the office
of the County Clerk.
A. The watering of any plants, grass, shrubs, trees, bushes or any other
type of vegetation.
B. The washing of any type of motor vehicle, including but not limited to
any jeep, car, truck, trailer, camper, all-terrain vehicle, dune buggy, golf
cart, motorbike, motorcycle or any other such motor vehicle, except by
commercial businesses engaged exclusively in the business of washing
cars or in the event that it is determined that by not washing any said
vehicle a threat to the public health may arise.
C. The washing or wetting of any street, driveway, sidewalk, curb or other
paved area.
D. The use of fire hydrants by municipal road departments, contractors or
any other entities, except as necessary for fire-fighting or protection
purposes or for other purposes deemed necessary by the municipality
for the health, safety and welfare of individuals within the municipality.
E. The filling or adding of water to any swimming pool, outdoor spa,
outdoor whirlpool, outdoor jacuzzi or other like recreational facility.
§ 290-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 290-28
1:927
Chapter 292
WATERCRAFT, PERSONAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Beach and dune protection — See Ch. 101.
Beaches and recreational facilities — See Ch.
105.
Boats — See Ch. 111.
§ 292-1. Regulations adopted by reference.
The rules and regulations attached to this chapter and specifically made
a part hereof by this reference shall be placed into full force and effect
and must be obeyed by any and all individuals operating or otherwise
associated with personal watercraft use in, on and around the waters, bays
and beaches of the City of Brigantine.193
§ 292-2. Permit required.
Each personal watercraft transported onto the beach in the City of
Brigantine for launching therefrom must acquire a permit from the City of
Brigantine.
§ 292-3. Fee.
The fee for said permits shall be as set forth in Chapter 210, Mercantile
Businesses, Article II, Fee Schedule. Permits shall be issued each year in the
same manner and at the same time as permits for four-wheel-drive vehicles.
§ 292-4. Application for permit; indemnification.
Each application for a permit shall include the name, address and telephone
number of the owner of the personal watercraft and have attached a copy
of the face sheet of the insurance policy showing proof of insurance. All
such applications shall contain a provision which shall have the applicant
indemnify and hold the City harmless regarding any property damage,
personal injury or loss of life.
§ 292-5. Insurance. [Amended 4-15-1998 by Ord. No. 3-1998]
Each personal watercraft owner or operator, in order to receive a permit
pursuant to this chapter, shall provide, with any application therefor, proof
of liability insurance for said personal watercraft in the amount of $500,000.
The City shall be named as an additional insured on all such insurance
policies.
193. Editor's Note: Said rules and regulations are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 290-28 BRIGANTINE CODE § 292-6
1:928
§ 292-6. Display of permit.
Upon applying for and being approved for a permit, each owner or operator
shall be issued a numbered permit capable of being placed on said personal
watercraft. Said permit shall be placed and kept on said personal watercraft
in a clearly visible area of said personal watercraft.
§ 292-7. Liability for violations.
If this chapter is violated, the operator and/or owner of the personal
watercraft associated with said violation shall be liable.
§ 292-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up
to $1,000, jail time of up to 90 days, and/or community service of up to
90 days, as determined by the Municipal Court Judge. In addition, the
Municipal Court Judge may revoke a permit issued to any individual or
entity who violates this chapter.
§ 292-9. Construal of provisions. [Added 4-16-1997 by Ord. No.
7-1997]
Nothing contained in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to
this chapter or in this chapter itself shall in any way take precedence
over the laws of the State of New Jersey dealing with personal watercraft,
particularly N.J.S.A. 12:7-62 et seq. If any inconsistency is present
concerning this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated thereto
and the state statutes as set forth above, the state statutes shall rule and
prevail.
Appendix
Chapter A301
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A301-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission (herein, the FCC) Rules and Regulations, 47
CFR 6.5, and the New Jersey Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.,
and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the
federal or state definitions:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Chapter 186 of the General Laws of
New Jersey, 1972, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et
seq.
§ 292-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A301-1
1:929
APPLICATION — The application for municipal consent filed with the
municipality, on or about March 31, 1999.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — That tier of channels which the company is
required to carry by FCC rules and is the level of service to which all
subscribers must subscribe prior to subscribing to additional video services.
BOARD or BPU — New Jersey Board of Public Utilities.
CABLE PROGRAMMING SERVICE — Any tier of video programming service
provided over the cable system, other than the basic cable service tier, or
programming offered on a per program or per channel basis.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to customers of video
programming and other programming services, together with customer
interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such programming,
or the utilization of any facilities or equipment of the cable system to
provide such services.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes, but is not limited to,
video programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community.
CHANNEL — A designated frequency band in the electromagnetic
spectrum, which is capable of carrying video, audio, digital or other
electronic signals, or some combination thereof.
COMMUNICATIONS ACT — Title VI of the U.S. Communications Act of
1934, as amended, entitled "Cable Communications."
CONVERTER — An electronic device, which allows for reception and
selection of signals distributed over the cable frequencies that may not be
receivable on the ordinary television receiver.
FRANCHISE or ORDINANCE — This document and expression of municipal
consent and is known as Ordinance No. 22 of 2000, 2000 A. D.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES — Those revenues derived from
recurring charges in the nature of subscription fees actually received by
Suburban from its subscribers located within the municipality, for Cable
Service, i.e., basic cable service and cable programming service. Gross
subscriber revenues shall not include revenues received as equipment
rental fees, installation charges, reconnection fees, service or advertising
income, per program revenues, and premium cable service revenues. Gross
subscriber revenues also shall not include any bad debt payments,
converter deposits, refunds to subscribers by Suburban or receipts from
sales, other communications and nonbroadcast services such as revenue
from high-speed data service (two-way or otherwise), use or franchise fees
or taxes or any other tax or fee that Suburban collects on behalf of the
municipality or any other taxing authority or income derived from the
provision of any service not set forth in this section.
§ A301-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § A301-1
1:930
MULTI-CHANNEL VIDEO PROGRAMMING DISTRIBUTOR — A person such
as, but not limited to, a cable operator, a multi-channel distribution service,
a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only satellite
program distributor, who makes available for purchase, by subscribers or
customers, multiple channels of video programming.
MUNICIPALITY or CITY — Brigantine City, County of Atlantic, in the State
of New Jersey.
OCTV — The Office of Cable Television within the BPU.
PERSON — Any individual, trustee, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of, and the space above and below, any public
street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court, boulevard,
sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle, or other public rightof-
way, including, but not limited to, public utility easements, dedicated
utility strips, rights-of-way or easements employed for compatible uses and
any temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now
or hereafter held by the municipality in the service area which shall entitle
the municipality and the company to the use thereof for the purpose of
installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the cable system. "Public
way" shall also mean any easement now or hereafter held by the
municipality within the service area for the purpose of public travel, or
for utility or public service use dedicated for compatible uses, and shall
include other easements or rights-of-way as shall within their proper use
and meaning entitle the municipality and the company to the use thereof
for the purposes of installing or transmitting the company's cable service or
other service over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may
be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the cable system.
SECTION — Any section, subsection, line or provision of this franchise.
SERVICE AREA — The present municipal boundaries of the municipality,
and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or other legal means.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person(s), firm(s), corporation(s) or other legal
entity(ies) who, or which, elects to receive, for any purpose, a cable service
provided by the company in connection with the cable system.
SUBURBAN or THE COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this
ordinance and is known as Lenfest Atlantic Inc. d/b/a Comcast Cable Vision
of South Jersey corporation, the cable system operator, and its lawful
successors, transferees or assigns.
§ A301-2. Statement of findings.
The Advisory Committee, having engaged in certain review and
investigations concerning the performance of the company under the
franchise; and the municipality, having held a public hearing concerning
the consent herein granted to the company after proper public notice
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act. Said
§ A301-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A301-2
1:931
hearing having been held as above stated and said hearing having been fully
open to the public, and the municipality having received at said hearing
all comments regarding the qualifications of the company to receive this
consent, the municipality hereby finds that the company possesses the
necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications and
that the company's operating and construction arrangements are adequate
and feasible.
§ A301-3. Grant of authority.
A. The municipality hereby grants to the company its nonexclusive
consent to place in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places in
the municipality poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes,
and other television conductors, and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the municipality of a cable television
system and cable communications system. Construction, operation and
maintenance pursuant to said consent is conditioned upon prior
approval of the Board of Public Utilities and the State of New Jersey and
its successor agencies.
B. The right to use and occupy the public way for the purposes herein set
forth shall not be exclusive. If the City grants municipal consent for
cable franchise to anyone other than the company, to the extent that the
company's franchise in whole or in part is inconsistent with such other
cable franchise, then, at the company's option, the company's franchise
shall be conformed in whole or in part, as the case may be, so that the
company's franchise is no less favorable to it than the most favorable
cable franchise granted to any other person or entity.
C. In the event that a multichannel video programming provider, which is
not in any way an affiliate of the company, provides video programming
to residents of the municipality, and is not required by applicable law to
obtain municipal consent for a franchise from the municipality or does
not have a written agreement with the municipality regarding the
providing of such video programming, and to the extent that the
company reports to the municipality in writing that the provision of
such video programming by that multichannel video programming
provider is having a substantial negative impact upon the financial
viability of the company's cable system in the municipality, the company
shall have a right to request amendments to the franchise that relieve
the company of regulatory burdens that create a competitive
disadvantage.
D. In requesting amendments, the company shall file a petition with the
BPU seeking to amend the franchise. Such petition shall indicate the
presence of a nonfranchised, multichannel video programming
provider(s); identify the basis for the company's belief that certain
provisions of the franchise place the company at a competitive
disadvantage; and identify the regulatory burdens to be amended or
repealed in order to eliminate the competitive disadvantage. The
§ A301-2 BRIGANTINE CODE § A301-3
1:932
§ A301-4. Duration of franchise.
The consent herein granted shall expire 15 years from the date a certificate
of approval is issued by the Board of Public Utilities, with a six-year
automatic renewal as provided by N.J.S.A. 48:5A-19 and 25, and N.J.A.C.
14:18 - 13.6.
§ A301-5. Franchise expiration and renewal.
§ A301-6. Annual franchise fee.
municipality shall not unreasonably object to the company's petition
and so amending the franchise.
E. COMCAST agrees to comply with the terms of any lawfully adopted,
generally applicable local ordinance, to the extent that the provisions of
the ordinance do not have the effect of limiting the benefits or
expanding the obligations of the company that are granted by this
franchise. COMCAST reserves the right to challenge the provisions of
any ordinance which conflict with its contractual rights, either now or
in the future. In the event of a conflict between any ordinance and this
franchise, the franchise shall control; provided, however, that the
company agrees that it is subject to the lawful exercise of the police
power of the City.
A. If the company seeks a successive consent it shall, prior to the
expiration of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate
of approval in accordance with the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-11 and 48:5A-16, and applicable State and federal rules and
regulations.
B. In addition to the above section, the City and the company agree that
any proceedings undertaken by the City that relate to the renewal of
the company's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the
provisions of Section 626 of the Communications Act unless the
procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be
deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any
subsequent provision of federal law. Further, this consent for a
franchise may be renewed at any time by mutual agreement between
the company and the municipality.
A. Pursuant to, and consistent with, the terms and conditions of the Cable
Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30, the company shall, during each year of
operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the municipality 2%
of the annual gross subscriber revenues received by the company from
subscribers residing in the municipality; provided, however, that the
company shall not be obligated to pay to the municipality an amount
which when aggregated with the amount paid to the State of New
Jersey as an assessment fee is more than 5% of its annual gross
subscriber revenue from subscribers residing in the municipality. In the
event that the municipality is permitted to receive an increased
§ A301-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A301-6
1:933
§ A301-7. Franchise territory.
The consent granted herein to the company shall apply to the entirety of the
municipality and any property hereafter annexed thereto.
§ A301-8. Construction and installation.
franchise fee, the company shall begin accruing such increase
payments within 60 days' written notice from the municipality that it
has adopted a resolution requiring the collection of a higher percentage
of annual gross subscriber revenues, and complied with all state and
federal provisions regarding such increase.
B. Such amount shall be paid by the company to the municipality on an
annual basis no later than January 25 of each calendar year beginning
the calendar year after this franchise becomes effective and ending one
year after this franchise expires, together with a report of such gross
subscriber revenues for such calendar year certified by a
representative of the company.
A. The company is hereby granted the right and privilege and an easement
to construct, erect, place, operate, repair and maintain poles, wires,
transmission lines, distribution lines, service lines and cable television
and communications equipment in and on, under and over all public
ways in the municipality for the purpose of providing the municipality
and its inhabitants with its services.
B. Wherever a telephone or other utility company has erected poles, the
company shall be expected to make a good faith attempt to enter into a
joint use agreement for those poles. The company shall not set new
poles, except where no pole exists or use of an existing utility pole is not
practicable due to excessive rearrangements or other conditions, and
such pole construction shall be subject to approval by the City's
Engineer.
C. The company shall apply for all permits necessary for work to be done
in the public way for the operation of the company's cable system and
shall not undertake any construction without receipt of such permits,
issuance of which shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed by the
municipality. The municipality shall issue all such permits at no cost to
the company, such costs being covered by the company's franchise fee.
D. The construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system
shall be effectuated by the company in a manner that is consistent with
the laws, ordinances and construction standards of the State of New
Jersey, the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the National
Electrical Safety Code, National Electrical Code, FCC and the
Standards of Good Engineering Practices for Measurement of Cable
Television Systems of the National Cable Television Association to the
extent applicable.
§ A301-6 BRIGANTINE CODE § A301-8
1:934
§ A301-9. System requirements.
E. All of the company's construction, installation, repair and maintenance
shall be conducted in such a manner as to cause minimum interference
with the rights and reasonable convenience of the public and any
property owners that may be affected.
F. The company shall promptly repair and restore any private property
which may have been damaged as a result of the construction,
installation, repair or maintenance of the system. Any City property
damaged or destroyed shall be promptly repaired or replaced by the
company and restored to a serviceable condition.
G. The company shall proffer service along any public right-of-way to any
residential area located in the franchise territory described herein at
tariffed rates for standard or nonstandard installation.
H. The municipality agrees to promptly notify the company of all permits
granted for the development of residential subdivisions or multipledwelling
complexes to enable the company to make arrangements for
installation of its cable facilities within same.
I. The company, on the request of any person, firm or corporation holding
a building permit issued by the municipality, or permit issued by an
appropriate state agency, shall temporarily raise or lower its wires to
permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary raising
or lowering shall be paid to the company by the person, firm or
corporation requesting the same, and the company shall have the
authority to require such payment in advance. The company shall be
given not less than 10 business days' advance written notice to arrange
for such temporary wire changes.
J. In those areas of the service area where the transmission or distribution
facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone
communications and electric services are both aerial and underground,
the company shall have the sole discretion to construct, operate and
maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities, or any part
thereof, aerially or underground.
K. The company shall not be required to construct its facilities in a manner
that exceeds the requirements that are placed upon other utility rightof-
way users, i.e. energy or communications providers, or in a manner
that would conflict with governing statutes or regulations.
A. The company shall use reasonable efforts in good faith to provide to
subscribers as wide a variety and number of services as is feasible in
the judgment of the company. In doing so, the company has agreed to
upgrade its cable system within 48 months of the BPU granting of the
certificate of approval. This upgrade shall be capable of delivering both
analog and digital television signals with sufficient bandwidth to deliver
a minimum of 60 channels of analog and 100 channels of digital
§ A301-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A301-9
1:935
§ A301-10. Local office.
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof the company
shall maintain a local business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and
similar matters. Such local business office shall be open during normal
business hours, and in no event (excepting emergent circumstances) less
than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
§ A301-11. Municipal complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television (OCTV) is hereby designated as complaint
officer for Brigantine City pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26b. All complaints
shall be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C 14:17-6.5.
§ A301-12. Performance bond.
During the life of the franchise the company shall post a performance bond,
to the municipality, in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure
the faithful performance of all undertakings of the company as represented
in its application for municipal consent, incorporated herein.
§ A301-13. Rates.
programming. Such upgrade shall also be designed for two-way data
(e.g., Internet) capability.
B. While it is the responsibility of COMCAST to obtain all required permits
and authorizations necessary for construction, such permits and
authorizations shall not be unreasonably withheld by the municipality. If
permits are delayed through no fault of COMCAST, then the
municipality shall grant a reasonable extension of time for COMCAST to
comply with the construction deadline.
C. The company shall use materials of good and durable quality, and all
work involved in the construction, installation, maintenance and repair
of the cable system shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable
manner.
D. Removal or trimming of trees. During the exercise of its rights and
privileges under this franchise, the company shall have the authority to
trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public
places of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires, poles, underground conduits,
related equipment and cables of the company.
A. The municipality acknowledges that under the Federal Cable Act, as
interpreted by the Board, municipalities do not have authority to
regulate any rates the company charges for services. However, the
§ A301-9 BRIGANTINE CODE § A301-13
1:936
§ A301-14. Local access cablecasting and cable needs contribution.
rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
B. The company shall provide notice to the municipality and to the affected
subscribers of an increase in the rate or charge for any cable television
service. The notice shall be in writing and shall specify the service or
services affected, the new rate and the effective date thereof. Notice to
subscribers affected by the rate increase shall be provided at least 30
days prior to the effective date of the rate change. This section shall not
apply to pay-per-view programming.
C. The company may require subscribers to pay for each month of service
in advance at the beginning of each month.
D. Nothing contained in this franchise shall be deemed to restrict or
prohibit the company from pursuing such legal remedies to collect past
due debts owed to it by subscribers, including the reasonable costs and
expenses incurred in pursuing such remedies, such as collection fees,
attorney's fees and trip charges.
E. The company shall not, as to rates, charges, services, service facilities,
rules, regulations, or in any respect, make or grant any undue
preference or disadvantage on the basis of race, creed, national origin,
religion, color, sex or age. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
prohibit the reduction or waiving of charges for promotional or
competitive purposes.
A. Upon request, subject to the provisions below, the company shall make
available a noncommercial, governmental/educational access channel
for use by the City and to the City Public School District at no cost.
However, the cost and expense of production and program development
shall be borne by the parties utilizing such access.
(1) Notwithstanding the contribution provided herein below, for
educational and government access channels, and while providing
limited technical assistance should transmission problems arise,
the company shall not be required to maintain technical or
production staff, equipment or studio facilities for such
programming which is independently owned and operated and
shall have no obligation to establish studio facilities, maintain
equipment or provide technical or production staff assistance, as
long as the company continues to retransmit such access
programming. The company shall enforce all indecency and
obscenity rules established by any federal or state agency,
including, but not limited to, rules related to access as set forth at
47 CFR 76.702.
(2) At its sole cost and expense, the company shall install, if not
installed already, a return path in one municipal building
§ A301-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A301-14
1:937
designated by the City Council. The return path shall be capable
of being connected to the cable system to permit live cablecasts of
public meetings and addresses of a nonpolitical nature.
(3) At its sole cost and expense, the company shall install, after
Suburban has implemented an upgrade of its cable system as
provided in § A301-9A, a return path in one School District building
designated by the City Council. The return path shall be capable of
being connected to the cable system to permit live cablecasts of
public meetings and addresses of a nonpolitical nature. Until that
time when the upgrade is completed, Suburban will provide a
connection from the School District site to the municipal cablecast
site referenced in § A301-15A(2) to provide temporary, shared
access on the government access channel.
(4) It is understood that the views expressed in programming
cablecasts pursuant to this section shall not be deemed to be the
views of the company; and the company shall not be responsible or
liable in any way for the content of such programming or the views
expressed therein.
(5) Upon request of the City Council only, after Suburban has
implemented an upgrade of its cable system as provided in Section
1.10(a), Suburban shall provide and maintain channel capacity for
the following separate access services:
(a) Government access channel, which shall be a specifically
designated channel for noncommercial use by the City and
shall be managed, scheduled and programmed exclusively by
the City or shared with other local governmental entities at
discretion of the City.
(b) Educational channel, which shall be a specifically designated
channel for use by local public and/or nonprofit, private school
authorities and shall be managed, scheduled and programmed
exclusively by them.
(6) An additional access channel will be made available only when all
existing access channels simultaneously carry nonduplicated,
locally produced access programming, none which is charactergenerated;
and when all existing access channels continuously
carry such programming, during the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 11:00
p.m., for over a period of 90 consecutive days.
(7) COMCAST reserves the right to program the access channels or
portion of the channels during any hours not used by the City or its
designee(s).
B. Within three months after passage of this municipal consent ordinance,
the company shall commit to paying the cost to the City for the upgrade
and/or renovation of the City meeting room public address system; the
City purchase of video and audio equipment; or School District cable-
§ A301-14 BRIGANTINE CODE § A301-14
1:938
§ A301-15. Free services.
related capital needs. The commitment to pay the City for the purchase
of such upgrade and equipment is limited to, and shall not exceed,
$30,000.
C. Within three months after the issuance of a certificate of approval by
the Board its approval of the term length and automatic renewal agreed
to by COMCAST and the City in § A301-4, or within a year after passage
of this municipal consent ordinance, whichever occurs first, the
company agrees to make to the City a second commitment to pay the
cost to the City an amount not to exceed $30,000 to be applied to the
cable-related capital needs of the City and/or School District. This
obligation by COMCAST set forth in § A301-15B and C to reimburse the
City is for a total amount not to exceed $60,000. These payments for
cable-related capital support shall be due in accordance with the above
upon request and upon submission of an itemized listing of the
equipment to be purchased and the associated cost of each item.
A. The company shall, without charge, provide upon request basic cable
television service to one outlet in City Hall, each police and fire station,
each public school building and each public library, within the
municipality, that is located within 150 feet of the company's
distribution system and is able to be connected with a normal aerial
installation.
B. Within six months after such service is available in the City, the
company shall provide upon request, without charge, high-speed twoway
data transmission service to one outlet in each public school
building, and each public library within the municipality, that is located
within 150 feet of the company's distribution system. and is able to be
connected with a normal aerial installation.
C. For each service referenced in this section, the company shall not be
required to provide an outlet to such buildings where a nonstandard
installation is required, unless the users agree to pay the incremental
cost of any necessary system extension and/or nonstandard installation.
If additional outlets of basic and expanded basic cable and/or highspeed
data transmission services are to be provided, the users shall pay
the usual installation and service fees associated therewith. Users of
such outlets shall hold the company harmless from any and all liability
or claims arising out of their use of such outlets, including but not
limited to, those arising from copyright liability.
D. The provided service shall not be distributed beyond the originally
installed outlet nor used for commercial purposes, nor shall outlets be
located in areas open to the general public. The City and School District
shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the company's
system in any manner that results in the inappropriate use thereof or
any loss or damage to the system.
§ A301-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A301-16
1:939
§ A301-16. TV stereo.
After the upgrade, the cable system shall be stereo capable in accordance
with FCC standards.
§ A301-17. Emergency uses.
The company shall be required to comply with the emergency alert
provisions set forth by the FCC [47 CFR Part 11, FCC Rules and
Regulations, Emergency Alert System (EAS)], so long as such standards
remain in effect.
§ A301-18. Liability insurance.
A. By its acceptance of this franchise, the company specifically agrees that
it shall defend and indemnify the municipality, its officers, employees,
agents, boards and commissions, acting in their official capacity, and
hold them harmless from any and all damages, penalties or costs that
may arise from a suit filed by a third party due to the granting of the
franchise to the company, or any activities engaged in by the company,
excluding any activities that are directly the result of negligence or
deliberate acts or omissions of the municipality, its officers, employees,
agents, boards or commissions.
B. By its acceptance of this franchise, the company specifically agrees that
it shall pay all judgments or settlements due to damages and/or
penalties for which it is liable under Subsection A. In this connection,
the company will provide the defense of any claims brought against the
City under this section of the franchise by selecting counsel of the
company's choice to defend the claim. The municipality shall give
timely notification of any such claims, demands, actions, suits,
proceedings, damages or liability before the company shall be required
to undertake the defense and to indemnify the municipality. The
company shall have the right to defend, settle or compromise any claim
or action arising hereunder. Expense of investigation, counsel and the
amount of any settlement of any claim or suit will be paid by the
company, and the company shall have the sole authority to decide the
appropriateness and the amount of any such settlement.
C. By its acceptance of this franchise, the company specifically agrees that
it will maintain, through the term of this franchise, and in any renewals
thereof, liability insurance protecting the company and the municipality
with regard to all damages and/or penalties mentioned in Subsection A
in the following minimum amounts:
(1) One million dollars for bodily injury or death to any one person,
within the limit, however, of $2,000,000 for bodily injury or death
resulting from any one accident and $5,000,000 for all injuries or
deaths resulting from any one accident.
§ A301-16 BRIGANTINE CODE § A301-18
1:940
§ A301-19. Compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
§ A301-20. Rights reserved by City.
(2) Five hundred thousand dollars for property damage resulting from
any one accident.
(3) Worker's compensation insurance on all employees engaged in
installation or service of its equipment.
D. A certificate evidencing the insurance coverage herein provided shall
be filed by the company with the municipality, upon request.
A. The company shall conform to all generally applicable laws, rules and
regulations of the United States and the State of New Jersey in the
construction and operation of its cable system and all generally
applicable rules and regulations of the FCC, which are now in effect or
hereafter enacted.
B. The company shall not refuse to hire or employ nor bar nor discharge
from employment nor discriminate against any person in compensation
or terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, race,
creed, color, national origin or sex.
C. Any right, power, protection, privilege or immunity which is provided,
granted or imposed on the company under or by virtue of the
Communications Act as it may be amended or interpreted from time to
time after the date hereof shall remain inviolate and shall be available
to the company notwithstanding any contrary provision of the
franchise, and the acceptance of the terms and conditions of this
franchise shall not be construed as a waiver or release by the company
of any right, power, protection, privilege, immunity or obligation under
the Communications Act, the laws or Constitution of the United States
or the laws and Constitution of the State of New Jersey. Nothing herein,
nor the company's acceptance hereof, shall be construed to deny the
company the right to seek administrative and/or judicial review of any
action or threatened action by the City under, or arising out of, this
franchise.
A. The right is hereby reserved by the City to adopt such additional
general regulations in the exercise of its police power as it shall find
necessary, provided that such regulations shall be reasonable and not
materially in conflict with the rights and privileges herein granted, nor
which shall impose any additional material or unreasonable economic
or technical burden on the company.
B. This franchise (including all of the company's particular rights, powers,
protections, privileges, immunities and obligations associated
therewith as the same exist on the date hereof) shall constitute a legally
binding contract between the municipality and the company and as
such cannot be amended, modified or changed by the municipality
§ A301-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A301-20
1:941
§ A301-21. Customer services.
without the consent of the company in any manner whatsoever whether
by ordinance, rule, regulation or otherwise, to impose on the company
more stringent or burdensome requirements or conditions; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall preclude the City from the
proper exercise of its general regulatory and police powers, as limited
in Subsection A, and/or powers of eminent domain.
C. The municipality or its officially designated representatives shall have
the right, upon 30 days' written notice, to inspect all pertinent records,
books, plans and financial statements maintained by the company at its
corporate office which relate directly to computation of gross
subscriber revenues from all recurring charges for subscription fees
paid by City subscribers for cable service, and construction and location
of facilities within the City, at the company's principal place of business
upon reasonable notice and during normal business hours. Such notice
shall specifically reference the section of the franchise which is under
review, so that the company may organize the necessary books and
records for easy access by the municipality. The company shall not be
required to maintain any books or records for franchise compliance
purposes longer than three years. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary set forth herein, the company shall not be required to disclose
information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential
in nature. The City, and its officially designated representatives, agree
to treat any information disclosed as confidential and only to disclose it
to employees, agents or representatives thereof that have a need to
know or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. The company shall
not be required to provide subscriber information in violation of Section
631 of the Communications Act.
D. The municipality, or its officially designated representatives or agents,
upon reasonable notice, shall have the right to observe all construction
or installation work performed subject to the provisions of this
franchise and to make such inspections, during regular business hours,
as it may find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this
franchise and other applicable provisions of the law.
A. The company shall provide written notice to each subscriber upon
initial subscription and at intervals not more than one year thereafter of
its procedures for reporting and resolving subscriber complaints, the
equipment and services currently available, and the practices and
procedures for protecting against invasions of subscriber privacy, and
such other notices as may be required by the FCC's rules.
B. Upon a subscriber's written request, the company shall issue a prorated
credit for any period of cable service interruption of six or more
continuous hours; provided that such outage was within the company's
reasonable control. Credit shall be based upon number of channels and
number of hours of interruption.
§ A301-20 BRIGANTINE CODE § A301-21
1:942
§ A301-22. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding
shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A301-23. Repealer.
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are
hereby repealed.
§ A301-24. Notices.
Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or
response required by this franchise to be served upon municipality or the
company shall be in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given
when received by overnight delivery, confirmed facsimile transmission or
certified or registered mail. The notices or responses to the municipality
shall be addressed as follows:
City of Brigantine
City Hall
1417 Brigantine Avenue
Brigantine City, New Jersey 08203
Attention: City Manager
C. The company shall maintain a business office which shall be open
during regular business hours and have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be so operated as to receive complaints and
requests for repairs or adjustments, and remedying such as soon as
possible.
D. Normal installations will be performed within seven business days after
an order has been placed. "Normal" installations are aerial drops up to
150 feet from the distribution system, unless circumstances beyond the
company's control prevent compliance with this standard.
E. As a normal operating procedure, upon subscriber request, the
company shall designate a block of time (not to exceed four hours), e.g.,
8:00 a.m. to 12 Noon or 1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., during which it will
make a good faith effort to provide service or installation at the
requested site.
F. The company shall comply with customer service standards established
by the FCC in accordance with Section 632 of the Communications Act,
so long as such Communications Act section and FCC standards remain
in effect.
§ A301-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A301-24
1:943
The notices or responses to the company shall be addressed as follows:
COMCAST CABLEVISION
PO BOX 775
TURNERSVILLE, NJ 08012
ATTENTION: Regional Director of Government Relations with a copy to
General Counsel
§ A301-25. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments and statements contained in the application and
any amendment thereto submitted in writing to the municipality by the
company, except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as
terms and conditions of this consent. The application and any other relevant
writings submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part
hereof by reference, as long as they do not conflict with state or federal law.
§ A301-26. When effective.
This municipal consent shall become effective as of the date upon which
the municipality receives written notification that the company accepts the
terms and conditions herein.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2002 1-16-2002 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
2-2002 1-16-2002 Land purchase NCM
3-2002 1-16-2002 Land purchase NCM
4-2002 1-16-2002 Land purchase NCM
5-2002 2-20-2002 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
6-2002 4-17-2002 Bond NCM
7-2002 5-1-2002 Golf course utility NCM
8-2002 5-15-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
9-2002 8-21-2002 Land use Ch. 198
10-2002 8-7-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
§ A301-24 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:944
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
11-2002 8-7-2002 Municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 234, Art. I
12-2002 8-7-2002 Sale of merchandise on
sidewalks amendment
Ch. 210, Art. IV
13-2002 8-7-2002 Bond NCM
14-2002 8-7-2002 Bond NCM
15-2002 9-18-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
16-2002 11-13-2002 Bond NCM
17-2002 11-13-2002 Bulkheads amendment Ch. 127
18-2002 11-13-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
19-2002 12-4-2002 Nuisances: late-night
deliveries
Ch. 220, Art. VI
20-2002 12-4-2002 Fees schedule amendment Ch. 210, Art. II
21-2002 12-4-2002 Condemnation of property NCM
1-2003 2-5-2003 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
2-2003 2-5-2003 Administration amendment Ch. 5
3-2003 2-19-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
4-2003 4-2-2003 Sale of riparian property NCM
5-2003 6-4-2003 Sale of riparian property NCM
6-2003 6-4-2003 Sale of property NCM
7-2003 7-16-2003 Street vacation NCM
8-2003 8-6-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
9-2003 8-6-2003 Land use amendment Ch. 198
10-2003 8-20-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
11-2003 8-20-2003 Municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 234, Art. I
12-2003 9-3-2003 Sale of riparian property NCM
13-2003 9-3-2003 Bond NCM
14-2003 9-3-2003 Bond NCM
15-2003 9-3-2003 Bond NCM
16-2003 10-15-2003 Late-night deliveries Ch. 220, Art. VI
17-2003 10-1-2003 Street naming NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:945
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-2003 10-1-2003 Surfing amendment Ch. 105, Art. II
19-2003 Beaches amendment Withdrawn
20-2003 10-15-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
21-2003 11-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
22-2003 12-3-2003 Use of rubbish facilities
amendment
Ch. 143, Art. II
23-2003 12-17-2003 Administration amendment Ch. 3
24-2003 12-17-2003 Fees amendment Ch. 210
25-2003 12-17-2003 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
26-2003 1-7-2004 Reimbursement for solid
waste collection services
Ch. 187, Art. II
1-2004 2-4-2004 Bond NCM
2-2004 2-4-2004 Economic Development
Committee amendment
Ch. 21
3-2004 2-4-2004 Sewer connection required
amendment
Ch. 252, Art. III
4-2004 2-18-2004 Personnel policies
amendment
NCM
5-2004 2-18-2004 Purchase of property NCM
6-2004 3-3-2004 Commercial parking lots
amendment
Ch. 234, Art. II
7-2004 3-3-2004 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 210, Art. II
8-2004 Appropriation NCM
9-2004 3-17-2004 Fee schedule amendment Ch. 210, Art. II
10-2004 3-17-2004 Rental property
amendment
Ch. 246
11-2004 4-7-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
12-2004 4-7-2004 Administration amendment Ch. 3
13-2004 5-5-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
14-2004 5-19-2004 Bond NCM
15-2004 5-19-2004 Towing amendment Ch. 278
16-2004 6-2-2004 Vehicles on beaches
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:946
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-2004 6-2-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 210, Art. II
18-2004 6-16-2004 Administration amendment Ch. 3
19-2004 6-16-2004 Solid waste collection
agreement
NCM
20-2004 6-16-2004 Bond NCM
21-2004 6-16-2004 Bond NCM
22-2004 6-16-2004 Bond NCM
23-2004 6-16-2004 Bond NCM
24-2004 7-21-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 210, Art. II
25-2004 8-4-2004 Parking lots amendment Ch. 234
26-2004 8-18-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
27-2004 8-18-2004 Personnel policies
amendment
NCM
28-2004 Withdrawn
29-2004 10-6-2004 Fee schedule amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 4-2006
30-2004 10-20-2004 Affordable housing
development fees
Ch. 150
31-2004 10-20-2004 Noise: stationary
structures amendment
Ch. 216, Art. II
32-2004 11-10-2004 Zoning Map amendment NCM
33-2004 Bond NCM
34-2004 12-1-2004 Fee schedule amendment Superseded by
Ord. No. 4-2006
35-2004 12-15-2004 Personnel policies
amendment
NCM
36-2004 1-5-2005 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
37-2004 1-5-2005 Solid waste agreement NCM
38-2004 1-5-2005 Emergency medical
services fees amendment
Ch. 162, Art. I
1-2005 1-19-2005 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: collection and
prohibitions amendment
Ch. 187, Art. I
2-2005 2-16-2005 Sewers: illicit connections Ch. 252, Art. VI
3-2005 2-16-2005 Mercantile businesses: fee
schedule amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 4-2006
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:947
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2005 Exceeding budget
appropriation limits and
establishing a cap bank
NCM
5-2005 3-2-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
6-2005 3-2-2005 Curfew amendment Ch. 147
7-2005 3-16-2005 Administration amendment Ch. 3
8-2005 3-16-2005 Firefighting drug testing
policy
NCM
9-2005 3-16-2005 Amendment to employee
handbook
NCM
10-2005 Acquisition of property by
eminent domain
NCM
11-2005 Sale of property NCM
12-2005 Bond amendment NCM
13-2005 5-4-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
14-2005 Bond NCM
15-2005 Bond NCM
16-2005 Granting of access
easement
NCM
17-2005 7-20-2005 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
18-2005 8-3-2005 Miniature golf course Ch. 190
19-2005 Not adopted
20-2005 8-3-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
21-2005 9-7-2005 Sex offender residency Repealed by Ord.
No. 7-2006
22-2005 9-21-2005 Administration amendment Ch. 3
23-2005 Bond NCM
24-2005 9-21-2005 Lifeguard drug testing
policy
NCM
25-2005 10-5-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
26-2005 Sale of land NCM
27-2005 11-2-2005 Vehicles and Traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
28-2005 Number not used
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:948
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
29-2005 Salary ordinance NCM
30-2005 12-21-2005 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 270
31-2005 Handicapped parking space Repealed by Ord.
No. 9-2006
32-2005 12-21-2005 Records, Public Ch. 56
33-2005 1-4-2006 Vehicles and Traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
1-2006 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
2-2006 1-18-2006 Administration amendment Ch. 3
3-2006 1-18-2006 Uniform construction
codes: fees and penalties
amendment
Ch. 143, Arts. I
and II
4-2006 Mercantile business: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
5-2006 2-15-2006 Arts and Cultural
Commission amendment
Ch. 5
6-2006 2-15-2006 Administration amendment Ch. 3
7-2006 Employee Handbook
amendment
NCM
8-2006 2-15-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
9-2006 Handicapped parking space
repealer
NCM
10-2006 Budget NCM
11-2006 Sale of land NCM
12-2006 Purchase of land NCM
13-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
14-2006 5-3-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
15-2006 5-17-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
16-2006 6-7-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
17-2006 School bond NCM
18-2006 6-7-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:949
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
19-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
20-2006 8-2-2006 Municipal Housing Liaison Ch. 3, Art.
21-2006 8-16-2006 Bond NCM
22-2006 8-16-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
23-2006 9-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
24-2006 9-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
25-2006 9-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
26-2006 9-20-2006 Development fee Superseded by
Ord. No. 12-2009
27-2006 11-1-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
28-2006 12-20-2006 Beaches and recreational
facilities: surfing
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. III
29-2006 12-20-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
30-2006 12-20-2006 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 175
31-2006 12-20-2006 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 270
32-2006 12-20-2006 Bond NCM
33-2006 1-3-2007 Beaches and recreational
facilities: automobiles and
other vehicles amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
1-2007 4-18-2007 Bond NCM
2-2007 4-18-2007 Bond NCM
3-2007 2-21-2007 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
4-2007 2-21-2007 Budget NCM
5-2007 2-21-2007 Uniform construction
codes: enforcement and
fees amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
6-2007 3-7-2007 Beaches and recreational
facilities: horses
Ch. 105, Art. VI
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:950
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
7-2007 3-21-2007 Sex offender registry
repealer
Ch. 253 (reference
only)
8-2007 3-21-2007 Uniform construction
codes: use of rubbish
disposal facilities during
construction amendment
Ch. 143, Art. II
9-2007 4-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
10-2007 6-20-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
11-2007 6-20-2007 Beaches and recreational
facilities: horses
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. VI
12-2007 8-1-2007 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
13-2007 8-1-2007 Beaches and recreational
facilities: horses
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. VI
14-2007 8-1-2007 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
15-2007 8-1-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
16-2007 8-1-2007 Use of beaches amendment Ch. 105, Art. IV
17-2007 Bond NCM
18-2007 9-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
19-2007 9-19-2007 Uniform construction
codes: enforcement and
fees amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
20-2007 10-3-2007 Stormwater control Ch. 258
21-2007 Bond NCM
22-2007 10-17-2007 Firearms Ch. 168
23-2007 11-7-2007 General provisions:
adoption of code
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
24-2007 11-7-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
25-2007 12-19-2007 Land use amendment Ch. 198
26-2007 12-19-2007 Use of beaches amendment Ch. 105, Art. IV
27-2007 12-19-2007 License agreement NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:951
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
28-2007 1-2-2008 Street naming NCM
29-2007 1-2-2008 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
30-2007 1-2-2008 Street naming NCM
1-2008 Bond NCM
2-2008 Bond NCM
3-2008 2-6-2008 Mercantile businesses:
licensing and regulation
amendment, fees schedule
amendment
Ch. 210, Arts. I
and II
4-2008 2-6-2008 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
5-2008 2-20-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
6-2008 Bond NCM
7-2008 3-19-2008 Administration amendment Ch. 3
8-2008 3-19-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
9-2008 4-16-2008 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
10-2008 4-2-2008 Uniform construction
codes: use of rubbish
disposal facilities during
construction amendment;
dumpsters
Chs. 143, Art. II
(footnote only);
144
11-2008 4-2-2008 Uniform construction
codes: enforcement and
fees amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
12-2008 5-7-2008 Employee Handbook
amendment
NCM
13-2008 6-4-2008 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment; dog park
Ch. 153, Arts. I
and IV
14-2008 Fees Pending adoption
15-2008 6-18-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
16-2008 7-16-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 198
17-2008 7-16-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
18-2008 8-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
19-2008 License agreement Not adopted
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:952
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
20-2008 8-20-2008 Retirement: Defined
Contribution Retirement
Program
Ch. 58, Art. I
21-2008 Bond NCM
22-2008 9-3-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
23-2008 9-3-2008 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
24-2008 Bond NCM
25-2008 Bond NCM
26-2008 9-17-2008 Land use amendment Ch. 198
27-2008 10-1-2008 Emergency medical
services: fees amendment
Ch. 162, Art. I
28-2008 12-17-2008 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
29-2008 12-17-2008 Beach and dune protection
amendment
Ch. 101
30-2008 12-17-2008 Alarm systems: supplier;
installation; use
amendment
Ch. 87, Art. I
1-2009 1-21-2009 Uniform construction
codes: enforcement and
fees amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
2-2009 Not adopted
3-2009 Bond NCM
4-2009 3-18-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
5-2009 Bond NCM
6-2009 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
7-2009 4-16-2009 Uniform construction
codes: enforcement and
fees amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
8-2009 4-16-2009 Emergency contracts Ch. 12, Art. I
9-2009 5-6-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
10-2009 5-20-2009 Towing: rotating list
amendment
Ch. 278, Art. II
11-2009 5-20-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:953
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
12-2009 5-20-2009 Development fees Ch. 150
13-2009 6-18-2009 Vehicles and traffic Ch. 284
14-2009 6-18-2009 Rental property: rental
registration; certificate of
habitability amendment
Ch. 246, Art. II
15-2009 8-19-2009 Beaches and recreational
facilities: use of beaches
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. IV
16-2009 8-19-2009 Municipal parking lots
amendment
Ch. 234, Art. I
17-2009 Bond NCM
18-2009 Bond NCM
19-2009 8-19-2009 Development fees
amendment
Ch. 150
20-2009 9-2-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
21-2009 9-16-2009 Beaches and recreational
facilities: automobiles and
other vehicles amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
22-2009 10-7-2009 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
23-2009 10-7-2009 Beaches and recreational
facilities: automobiles and
other vehicles amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
24-2009 10-7-2009 Alcoholic beverages:
possession or consumption
on private property by
minors
Ch. 91, Art. IV
25-2009 10-7-2009 Personnel policies
amendment
See Ch. 48
26-2009 11-4-2009 No changes to salary
ordinance
NCM
27-2009 12-2-2009 Recreational facilities:
criminal history
background checks
Ch. 241, Art. II
28-2009 12-2-2009 Unsafe buildings
amendment
Ch. 123
29-2009 Tabled
30-2009 12-16-2009 License agreement NCM
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:954
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1-2010 1-20-2010 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210. Art. II
2-2010 Withdrawn
3-2010 Withdrawn
4-2010 Withdrawn
5-2010 Bond NCM
6-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
7-2010 Tabled
8-2010 5-19-2010 Landlords of seasonal
rental property amendment
Ch. 246, Art. III
9-2010 6-2-2010 Towing: rotating list
amendment
Ch. 278, Art. II
10-2010 6-16-2010 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 270
11-2010 Withdrawn
12-2010 Tabled
13-2010 8-18-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
14-2010 Bond NCM
15-2010 9-15-2010 Street vacation NCM
16-2010 9-15-2010 Renaming of portion of
street
NCM
17-2010 9-15-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
18-2010 Bond NCM
19-2010 10-20-2010 Property maintenance:
appeals amendment
Ch. 238, Art. II
20-2010 10-20-2010 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 175
21-2010 10-20-2010 Rental property: tenant
registration certificate
amendment; landlords of
seasonal rental property
amendment
Ch. 246, Arts. I
and III
22-2010 10-20-2010 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
23-2010 10-20-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:955
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
24-2010 11-3-2010 Repeal of handicapped
parking space at 112 22nd
Street
Repealer only
25-2010 12-1-2010 Administration amendment Ch. 3
26-2010 Bond NCM
27-2010 Bond NCM
28-2010 12-15-2010 Personnel policies
amendment
See Ch. 48
29-2010 1-5-2011 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
1-2011 2-26-2011 Personnel policies
amendment
See Ch. 48
2-2011 3-16-2011 Emergency medical
services: fees amendment
Ch. 162, Art. I
3-2011 3-16-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
4-2011 4-6-2011 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
5-2011 4-20-2011 Storm sewers: retrofitting
of storm drains
Ch. 259, Art. I
6-2011 5-18-2011 Bond NCM
7-2011 5-4-2011 Street vacation NCM
8-2011 5-4-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
9-2011 Withdrawn
10-2011 5-18-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
11-2011 5-18-2011 Bond NCM
12-2011 7-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
13-2011 Tabled
14-2011 7-20-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
15-2011 7-20-2011 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
16-2011 Tabled
17-2011 8-17-2011 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:956
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
18-2011 8-17-2011 Political contributions:
limits on contributions by
contractors; receipt of
certain contributions by
candidates
Repealed by Ord.
No. 9-2017
19-2011 9-7-2011 Use of beaches amendment Ch. 105, Art. IV
20-2011 9-7-2011 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
21-2011 9-21-2011 Authorization of sale of ice
machine
NCM
22-2011 9-21-2011 Emergency medical
services: fees amendment
Ch. 162, Art. I
23-2011 Bond NCM
24-2011 10-5-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
25-2011 Withdrawn
26-2011 12-7-2011 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
27-2011 Withdrawn
28-2011 12-21-2011 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 270
29-2011 12-21-2011 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
30-2011 Withdrawn
31-2011 12-21-2011 Uniform construction
codes: enforcement and
fees amendment
Ch. 143, Art. I
32-2011 Withdrawn
33-2011 12-21-2011 Emergency appropriation NCM
1-2012 Withdrawn
2-2012 2-1-2012 Community Recreation
Center
Ch. 241, Art. III
3-2012 Withdrawn
4-2012 Withdrawn
5-2012 2-1-2012 Peddling and soliciting:
charitable roadway
solicitations
Ch. 235, Art. I
6-2012 Sale of property NCM
7-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
8-2012 3-7-2012 Administration amendment Ch. 3
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:957
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
9-2012 3-7-2012 Administration amendment Ch. 3
10-2012 3-7-2012 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
11-2012 4-4-2012 Vacation of right-of-way NCM
12-2012 4-4-2012 Dogs on beaches
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. I
13-2012 4-4-2012 Use of beaches amendment Ch. 105, Art. IV
14-2012 4-4-2012 Use of beaches amendment Ch. 105, Art. IV
15-2012 4-4-2012 Beaches and recreational
facilities: automobile and
other vehicles amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
16-2012 Withdrawn
17-2012 Not adopted
18-2012 6-20-2012 Sale of ice cream on
beaches
Ch. 105, Art. VII
19-2012 Bond NCM
20-2012 6-20-2012 Amusement games
amendment
Ch. 95
21-2012 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
22-2012 8-1-2012 Beaches and recreational
facilities: automobile and
other vehicles amendment
Ch. 105, Art. V
23-2012 8-1-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
24-2012 8-1-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
25-2012 9-19-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
26-2012 10-17-2012 Brush, weeds and other
debris amendment
Ch. 115
27-2012 10-17-2012 Bulkheads amendment Ch. 127
28-2012 10-17-2012 Development fees
amendment
Ch. 150
29-2012 11-7-2012 Refunding bond NCM
1-2013 3-6-2013 Administration amendment Ch. 3
2-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3-2013 5-1-2013 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 181
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:958
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
4-2013 Temporary waiver of
ordinance
NCM
5-2013 5-15-2013 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
6-2013 Bond NCM
7-2013 Not adopted
8-2013 Not adopted
9-2013 8-7-2013 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
10-2013 Bond NCM
11-2013 10-17-2013 Unsafe buildings
amendment
Ch. 123
12-2013 10-17-2013 Abandoned property Ch. 237
13-2013 Tabled
14-2013 Bond NCM
15-2013 Emergency budget
appropriation
NCM
16-2013 Tabled
1-2014 Fee ordinance Not adopted
2-2014 Administration amendment Not adopted
3-2014 3-19-2014 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
4-2014 3-19-2014 Beaches and recreational
facilities: sale of ice cream
on beaches amendment
Ch. 105, Art. VII
5-2014 4-2-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
6-2014 4-16-2014 Street vacation NCM
7-2014 5-7-2014 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
8-2014 5-7-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
9-2014 Smoking on public grounds Tabled
10-2014 8-6-2014 Grant of consent for use of
public streets (South Jersey
Gas Company)
NCM
11-2014 8-6-2014 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
12-2014 8-20-2014 Recreational facilities:
general provisions
amendment
Ch. 241, Art. I
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:959
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
13-2014 9-3-2014 Bond NCM
14-2014 10-15-2014 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 181
15-2014 11-5-2014 Smoking on City-owned
property
Ch. 257, Art. I
1-2015 2-4-2015 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
2-2015 Salaries and compensation Not adopted
3-2015 5-18-2015 Beaches and recreational
facilities: sale of ice cream
on beaches amendment
Ch. 105, Art. VII
4-2015 3-18-2015 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
5-2015 4-1-2015 Economic Development,
Tourism and Special Events
Advisory Committee
Ch. 22
6-2015 4-1-2015 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
7-2015 5-6-2015 Beaches and recreational
facilities: use of beaches
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. IV
8-2015 5-20-2015 Bond NCM
9-2015 5-20-2015 Bond NCM
10-2015 5-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
11-2015 5-20-2015 Development fees
amendment
Ch. 150
12-2015 6-17-2015 Bond NCM
13-2015 9-2-2015 Brush, weeds and other
debris amendment
Ch. 115
14-2015 9-2-2015 Administration amendment Ch. 3
15-2015 11-4-2015 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
16-2015 11-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
17-2015 11-4-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
18-2015 12-16-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
1-2016 1-20-2016 Land use amendment Ch. 198
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:960
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2-2016 1-20-2016 Abandoned property:
abandoned property list
Ch. 237, Art. II
3-2016 2-3-2016 Budget NCM
4-2016 2-3-2016 Golf Course Advisory
Committee
Ch. 30
5-2016 3-2-2016 Mercantile businesses: fees
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
6-2016 3-16-2016 Recycling Ch. 242
7-2016 Tabled
8-2016 8-3-2016 Bamboo Ch. 98
9-2016 8-3-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
10-2016 10-16-2016 Nuisances: dumping of
debris in catch basins
amendment
Ch. 220, Art. V
1-2017 2-1-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
2-2017 2-15-2017 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
3-2017 2-15-2017 Sustainable Brigantine
Green Team
Ch. 65
4-2017 2-15-2017 Brigantine Beach
Committee
Ch. 6
5-2017 3-1-2017 Appropriation NCM
6-2017 3-15-2017 Payroll procedures: direct
deposit
Ch. 45, Art. I
7-2017 3-15-2017 Sale of ice cream on
beaches amendment
Ch. 105, Art. VII
8-2017 3-15-2017 Salaries and compensation See Ch. 61
9-2017 4-5-2017 Political contributions Ch. 236
10-2017 Not adopted
11-2017 4-5-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
12-2017 4-19-2017 Appropriation NCM
13-2017 4-19-2017 Appropriation NCM
14-2017 4-19-2017 Appropriation NCM
15-2017 4-19-2017 Bond NCM
16-2017 4-19-2017 Mercantile businesses: fee
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:961
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
17-2017 4-19-2017 Nuisances: release of
balloons
Ch. 220, Art. VII
18-2017 5-3-2017 Bond NCM
19-2017 6-7-2017 Use of beaches amendment Ch. 105, Art. IV
20-2017 6-7-2017 Dumpsters amendment Ch. 144
21-2017 6-21-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
22-2017 8-2-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 284
23-2017 10-18-2017 Mercantile businesses: fee
schedule amendment
Ch. 210, Art. II
24-2017 Not adopted
25-2017 12-6-2017 Use of beaches
amendment; mercantile
businesses: fee schedule
amendment
Ch. 105, Art. IV;
Ch. 210, Art. II
26-2017 12-20-2017 Property maintenance:
adoption of standards
amendment
Ch. 238, Art. I
1-2018 2-7-2018 Flood Damage Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 181
2-2018 2-7-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284
3-2018 2-21-2018 Salaries and Compensation See Ch. 61
4-2018 2-21-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
5-2018 3-7-2018 Administration Amendment Ch. 3
6-2018 3-7-2018 Bond NCM
7-2018 4-18-2018 Bond NCM
8-2018 4-18-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 198
9-2018 5-16-2018 Salaries and Compensation See Ch. 61
10-2018 4-25-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
11-2018 4-25-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
12-2018 6-6-2018 Renaming of Portion of
Street
NCM
13-2018 5-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284
14-2018 8-15-2018 Flood Damage Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 181
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:962
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-2018 8-15-2018 Development Fees Ch. 150
16-2018 8-15-2018 Affordable Housing Ch. 85
17-2018 8-15-2018 Affordable Housing
Amendment
Ch. 85
18-2018 8-15-2018 Land Use Amendment Ch. 198
19-2018 8-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284
20-2018 8-15-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284
21-2018 9-5-2018 Mercantile Businesses:
Single-Use Carryout Bags
Ch. 210, Art. V
22-2018 10-3-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284
23-2018 10-3-2018 Beach and Dune Protection
Amendment
Ch. 101
24-2018 10-3-2018 Bond NCM
25-2018 11-7-2018 Bond NCM
26-2018 11-7-2018 Bond NCM
27-2018 11-7-2018 Purchase of Land NCM
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp
No.
1-2019 2-6-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284 33
2-2019 2-20-2019 Beach and Dune
Protection Amendment
Ch. 101 33
3-2019 3-6-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 33
4-2019 3-20-2019 Mercantile Businesses
Amendment; Taxicabs
Amendment
Ch. 210; Ch.
270
33
5-2019 3-20-2019 Salaries and
Compensation
See Ch. 61 33
6-2019 3-20-2019 Excavations: Street
Openings Amendment
Ch. 165, Art.
II
33
7-2019 3-20-2019 Beaches and
Recreational Facilities:
Automobiles and Other
Vehicles Amendment
Ch. 105, Art.
V
33
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:963
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp
No.
8-2019 4-17-2019 Rental Property
Amendment
Ch. 246 33
9-2019 5-15-2019 Bond NCM 33
10-2019 6-5-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284 33
11-2019 6-5-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284 33
12-2019 8-7-2019 Bond NCM 33
13-2019 8-7-2019 Bond NCM 33
14-2019 8-7-2019 Parking Lots:
Commercial Parking
Lots Amendment
Ch. 234, Art.
II
33
15-2019 8-7-2019 Beaches and
Recreational Facilities:
Automobiles and Other
Vehicles Amendment
Ch. 105, Art.
V
33
16-2019 9-4-2019 Garden Club Advisory
Board
Ch. 39 33
17-2019 9-4-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284 33
18-2019 Withdrawn
19-2019 11-6-2019 Administration
Amendment; Beaches
and Recreational
Facilities Amendment
Ch. 3; Ch.105 33
20-2019 11-6-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284 33
21-2019 12-4-2019 Grant NCM 33
22-2019 12-4-2019 Eliminating Golf Course
Utility
NCM 33
23-2019 12-18-2019 Salaries NCM 33
24-2019 12-18-2019 Mercantile Businesses
Amendment
Ch. 210 33
25-2019 12-18-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 284 33
26-2019 12-18-2019 Easement NCM 33
§ DL-1 BRIGANTINE CODE § DL-1
1:964