Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Code of the Borough of
Brielle, 1988", and may be so cited.
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require, the following definitions shall be used in the Code:
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Brielle in the County of Monmouth
and State of New Jersey.
CLERK OR BOROUGH CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Monmouth.
DAYS — Shall mean calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the government
established or designated by ordinance or otherwise, together with any
agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to such
organizational unit by the Governing Body.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Brielle.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or Chapter of this Code.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words swear and sworn
shall be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OCCUPANT — See tenant.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL — And the title of an officer or official shall be
construed as if the words of the Borough of Brielle followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this Code, so long as it is adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it
remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
1:1
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall include any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind or personal representatives of any kind thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Shall mean goods and chattels, rights and
credits, moneys and effects, evidences of debt, and all written instruments
by which any right to, interest in, or lien or encumbrances upon, property
or any debt or financial obligation as created, acknowledged, evidenced,
transferred, discharged or defeated, in whole or in part, and every thing,
except real property as herein defined, which may be the subject of
ownership.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the Borough.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments, all
rights thereto and interests therein.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STREET — Shall include an avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
Street shall be considered to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the
contrary is expressed or unless such construction is inconsistent with the
apparent intent.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether
alone or with others.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
§ 1-2 BRIELLE CODE § 1-3
1:2
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and may is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Borough are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Revision, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during
any day in any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Revision shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether
or not such designation is included in the citation.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the Code identified by
Arabic numbers and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a Chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [New]
If any Chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such Chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining Chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Revision.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [New]
For violation of any provision of this Code, or other ordinance of the
Borough of Brielle, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in
§ 1-3 GENERAL § 1-5.1
1:3
connection with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be one or more of the following: a fine not
exceeding $1,250 for each and every offense or imprisonment in the County
Jail for not more than 90 days, or to a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 1-5.2. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Borough exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.3. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in the general penalty clause of this section is
not intended to state an appropriate penalty for each and every violation.
Any lesser penalty, including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be
appropriate for a particular case or a particular violation.
§ 1-5.4. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Governing Body may prescribe that, for the violation of any particular
Code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed
which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding
$100.
§ 1-6. CODE OF THE BOROUGH OF BRIELLE TO BE MAINTAINED
BY BOROUGH CLERK. [New]
It shall be the duty of the Borough Clerk or someone authorized and
directed by the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing "The Code of the Borough of Brielle, 1988" required to be filed in
the office of the Borough Clerk for the use of the public. All changes in the
Revision and all ordinances adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the adoption of the Code, which the Governing Body shall adopt specifically
as a part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such change or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to the Code, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1-5.1 BRIELLE CODE § 1-6
1:4
ARTICLE I
MAYOR AND BOROUGH COUNCIL
§ 2-1. THE GOVERNING BODY.
§ 2-1.1. Organizational Meeting; Date and Time Established. [Ord.
#315; Ord. #666, 1972 Code § 9-1; New; Ord. #847]
The Governing Body shall now hold its annual organizational or
reorganization meeting during the first seven days of January of each year
in compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:60-3.
The exact date and time shall be determined by the Mayor and Council at
their final meeting held in the preceding year and by the dissemination of
the date and time in compliance with the provisions of P.L. 1975, c.231 The
Open Public Meetings Act.
The meeting shall be held at the designated prevailing time in the Council
Chambers of the Municipal Building, 601 Union Lane, Brielle, New Jersey.
§ 2-1.2. First Monthly Meeting of the Year. [Ord. #847]
The Governing Body may, at their discretion, elect to conduct their first
monthly meeting of January of any year in conjunction with the
organization/reorganization meeting, provided that proper notice is given in
compliance with P.L. 1975 c. 231.
§ 2-1.3. Council Liaison. [Ord. #966]
The Governing Body shall have the right to appoint a Council Liaison to any
entity, public or private that is funded by the Borough of Brielle using public
money. The purpose of the Council Liaison is to keep the Governing Body
advised of the activities of such entity and to act as an intermediary between
that body and the Mayor and Council.
The Liaison shall have the right to be in attendance at all meetings of
such entities and shall not be excluded from attendance at those sessions
commonly referred to as Executive Session under the provisions of "The
Open Public Meetings Act" (N.J.S.A. 10-4.6).
When attending an Executive Session the Council Liaison shall be bound by
the same restrictions that apply to an Executive Session of the Governing
Body and any matters discussed in such a session shall be reported to the
Governing Body in Executive Session to ensure confidentiality.
§ 2-1 GENERAL § 2-1.3
1:5

ARTICLE II
OFFICE OF THE MUNICIPAL CLERK
§ 2-2. MUNICIPAL CLERK.
§ 2-2.1. Office Created. [Ord. #663; 1972 Code § 10-1]
There is hereby created the office of Municipal Clerk in the Borough of
Brielle.
§ 2-2.2. Appointment and Term. [Ord. #663; 1972 Code § 10-2A]
The Municipal Clerk shall be appointed by the Governing Body of the
Borough. The term of office of Municipal Clerk shall be for three years from
January 1 in the year in which he or she was appointed.
§ 2-2.3. Duties of the Municipal Clerk. [Ord. #663; 1972 Code
§ 10-2B G; Ord. No. 1064-2017]
a. General. The Municipal Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Council,
keep a correct record of all its proceedings and make such record
available in a timely manner, certify all records and municipal
documents, have the power and authority to take and administer oaths
and affirmations in Borough matters, and perform all the functions of
municipal clerks as specified by law. The Clerk shall assist the
Governing Body in the preparation of the annual budget and make
recommendations thereon. After adoption of the annual budget, the
Clerk shall see to it that the same is properly administered and
implemented. In addition, he shall perform such other duties as the
Council may require. In addition to the foregoing, the Clerk shall be
responsible for the day-to-day functions of all municipal services and
functions. All department heads are responsible to the Municipal Clerk
who shall be responsible to report as to the status of the functioning of
such department to the Governing Body. The Clerk shall be responsible
for the providing of efficient delivery of all municipal services and of all
municipal duties except for the Police Department. The Clerk shall
supervise, integrate and coordinate the functions of all departments.
The Clerk shall further integrate and coordinate the functions of the
boards, independent agencies, agencies, and employees of the Borough
except for the Police Department. The Clerk shall be responsible to
assure that the organizational chart adopted by resolution annually by
the Governing Body is implemented. The Clerk shall further implement
such policies and directives as are adopted by the Governing Body.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Clerk shall not have the power to
hire, discharge or promote personnel, but shall have the power to make
recommendation as to same to the Governing Body. The Clerk shall
provide by December 1 of every year an annual performance review of
all employees. Such reviews may be prepared by the department heads
reporting to the Clerk and shall be made a part of each employee's
personal file. He shall coordinate the purchasing of supplies, services,
§ 2-2 GENERAL § 2-2.3
1:7
materials and equipment. He shall cause to have certified the receipt of
the same and attend to the submission of proper vouchers for payment
and review of all disbursements in connection therewith.
b. Records. In addition to recording ordinances and resolutions of a
permanent character, the Clerk shall have custody of and shall safely
keep all records, books and documents of the borough, except those
committed by ordinance to any other office or transferred thereto by
the Governing Body. He shall, upon request and upon the payment of
the fees prescribed therefor by resolution of the Council for the use of
the Borough, furnish a certified copy of such paper in his custody, under
the corporate seal of the Borough. (N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2)
c. Filing of Rules, Regulations. All rules or general regulations made by
any department, officer, agency or authority of the Borough shall be
filed with the Clerk. The Clerk shall maintain a current compilation of
all such rules and regulations, which shall be available for public
inspection in his office during business hours.
d. Custodian of Borough Seal. The Clerk shall be the custodian of the
Borough seal. The Clerk shall cause the corporate seal of the Borough
to be affixed to instruments and writing when authorized by ordinance
or resolution of the Council or when necessary to exemplify any
document on record in his office or to certify any act or paper which,
from the records in his office, shall appear to have been a public act of
the Borough or a public document. He shall not affix the Seal or cause it
to be affixed to any other instrument or writing or other paper, unless
required by State Statute or ordinance of the Borough.
e. Duties Regarding Sureties, Bonds, Leases; Reports Required. The
Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Mayor and Council shall:
1. Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any officer or employee, all insurance
policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the benefit of the
Borough or to protect it against any claim, demand or liability
whatsoever, and all formal contracts for work, labor services,
supplies, equipment and materials to which the Borough may be a
party. (N.J.S.A. 40A:5-34)
2. Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Borough as obligee, or any other form of security
given by any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on
account of work done or to be done in or for the Borough.
3. Have custody of all leases or property owned by the Borough.
4. Report to the Council, at such time as may be required, on the
coverage, premium and expiration date of each surety bond and
insurance contract and the terms of leases and their expiration
dates.
§ 2-2.3 BRIELLE CODE § 2-2.3
1:8
§ 2-2.4. Residency. [Ord. #663; 1972 Code § 10-2H]
The Borough hereby waives the requirement that the Municipal Clerk
reside in Brielle.
§ 2-2.5. Deputy Municipal Clerk. [Ord. #194, 1972 Code § 11-1 —
§ 11-3]
f. Additional Duties. The Clerk shall also:
1. Administer the provisions of the Borough ordinances with
reference to the licensing of occupations and activities for which
licenses are required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the
Clerk.
2. Keep a calendar of all matters pending before the Council and shall
prepare the required agendas.
3. Administer the provisions as the "Administrative Official" of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. and as designated therein.
4. Act as the issuing authority to approve the granting of raffle and
gaming licenses as provided by Law.
a. Office Created. There is hereby created the office of Deputy Municipal
Clerk in the Borough of Brielle.
b. Duties. The person appointed to the office of Deputy Municipal Clerk in
the Borough shall do and perform all of the duties assigned to him by
the Municipal Clerk of this Borough and the Borough Council in relation
to such office, and shall have all the powers and perform all the duties
of the Municipal Clerk at such times and for such specific periods when
the Municipal Clerk is absent.
c. Appointment; Term of Office. The Deputy Municipal Clerk shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council for a one year
term commencing January 1.
§ 2-2.3 GENERAL § 2-2.5
1:9

ARTICLE III
OFFICE OF THE BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR
§ 2-3. BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-3.1. Office Created. [Ord. #695; 1972 Code § 6A-1]
The position of Borough Business Administrator is established in the
Borough of Brielle and in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 2-3.2. Appointment; Vacancy. [Ord. #695; 1972 Code § 6A-2]
The Business Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor and the
appointment confirmed by the Council in accordance with the Statutes of
New Jersey. The person appointed as Business Administrator shall hold
office until December 31 next following the appointment thereof. A vacancy
in the position of Business Administrator shall be filled in the same manner
as above and for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-3.3. Qualifications of Business Administrator. [Ord. #695; 1972
Code § 6A-3]
The Business Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of his or her
administrative abilities and with special emphasis being given to experience
in local municipal government including but not limited to local ordinances,
local governmental operations, municipal finance, Federal and State laws,
regulations and programs. Further, the Business Administrator may hold
one or more other municipal positions in the Borough while at the same
time fulfilling the duties and responsibilities of the position of Business
Administrator.
§ 2-3.4. Compensation. [Ord. #695; 1972 Code § 6A-4]
The Business Administrator shall be paid a salary as designated in the
Salary ordinance, payable bi-weekly or in conformance with prevailing
payroll procedures. The salary shall commence on the date of appointment
and confirmation as Business Administrator.
§ 2-3.5. Duties as Chief Administrative Officer. [Ord. #695; 1972
Code § 6A-5]
The Business Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Borough. The Business Administrator shall exercise supervision over all the
Departments of the Borough, except the Police Department, to the extent
permitted by law. Further, the Business Administrator shall be subject to the
decisions, directives and policies as established by the Borough Council.
§ 2-3.6. Duties and Responsibilities. [Ord. #695; 1972 Code § 6A-6]
The Business Administrator shall have the following duties and
responsibilities which are not intended to be all inclusive but rather to
§ 2-3 GENERAL § 2-3.6
1:11
be broad outlines of the duties and responsibilities of the Business
Administrator's Office.
a. With the approval of the Governing Body, research, initiate and carryout
efficient and economical administrative, personnel and purchasing
procedures for all departments, offices, boards and agencies of the
Borough;
b. After consultation with department heads, develop personnel practices
consistent with the proper assignment of jobs;
c. Act as Chief Administrative Officer in the implementation of the
decisions and policies of the Governing Body;
d. Act as the liaison between the Governing Body and the officers and
employees of the Borough. This responsibility is not intended to
preclude the direct discussion between the members of the Governing
Body and any officer or employee of the Borough. It is intended rather
to designate one person who shall receive complaints,
recommendations and any other information which must or may be
presented to the Governing Body for decisions;
e. Investigate and report to the Governing Body the availability of
financial and other aid from the Federal and State governments;
f. Attend all meetings of the Governing Body and, in addition thereto,
attend meetings of department heads and other meetings of municipal
business whenever necessary or advisable;
g. Assist and advise the Governing Body in the preparation of the
municipal budgets;
h. Perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to
the Business Administrator by the Governing Body;
i. The above duties and responsibilities may be amended, deleted,
transferred, and increased by resolution of the Governing Body duly
adopted.
§ 2-3.6 BRIELLE CODE § 2-3.6
1:12
ARTICLE IV
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 2-4. OFFICES AND POSITIONS ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-4.1. Borough Attorney. [Ord. #415, 1972 Code § 6-1, § 6-2, § 6-4]
§ 2-4.2. Borough Engineer. [Ord. #415; Ord. #505; 1972 Code § 6-1;
§ 6-3]
§ 2-4.3. Municipal Prosecutor. [Ord. #530; 1972 Code § 6-7, § 6-8,
§ 6-11, § 6-12; Ord. #870]
a. Office Created. There is hereby created the office of Borough Attorney
of the Borough of Brielle.
b. Qualifications and Duties of Attorney. The person appointed to the office
of Borough Attorney shall be a practicing attorney in New Jersey and
shall do and perform all of the duties assigned to him by the Governing
Body of this borough in relation to such office.
c. Term of Office. The Borough Attorney shall hold such office for one year
commencing January 1 annually and shall be appointed by the Mayor
and confirmed by the Council.
a. Office Created. There is hereby created the office of Borough Engineer
of the Borough of Brielle.
b. Qualifications and Duties of Engineer. The person appointed to the
office of Borough Engineer shall be a licensed professional engineer of
the State of New Jersey and shall do and perform all of the duties
assigned to him by the Governing Body of this borough in relation to
such office.
c. Term of Office. The Borough Engineer shall hold such office for one year
commencing January 1 and shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the Council.
a. Office Created. There is hereby created the Office of Municipal
Prosecutor.
b. Duties of Municipal Prosecutor. The person appointed to the Office of
Municipal Prosecutor shall represent the members of the Police
Department of the Borough in all proceedings brought in the Municipal
Court of the Borough, and shall perform any and all duties assigned to
him by the Governing Body of this Borough in relation to such office
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1996, C.95, which states that the
Municipal Prosecutor shall be under the supervision of the Attorney
General or County Prosecutor.
c. Qualifications and Terms of Office. The person appointed to the office of
Municipal Prosecutor shall be a duly licensed attorney in good standing
§ 2-4 GENERAL § 2-4.3
1:13
§ 2-4.4. Planning Board Attorney. [Ord. #530; 1972 Code § 6-7,
§ 6-9, § 6-11, § 6-12]
§ 2-4.5. Board of Adjustment Attorney. [Ord. #530, 1972 Code § 6-7,
§ 6-10, § 6-11, § 6-12]
§ 2-4.6. Assistant Municipal Clerk; Assistant Treasurer; Assistant
Tax Collector; Assistant Water Rent Collector. [Ord. #527; 1972
Code § 22-1, § 22-2, § 22-3]
of the State of New Jersey and shall hold office for a term not exceeding
one year or beyond December 31 of the year of his or her appointment.
d. Compensation. The compensation of the Municipal Prosecutor shall be
fixed by the Council in the salary ordinance.
a. Office Created. There is hereby created the Office of Planning Board
Attorney.
b. Duties. The Planning Board Attorney shall represent the Planning
Board of the Borough and shall perform all duties assigned to him by
the Planning Board.
c. Qualifications and Terms of Office. The person appointed to the office of
Planning Board Attorney shall be a duly licensed attorney in good
standing of the State of New Jersey and shall hold office for a term not
exceeding one year or beyond December 31 of the year of his or her
appointment.
d. Compensation. The compensation of the Planning Board Attorney shall
be fixed by the Planning Board.
a. Office Created. There is hereby created the Office of Attorney for the
Board of Adjustment.
b. Duties. The Board of Adjustment Attorney shall represent and perform
all duties assigned to him by the Board of Adjustment.
c. Qualifications and Terms of Office. The person appointed to the Office of
Board of Adjustment Attorney shall be a duly licensed attorney in good
standing in the State of New Jersey and shall hold office for a term not
exceeding one year or beyond December 31 of the year of his or her
appointment.
d. Compensation. The compensation of the Board of Adjustment Attorney
shall be fixed by the Board of Adjustment.
a. Offices Created. There are hereby created the offices of Assistant
Municipal Clerk, Assistant Treasurer, Assistant Tax Collector and
Assistant Water Rent Collector in the Borough.
b. Duties. The person or persons appointed to the aforesaid offices in the
Borough shall do and perform all of the duties assigned to him or her by
§ 2-4.3 BRIELLE CODE § 2-4.6
1:14
§ 2-4.7. Purchasing Agent. [Ord. #565; 1972 Code § 30-1; § 30-2]
§ 2-4.8. Relocation Officer. [Ord. #488; 1972 Code § 31-1, § 31-2,
§ 31-3]
the officer to whom he or she is an Assistant and by the Borough
Council in relation to such office. If so directed by the Council, he or she
shall have all the powers and shall perform all the duties of the office
held by the person to whom he or she is an Assistant.
c. Appointments; Terms of Office. The Assistant Municipal Clerk, the
Assistant Treasurer, the Assistant Tax Collector and the Assistant Water
Rent Collector shall each hold such office initially commencing as of the
date of appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by the Council and
until the end of the calendar year in which such appointment and
confirmation shall have taken place. Thereafter, they shall each hold
such office for one year, commencing January 1 annually, and shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council.
a. Office Established. There is hereby established, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-9, the office of Purchasing Agent, whose term of office shall be
one year, expiring on December 31 annually. The Purchasing Agent
shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, and he
shall exercise the powers prescribed herein, at a salary fixed by
resolution. It is the intent of this subsection to encourage open and
competitive bidding and to award contracts to the lowest bidder.
b. Powers and Duties.
1. He shall have the duty and power to purchase and contract for all
work, materials and supplies needed by any department, unit or
agency of the Borough pursuant to the Public Contracts Law.
2. He shall be authorized to purchase work, materials, supplies or
services up to $1,000.
3. He shall be authorized to purchase work, materials, supplies or
services from $1,000 to less than $7,500 after attempting to secure
a minimum of two quotations and after approval of the Chairman of
the department involved.
4. He shall be authorized to prepare bids and specifications for the
purchase of work, materials, supplies or services in the amount of
$7,500 or more, the bids to be awarded by the Council. The award
of such bids shall be made, after public advertising, to the lowest
responsible bidder and upon execution of a written contract.
a. Position Established. The position of Relocation Officer of the Borough
is hereby established.
b. Duties. The duties of the Relocation Officer shall be those set forth in
the Statutes of the United States and of the State of New Jersey, and the
§ 2-4.6 GENERAL § 2-4.8
1:15
§ 2-4.9. Chief Financial Officer. [Ord. #762]
§ 2-4.10. Municipal Public Defender. [Ord. #886, § 1]
regulations of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development and of the State of New Jersey.
c. Salary. The salary of the Relocation Officer may be established by
resolution of the Governing Body, but in no event shall such salary
exceed $500 per year.
a. The position of Chief Financial Officer is hereby established.
b. The person employed in this position shall be responsible to carry out
all duties and functions provided for in Chapter 9 of Title 40A of the
New Jersey Statutes and shall perform such duties as the Mayor and
Council may, from time to time, direct.
a. Public Defender, Appointment. There is hereby created within the
Department of Law, for administrative purposes, but independent from
the Department of Law, a Municipal Public Defender who shall be
appointed by the Borough Council. The Borough Council may appoint a
Chief Municipal Public Defender and such Deputy Municipal Public
Defenders as may be determined by the Borough Council to be
necessary.
b. Qualifications. In accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1997, Chapter
256, the Municipal Public Defender and any Deputy Municipal Public
Defenders shall be qualified as an attorney-at-law of the State of New
Jersey in good standing and shall represent those defendants appearing
in Municipal Court who are determined by the Court to be indigent and
whose representation is assigned to the Borough Public Defender by
the Court.
c. Term. The Municipal Public Defender, Chief Municipal Public Defender
or Deputy Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed for a term of
one year from the date of appointment and may continue to serve in
office pending reappointment or appointment of a successor.
d. Compensation. The Municipal Public Defender, Chief Municipal Public
Defender or Deputy Municipal Public Defender shall be compensated in
the manner established by ordinance.
e. Chief Municipal Public Defender. The Chief Municipal Public Defender
shall have all of the duties provided by P.L. 1997, Chapter 256 in the
representation of indigent defendants in proceedings over which the
Borough of Brielle Municipal Court has jurisdiction and shall have
authority over any Deputy Municipal Defenders that may be appointed
by the Borough Council with respect to the performance of their duties.
f. Deputy Municipal Public Defender. The Deputy Municipal Public
Defender, if one or more shall be appointed, shall serve in the absence
§ 2-4.8 BRIELLE CODE § 2-4.10
1:16
or disqualification of the Chief Municipal Defender or when assigned by
the Chief Municipal Public Defender.
g. Representation of Private Clients. The Municipal Public Defenders may
represent private clients in the Municipal Court and before Borough
agencies, subject to the Rules of Court Governing the Conduct of
Lawyers, Judges and Court Personnel.
h. Application for Representation by the Public Defender. A person
applying for representation by the Municipal Public Defender shall pay
an application fee of $200. In accordance with P.L. 1997, Ch. 256 and
with guidelines promulgated by the Supreme Court, the Municipal
Court may waive any required application fee, in whole or in part, only
if the Court determines, in its discretion, upon a clear and convincing
showing by the applicant that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation. The
Municipal Court may permit a person to pay the application fee over a
specific period of time not to exceed four months.
i. Eligibility of Services. Eligibility for services of the Municipal Public
Defender shall be determined by the Municipal Court on the basis of the
need of the defendant, except as provided in paragraph j. Need shall be
measured as provided by law and in accordance with guidelines
promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court. In the event that a
determination of eligibility cannot be made before the time when the
first services are to be rendered, or if an initial determination is found
to be erroneous, the Municipal Court shall refer the defendant to the
Municipal Public Defender provisionally, and if subsequently it is
determined that the defendant is ineligible the Municipal Court shall
inform the defendant, and the defendant shall be obliged to engage his
own counsel and to reimburse the municipality for the cost of services
rendered to that time.
j. Representation by a Municipal Public Defender where a Person is
Under the Age of 18 Years. Whenever a person entitled to
representation by a Municipal Public Defender pursuant to this act, is
under the age of 18 years, the eligibility for services shall be
determined on the basis of the financial circumstances of the individual
and the financial circumstances of the individual's parents or legal
guardians. The municipality shall be entitled to recover the cost of legal
services from the parents or legal guardians as provided in paragraph
m of this act and the Municipal Court shall have authority to require
parents or legal guardians to execute and deliver the written request or
authorization required under the applicable law in order to provide the
Court with access to records of public or private sources, otherwise
confidential, as may be of aid to it in evaluating eligibility.
k. Investigation of Financial Status. The Municipal Court shall make an
investigation of the financial status of each defendant seeking
representation and shall have the authority to require a defendant to
execute and deliver written requests or authorizations required under
§ 2-4.10 GENERAL § 2-4.10
1:17
applicable law to provide the Court with access to records of public or
private sources, otherwise confidential, as may be of aid in evaluating
eligibility. As provided by law, the Court is authorized to obtain
information from any public record office of the State or of any
subdivision or agency thereof on request and without payment of the
fees ordinarily required by law.
l. Reimbursement to the Borough. As provided by P.L. 1997, Ch. 256, if
the defendant has or reasonably expects to have means to meet some
part, though not all, of the cost of the services rendered, the defendant
shall be required to reimburse the Borough and the Borough shall have
a lien on any property to which the defendant shall have or acquire an
interest for an amount equal to the reasonable value of the services
rendered to a defendant pursuant to this act as calculated at the same
rate as the Office of the Public Defender bills clients at that time.
m. Collection and Settlement of Claims. The Municipal Attorney may do all
things necessary to collect any money due to the Borough by way or
reimbursement for services rendered by the Municipal Public Defender.
The Municipal Attorney may enter into arrangements with any State or
County agency to handle collections on a cost basis. The Municipal
Attorney shall have all the remedies and proceedings available for
collection which are available for or upon the recovery of a judgment in
a civil action and shall also be permitted to collect counsel fees and
costs from the defendant. The Municipal Attorney is authorized to
compromise and settle any claim for services performed whenever the
financial circumstances of the person receiving the services are such
that, in the judgment of the Municipal Attorney, the best interest of the
Borough will be served by compromise and settlement.
n. Establishment of Fund. Funds collected from the application fee shall
be deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial
Officer of the Borough. The funds shall be used exclusively to meet the
costs incurred in providing the services of a Municipal Public Defender
including, when required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
o. Effective Dates. The Borough Council shall appoint a Municipal Public
Defender, as required by P.L. 1997, Ch. 256, not later than March 22,
1998. The application fee set forth in paragraph h shall take effect as of
December 22, 1997. In accordance with the provisions of P.L. 1997, Ch.
256, § 6c, the Borough shall not be required to pay for expert and lay
investigation or testimony prior to March 22, 1999.
§ 2-4.10 BRIELLE CODE § 2-4.10
1:18
ARTICLE V
MUNICIPAL COURT
§ 2-5. MUNICIPAL COURT.
§ 2-5.1. Municipal Court Established. [Ord. #144, 1972 Code § 20-1]
There is hereby established a Municipal Court in the Borough, to be known
as the "Municipal Court of the Borough of Brielle."
§ 2-5.2. Seal. [Ord. #144; 1972 Code § 20-2]
The Court shall have a seal, which seal shall bear the impress of the name
of the Court.
§ 2-5.3. Municipal Judge. [Ord. #144; 1972 Code § 20-3]
The Court shall be presided over by a Judge appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council. He shall have the qualifications
required by law and shall serve for a term of three years from the date of
his appointment and until his successor is appointed and has qualified.
§ 2-5.4. Powers, Duties and Jurisdiction. [Ord. #144; 1972 Code
§ 20-8; New]
The Municipal Court and the Municipal Judge thereof shall have, possess
and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred
by the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948 as amended and
supplemented, or by any other law.
§ 2-5.5. Clerk: Appointment, Term, Salary, Duties. [Ord. #144; 1972
Code § 20-7]
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. The salary of
the Clerk of the Municipal Court shall be fixed by the Mayor and Borough
Council. The Clerk shall perform such functions and duties as shall be
prescribed for him by law, the rules applicable to Municipal Courts and by
the Municipal Judge.
§ 2-5.6. Times for Holding of Municipal Court. [New]
The Municipal Court shall be held in the Borough Hall at such times as shall
be designated by resolution duly adopted by the Mayor and Council, and at
such other times as the business of the Court may require, subject to the
rules applicable to municipal courts.
§ 2-5 GENERAL § 2-5.6
1:19

ARTICLE VI
DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
§ 2-6. POLICE DEPARTMENT.1
§ 2-6.1. Establishment. [Ord. #1041-2015]
There is hereby created in and for the Borough of Brielle, in the County
of Monmouth and State of New Jersey, a Police Department. The Police
Department shall be known as the "Brielle Police Department."
The Brielle Department which shall consist of no more than a Chief of
Police, and one Captain, one Lieutenant, (5) Sergeants, a maximum of (8)
Police Officers, and (3) Special Law Enforcement Officers to be appointed
to these positions by the Chief of Police at the approval of the Public Safety
Committee with the budgetary approval of the Governing Body, as public
need may require.
The creation of these positions shall not require the Public Safety
Committee to fill each position and any position hereunder established may,
in the sole discretion of the Public Safety Committee, remain vacant.
§ 2-6.2. Designation of Appropriate Authority. [Ord. #1041-2015]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Public Safety Committee of the
Borough of Brielle is hereby designated as the Appropriate Authority and
is hereby vested with the powers and duties of an Appropriate Authority
as delegated by law. The Public Safety Committee shall also serve as the
hearing officer for all disciplinary hearings within the Department, unless
as designee is appointed and approved by the Governing Body.
The Public Safety Committee shall be defined as follows: The Chairman
of said Committee shall be the Police Commissioner and the other two
members shall be Deputy Police Commissioners, these two members shall
be appointed by the Chairman to serve as Fire Commissioner and First
Aid Commissioner. While collectively functioning as the Public Safety
Committee, each commissioner shall be directly responsible for their
specific area of public safety.
a. In addition, the Police Department may employ clerical personnel and
other employees to assist its officers in preserving peace and good
order in the Borough.
b. In cases of emergency the Chief of Police may make temporary
appointments until the next meeting of Council, and in the absence of
the Chief for any reason, emergency appointments shall be made by the
Public Safety Committee.
1. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 150; 808; 860; 1988 Code §§ 2-6.1
— 2-6.6
§ 2-6 GENERAL § 2-6.3
1:21
§ 2-6.3. Chief of Police. [Ord. #1041-2015]
There is hereby created within the Department of Police the position of
Chief of Police, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council. The Chief
of Police shall be directly responsible to the Public Safety Committee as the
appropriate authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations
thereof, pursuant to policies established by the appropriate authority under
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
§ 2-6.4. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #1041-2015]
The Public Safety Committee as the "Appropriate Authority" shall, from time
to time as may be necessary, adopt and amend the rules and regulations
for the government and discipline of the Police Department and employees
thereof. Said rules and regulations may fix and provide for the enforcement
of such rules and regulations and the enforcement of penalties for the
violation of such rules and regulations. All employees of the Police
Department shall be subject to such rules and regulations and penalties.
§ 2-6.5. Disciplinary Actions. [Ord. #1041-2015]
Discipline of employees and police officers will be imposed consistent with
New Jersey State statutes and the Rules and Regulations of the Brielle
Police Department. Employees may be subject to discipline for violating
laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations and written directives.
§ 2-6.6. Appointment of Police Department, Officers and Personnel.
[Ord. #1041-2015]
No person shall be appointed to the Police Department who is not qualified
as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The selection criteria for a police
officer shall be established in the Department Policy consistent with New
Jersey Statutes.
a. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the force and its officers
and personnel.
b. Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
force.
c. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
d. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his direction and
supervision; and
e. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by such authority on the operation of the force
during the preceding month, and make such other reports as may be
requested by such authority.
§ 2-6.3 BRIELLE CODE § 2-6.7
1:22
§ 2-6.7. Private Employment of Off-Duty Police Personnel. [Ord.
#1041-2015]
Members of the Brielle Police Department shall be permitted to accept
employment as safety or security personnel for private employers only
during off-duty hours and at such times as will not interfere with the
efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the
Borough.
Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police officers shall first
obtain the approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall be granted
if, in the opinion of the Chief, such employment would not be inconsistent
with the efficient functioning and good reputation of the Brielle Police
Department, and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety
or health of the officer or officers who are to perform the work.
All private employers shall pay directly to the Borough's Chief Municipal
Financial Officer the hourly sum of $90 per officer for the work performed.
If additional work time is required due to unanticipated circumstances and
such work is approved by the Police Chief, or his representative, the private
employer shall be liable for payment to the Borough for all such additional
hours worked at the specified rate of $90 per hour and shall indicate his
prior consent in writing to the Chief of Police or his representative.
§ 2-6.8. Special Law Enforcement Officers. [Ord. #1041-2015]
The Borough of Brielle shall appoint Special Law Enforcement Officers
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.
§ 2-6A. EMERGENCY POLICE ASSISTANCE FROM OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES.
§ 2-6A.1. Definitions. [Ord. #769, § 1]
BRIELLE — Shall mean the Borough of Brielle, County of Monmouth and
State of New Jersey.
CHIEF — Shall mean Chief of Police of the Borough of Brielle.
MAYOR — Shall mean the Mayor of the Borough of Brielle.
SHIFT SUPERVISOR — Shall mean the designee of the Chief or head of the
Police Department in the absence of the Chief.
§ 2-6A.2. Procedure. [Ord. #769, § 2; Ord. #890]
a. Be it enacted by the Borough of Brielle, in the County of Monmouth, an
ordinance establishing the participation of the Borough of Brielle in a
County-wide compact which shall be known as the "Monmouth County
Mutual Aid Agreement."
§ 2-6.7 GENERAL § 2-6A.2
1:23
§ 2-6A.3. Copy of Agreement. [Ord. #769, § 3]
A copy of this section shall be kept on file and made available for public
inspection at the Borough Clerk's Office located at 601 Union Lane, Brielle,
New Jersey, during regular business hours.
§ 2-7. FIRE DEPARTMENT.2
§ 2-7.1. Department Established; Companies Cited. [Ord. #8; 1972
Code § 14-1]
The Fire Department of the Borough shall consist of Brielle Fire Company
No. 1.
§ 2-7.2. Control of Fire Apparatus. [Ord. #8; 1972 Code § 14-2]
The Company shall have charge of all fire apparatus belonging to the
Borough.
§ 2-7.3. Determination of Active Membership. [Ord. #8, 1972 Code
§ 14-3]
Active members shall be determined by the record of attendance and
service at fires. Active members shall be present at every alarm of fire or
This subsection is created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48- 1(6) and N.J.S.A.
40A:14-156.1 and is adopted as a reciprocal agreement with all
municipalities participating in the County-wide municipal compact.
Pursuant to this agreement, the municipality of Brielle shall render
assistance to any participating municipality by providing members of
the Brielle Police Department, upon request, to help preserve the public
peace and order.
The municipality requesting assistance shall compensate the officers at
an agreed-upon rate by forwarding payment to the municipality, which
will then compensate those officers who rendered assistance.
b. In the event that a member of the Brielle Police Department is injured
while rendering assistance to a participating municipality, the
municipality providing assistance shall be primarily responsible for any
costs as a result of injury and shall be responsible for all expenses
incurred as a result of a worker's compensation claim filed by the
injured officer.
This ordinance is separate and distinct from any mutual aid agreements
previously entered into between the Borough of Brielle and any other
municipalities and shall remain in full force and effect until specifically
repealed by an affirmative act of the Governing Body of the Borough of
Brielle.
2. Editor's Note: See Section 2-17 for Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP).
§ 2-6A.2 BRIELLE CODE § 2-7.3
1:24
be excused by the Foreman of the Company in writing to the Chief for each
nonattendance.
§ 2-7.4. Volunteer Companies. [Ord. #8; 1972 Code, § 14-4]
A volunteer company shall consist of such volunteer fire organization as
may now and hereafter exist in the Borough.
§ 2-7.5. Fire Department Officers. [Ord. #8; 1972 Code § 14-5]
There shall be a Chief, Assistant Chief of the Fire Department and such
other subordinate officers as are designated by the Council.
§ 2-7.6. Election of Chief and Deputy Chief; Confirmation; Vacancies
in Office. [Ord. #8; 1972 Code § 14-6]
The Chief and Assistant Chief shall be elected annually by the Fire Company
duly assembled for that purpose on the first Thursday of December in the
meeting room of the Fire Company; the votes of a majority of the members
present and voting at such election shall be sufficient to elect such officers.
The election of these officers shall be confirmed by Council, and they shall
hold their respective offices at the pleasure of the Council. Any vacancy
shall be filled by the Council, the appointee to hold office until the next
election.
§ 2-7.7. Membership in Fire Company. [Ord. #8; Ord. #308, 1972
Code § 14-7]
No person shall become a member of this Company unless he be
recommended and approved by a two-thirds majority vote of the members
of the Company as a person to be appointed a fireman and who shall in all
other respects be qualified to become a member of the Company.
§ 2-7.8. Badges of Members. [Ord. #8; 1972 Code § 14-10]
Each member shall receive a metallic badge upon the terms and
specifications hereinafter specified.
§ 2-7.9. Duties of Chief. [Ord. #8; 1972 Code, § 14-11; § 14-12;
§ 14-13; § 14-15]
a. Minimum Age of Members. No person shall become a member of the
Company unless he is above the age of 18 years.
b. Confirmation by Borough Council. All members of this Company shall
be confirmed as such by the Council.
a. Examination and Repair of Fire Apparatus. The Chief shall devote his
time and attention to the faithful discharge of the duties of his office. He
shall examine at least once in each month, and oftener if necessary, the
engine house and all fire apparatus, and shall keep in his office a record
§ 2-7.3 GENERAL § 2-7.9
1:25
§ 2-7.10. Absence of Chief; Chain of Command. [Ord. #8; 1972 Code
§ 14-14]
In the absence of the Chief, the Assistant Chief shall assume command, and
in the event of his absence, the next senior officer present.
§ 2-7.11. Duties of Firemen; Conduct of Persons at Fires. [Ord. #8;
1972 Code § 14-16]
It shall be the duty, subject to the direction of the Chief, of all members of
the Fire Department to prevent all persons not belonging to the Department
from entering any house or handling any apparatus belonging to the
Department, except as is hereinafter provided. Every person not a fireman
who shall be present at a fire shall be subject and obedient to the orders
of the Chief or the Assistant Chief or the Mayor, or any member of the
Fire Department acting under their direction in extinguishing the fire,
preserving order and the removal of property.
of the date of such examinations and of the condition in which the
engine house and apparatus were found by him, and when any
emergency repairs to any of said property shall be thought necessary,
the Chief shall have such repairs made and report same to Council.
b. Membership Records. The Chief shall keep an accurate record of the
names of the officers and members of the Fire Department and of all
appointments, resignations and removals of firemen.
c. At Fires. The Chief shall, in all cases of fire threatening damage or
destruction of property within the Borough, take prompt and efficient
measures and use the means of the Department to extinguish the same,
and shall, at such times and on occasions of alarms of fire, have sole and
absolute control of the Fire Department and persons aiding and
assisting the Department in cases of actual fire.
d. In Regard to Fire Prevention and Fires of Incendiary Origin. The Chief
shall inquire into all violations of the provisions of this section or of any
law of the State or ordinance of the Borough relating to the prevention
or extinguishment of fires, and shall cause such legal proceedings to be
had as shall prevent the continuance of the same. He shall investigate
the cause of all fires which may take place within the Borough, and if
the result of such inquiry shall satisfy him that the fire was of
incendiary origin, he shall report to the Mayor that there are good and
sufficient grounds of presumption that the fire so occurring was caused
by design, and it shall thereupon be lawful for the Mayor to offer such
reward as he may deem advisable, or as the Council shall recommend,
for the discovery and apprehension of the incendiary, such reward to be
paid on conviction of the person or persons so offending.
§ 2-7.9 BRIELLE CODE § 2-7.12
1:26
§ 2-7.12. Adoption of Bylaws Authorized. [Ord. #8; 1972 Code
§ 14-17]
The Fire Department may adopt such bylaws and regulations for its
government, subordinate to the ordinances of the Borough and not
inconsistent therewith, as it may deem useful and proper in the discharge
of its duties.
§ 2-7.13. Misconduct or Neglect of Duty by Firemen. [Ord. #8; 1972
Code § 14-18]
Any fireman who shall be guilty of misconduct or negligent of his duties as a
fireman shall be reported by the Chief to the Council and may be dismissed
for such misconduct or neglect of duty.
§ 2-7.14. Control of Department; Duties of Fire Committee. [Ord.
#8; 1972 Code § 14-20]
The Fire Department and members of the Fire Department shall be under
the immediate charge and direction of the Mayor and Public Safety
Committee of the Borough Council; subject, however, to the ultimate control
of the Borough Council. The Public Safety Committee shall have the power
and duty of the general charge, supervision and direction of the Fire
Department and the members thereof, and all reports shall be made and
transmitted to the Public Safety Committee by the acting head of the
Fire Department. All complaints against the Fire Department, or members
thereof, shall be first submitted to the Public Safety Committee.
§ 2-7.15. Disclosure of Information Regarding Applicants for
Membership. [Ord. #861, §§ 1 — 7]
a. This subsection is enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:42-1 et seq., The
Home Rule Act, which directs municipalities to act for the health,
welfare, and safety of its citizens and to implement N.J.S.A. 15:8-1.1.
b. Membership in a Volunteer Fire Company Company means membership
in a Volunteer Fire Company organized pursuant to Title 15 of the
Revised Statutes or Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes, membership
in a Volunteer Fire Company or similar organization constituted in a
Fire District pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-70.1, membership in a Junior
Fire Fighter's Auxiliary established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-95, or
nonpaid membership in a part-paid fire department or force established
pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 40A of the New Jersey Statutes.
c. Any person desiring membership in a Volunteer Fire Company located
within the Borough of Brielle, shall complete in duplicate, filing the
same with the Volunteer Fire Company, and the Clerk of the Borough of
Brielle, an application, the form of which may be prescribed by the
Volunteer Fire Company, but which shall contain the following
information about the applicant:
§ 2-7.12 GENERAL § 2-7.15
1:27
1. Name;
2. Home address;
3. Birth date;
4. Social Security Number;
5. Driver's License Number;
6. Any conviction of violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1,
(a) Aggravated arson, or
(b) Arson, or
(c) Failure to control or report dangerous fire, or
(d) Directly or indirectly pays or accepts any form of consideration
for the purpose of starting a fire or explosion.
7. Any conviction of violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3, False Public Alarms;
8. Any conviction of a crime or disorderly persons violation;
9. Such other information as the Volunteer Fire Company deems
relevant to the application provided none of such information is
prohibited by law.
d. Following the filing of such application, the Volunteer Fire Company
shall transmit one of the applications to the Chief of Police of the
Borough of Brielle who shall conduct an investigation to ascertain the
truth of the statements made by the applicant upon his/her application
and any such other investigation of the applicant's background as he
deems necessary for the protection of the public good. If, as the result
of such investigation, the applicant is found to have been convicted of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-1a, b, c, or/and d. or N.J.S.A. 2C:33-3 or any
other crime or disorderly persons violation, or any other information
that would indicate the applicant may be a threat to the health, safety
or welfare of the community, the Chief of Police shall report such
information and the particulars thereof to the Volunteer Fire Company
and the Clerk of the Borough of Brielle.
e. In connection with said investigation, the applicant shall submit to
fingerprinting, the Chief of Police is authorized to submit applicant's
fingerprint card and receive State criminal history record information
from the Division of State Police/State Bureau of Identification for use
in considering the suitability of all applicants covered under this
subsection.
f. This subsection is intended to make the Volunteer Fire Company an
authorized agency as defined by N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.1.
§ 2-7.15 BRIELLE CODE § 2-7.15
1:28
§ 2-8. BOARD OF HEALTH.
§ 2-8.1. Board of Health Established. [Ord. #3; 1972 Code § 16-1]
There shall be established in the Borough a Board of Health, in accordance
with the provisions of "An Act to Establish, in This State, Boards of Health
and a Bureau of Vital Statistics, and to Define Their Respective Powers and
Duties," approved March 31, 1887 and supplements thereto.
§ 2-8.2. Membership; Terms of Office; Vacancies. [Ord. #3; 1972
Code § 16-2]
The Board of Health shall consist of five members. All members shall be
appointed by the Mayor with approval of the Council and shall hold office
for three years, except in the case of vacancies. Vacancies shall be filled in
the same manner for any uncompleted terms of office.
§ 2-8.3. Organization of Board; Appointment of Registrar of Vital
Statistics. [Ord. #3; 1972 Code § 16-3]
The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for its government,
and shall elect a President from its members, and shall appoint a Registrar
of Vital Statistics who does not need to be a member of the Board.
§ 2-8.4. Additional Officers and Employees. [Ord. #3; 1972 Code
§ 16-4]
The Board of Health may appoint a Secretary, Health Officer, Plumbing
Inspector and such other officers and assistants as the Board of Health may
deem necessary.
§ 2-8.5. Regulation of Employees; Removal from Office. [Ord. #3;
1972 Code § 16-5]
The appointees of the Board of Health shall be governed by the rules of the
Board and may be removed for cause by the Board.
§ 2-8.6. Authority and Duties of Police Officers. [Ord. #3; 1972 Code
§ 16-6]
The police officers of this Borough shall be special inspectors and shall
promptly report to the Board of Health every violation of the health
ordinances of this Borough which may come within their observation or
knowledge.
g. The above investigation by the Chief of Police shall be completed within
30 days of receipt of the application and the fingerprinting of applicant.
§ 2-7.15 GENERAL § 2-8.7
1:29
§ 2-8.7. Authority of Board to Contract Debts Limited. [Ord. #3;
1972 Code § 16-7]
The Board of Health shall not contract any debts beyond the amount of the
appropriations made for its use by the Council.
§ 2-9. BOARD OF ASSESSMENTS.
§ 2-9.1. Board Created; Title of Members. [Ord. #427; 1972 Code
§ 4-1]
There is hereby created a general board for the making of all assessments
for benefits accruing from local improvements in the Borough, which Board
shall be known as the "Board of Assessments", and each member thereof
shall be known as a "Commissioner of Assessments".
§ 2-9.2. Membership; Qualifications; Terms of Office. [Ord. #427;
1972 Code § 4-2]
The Board shall consist of five residents of the Borough in no way interested
in the particular assessments or improvements; provided, in case any such
improvement shall be of a general nature, affecting the greater part of the
properties in the Borough, none of the Commissioners shall be disqualified
by reason of the fact that they may own a property or properties included
in such assessment; and shall hold office for one year from the first day of
January, the date of or preceding the date of their appointment, and until
their successors shall be appointed and qualified. The Board is authorized to
adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation. It shall select a Chairman
from its members and create and fill such other offices as it shall determine.
It shall have the power and authority to employ experts and a staff and to
pay for their services and such other expenses as may be necessary and
proper, not exceeding in all the amount appropriated by the Governing Body
for the use of the Board of Assessments.
§ 2-9.3. Oath. [Ord. #427; 1972 Code § 4-3]
Before performing any of the duties of his office, each member of the Board
shall take, before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths, an oath
that he is a resident of the Borough and that he will faithfully perform his
duties.
§ 2-9.4. Duties of Board; Notice of Hearing. [Ord. #427; 1972 Code
§ 4-4]
It shall be the duty of the Board of Assessments, when notified of the
completion of a local improvement in the Borough, any portion of the cost of
which is to be assessed upon lands in the vicinity thereof benefited thereby,
to examine the work and view all lands and real estate in the vicinity of
the local improvement and to determine what lands and real estate have
been benefited thereby, and thereupon to fix a time and place for a hearing
of all persons interested, notice of which hearing shall be published in a
§ 2-8.7 BRIELLE CODE § 2-9.4
1:30
newspaper circulating in the Borough, at least 10 days before such hearing,
and shall be mailed by the Borough Clerk to the owners of all lands affected,
directed to the last known post-office addresses of such owners.
§ 2-9.5. Assessment of Benefits to Land. [Ord. #427; 1972 Code
§ 4-5]
At the time and place appointed for any such hearing, the Board of
Assessments shall attend and shall give all parties interested or affected
by the improvement ample opportunity to be heard upon the subject of the
assessment. Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business and shall be sufficient to make any assessment. Any
hearing may be adjourned from time to time. The Board of Assessments
shall have power to examine witnesses under oath or affirmation
administered by any Commissioner. Upon the completion of the hearing
or hearings, the Board shall make a just and equitable assessment of
the benefits conferred upon any lands or real estate by reason of such
improvement, having due regard for the rights and interests of all persons
concerned, as well as for the value of the lands and real estate benefited,
and the peculiar benefit, advantage or increase in value which the
respective lots and parcels of land and real estate shall be found to have
received by reason of such improvement. In no case shall any assessment
of any parcel of land exceed in value such peculiar benefit, advantage or
increase in value.
§ 2-9.6. Assessment of Damages to Land Not Taken. [Ord. #427;
1972 Code § 4-6]
In addition to the making of assessments for benefits, the Board of
Assessments or a majority of the Board shall also at the same time fix and
determine the amount, if any, that any property is damaged incidentally to
the making of the local improvement, but exclusive of damages for land
taken, such determination to be made after a hearing in each case, to be
held as above provided in the case of assessment for benefits; where such
damages are determined in the case of a local improvement, the amount
thereof, if equal to or less than the amount of the benefits assessed, shall
be deducted from the amount of benefits. Where the amount of damages
exceeds the amount of benefits assessed in the case of any such local
improvement, then the amount of benefits shall be deducted from the
amount of damages, and the balance shall be reported.
§ 2-9.7. Assessment of Damages for Land Taken. [Ord. #427; 1972
Code § 4-7]
When any improvement ordinance shall require the taking of any lands or
real estate or any rights or interests therein of any owner thereof, after the
passage of such ordinance and upon receiving from the Borough Clerk of a
copy of the ordinance duly attested by him, together with a map showing
in detail the location and dimensions of such land proposed to be taken,
the Board of Assessments or a majority thereof shall make an award for the
§ 2-9.4 GENERAL § 2-9.7
1:31
lands and real estate or right or interest therein to be taken to the owner
or owners thereof, after hearings are held, upon notice, in the same way
and manner as herein provided in the case of assessments for benefits and
awards for incidental damages where no lands are to be taken, except that
said award shall be made before the commencement of the work of the
improvement.
§ 2-9.8. Report of Board. [Ord. #427; 1972 Code § 4-8]
As soon as the Board of Assessments shall have fixed and determined the
amount of all assessments or of all assessments and damages, as the case
may be, with respect to any local improvement, or the amount of damages
with respect to any general improvement, it shall make a report in writing
of its determination to the Borough Council.
§ 2-9.9. Disqualification of Member; Temporary Commissioner;
Vacancies. [Ord. #427; 1972 Code § 4-9]
When any member of the Board of Assessments shall be the owner of
property affected by any local improvement for which the Board shall be
required to assess benefits, or the owner of any property damaged by
any local or general improvement for which the Board shall be required
to assess damages, or shall in any way be financially interested in any
property, or shall be temporarily disqualified from acting with respect to
any improvement, the Board of Assessments shall report such a fact to this
Council, and a temporary Commissioner of Assessments may be appointed
to act with respect to such improvement. Whenever any Commissioner shall
be permanently disqualified or shall die or resign, his successor shall be
appointed by the Borough Council for the balance of his unexpired term.
§ 2-9.10. Compensation of Commissioners. [Ord. #427; 1972 Code
§ 4-10; New]
Each Commissioner of Assessments shall receive compensation for his
services as the Governing Body may fix and determine.
§ 2-9.11. Additional Powers of Board. [Ord. #427; 1972 Code § 4-11]
In addition to the powers hereinabove specifically set forth, said Board of
Assessments shall have and be deemed to have all the powers conferred
upon such boards by any laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-10. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-10.1. Commission Established. [Ord. #442; 1972 Code § 13-1]
The Environmental Commission of the Borough is hereby established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, et seq., as amended.
§ 2-9.7 BRIELLE CODE § 2-10.2
1:32
§ 2-10.2. Members; Powers and Duties. [Ord. #442, 1972 Code
§ 13-2]
The Environmental Commission shall consist of five members and shall have
all powers, duties and responsibilities set forth by Statute.
§ 2-10.3. Appropriation of Funds. [Ord. #442; 1972 Code § 13-3]
The Governing Body may authorize and appropriate sums for the expenses
to be incurred by the Environmental Commission of the Borough of Brielle.
§ 2-11. SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
§ 2-11.1. Commission Established; Appointment of Members. [Ord.
#511; 1972 Code § 33-1]
The regulation, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees
and shrubbery upon or in the highways, parks or parkways of the Borough
shall be exercised and be under the authority of a Commission consisting
of five residents of the Borough, the commission to be known as the "Shade
Tree Commission of the Borough of Brielle". The members of the Shade
Tree Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with confirmation by the
Council and shall serve without compensation.
§ 2-11.2. Terms of Office; Vacancies. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-2]
All appointments, except to fill vacancies, shall take effect on January
1 annually for a full term of five years. Any vacancy occurring in the
membership of the Commission by reason of death, resignation or removal
of any Commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor
with the confirmation of Council.
§ 2-11.3. Organization. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-3; New]
The Shade Tree Commission shall organize within 30 days after the
appointment of its total membership annually by the election of one of its
members as Chairman and the appointment of a Secretary.
§ 2-11.4. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-4]
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the power to:
a. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located or
which may hereafter be planted in any public highway, park or parkway,
except such as are excluded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:64-1, including the
planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof.
b. Regulate and control the use of the grounds surrounding the same, so
far as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
§ 2-10.2 GENERAL § 2-11.4
1:33
c. Move or require the removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to
public safety, at the expense of the owner of such tree.
d. Care for and control parks and parkways; encourage arboriculture;
make, alter, amend and repeal any and all ordinances, rules and
regulations necessary or proper for carrying out the provisions of this
section and the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:64-5, Powers of Commission.
e. Administer treatment to, or remove, any tree which is situated upon
private property which is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily
communicable to neighboring healthy trees in care of the Borough; and
enter upon private property for that purpose, with the consent of the
owner thereof, provided that the suspected condition is first confirmed
by a certificate issued by or on behalf of the Department of Agriculture.
§ 2-11.4 BRIELLE CODE § 2-11.4
1:34
ARTICLE VII
INTERLOCAL SERVICES AND AGREEMENTS
§ 2-12. INTERLOCAL SERVICES.
§ 2-12.1. Community Development Block Grant Program. [Ord.
#516; Ord. #603; Ord. #635; Ord. #659; 1972 Code §§ 8-1, 17-2;
Ord. #707; Ord. #720, § 1; Ord. #781; Ord. #787; Ord. #791; Ord.
#831; Ord. #862]
§ 2-12.2. Metering of Sewage, Agreement with the South Monmouth
Regional Sewerage Authority. [Ord. #689; 1972 Code § 17-4; Ord.
#795; Ord. #931, §§ I — III; Ord. #942, § 1]
a. Findings.
1. Certain Federal funds are potentially available to Monmouth
County under Title I of the Housing and Community Development
Act of 1974, as amended, commonly known as the Community
Development Block Grant Program;
2. It is necessary to establish a legal basis for the County and its
people to benefit from this program; and
3. An agreement has been proposed under which the Borough of
Brielle and the County of Monmouth in cooperation with other
municipalities will establish an Interlocal Services Program
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:8B-1; and
4. It is in the best interests of the Borough of Brielle to enter into such
an agreement.
b. Agreement. Be it ordained by the Mayor and Governing Body of the
Borough of Brielle that the agreement entitled "Agreement between the
County of Monmouth and certain municipalities located herein for the
establishment of a cooperative means of conducting certain community
development activities," a copy of which is attached hereto, be executed
by the Mayor and Municipal Clerk in accordance with the provisions of
law.
a. Purpose. The Borough of Brielle, Borough of Manasquan and the
Township of Wall are desirous of entering into an agreement whereby
the rights, duties and obligations of each municipality with respect to
providing for the metering of sewage for Borough of Manasquan
residents which is deposited in South Monmouth Regional Sewerage
Authority Facilities.
b. Agreement on File; Effective Date.
1. The form of the agreement proposed between the parties is on file
with the Borough Clerk in the Municipal Building, 601 Union Lane,
Brielle, New Jersey and is available for public inspection during
§ 2-12 GENERAL § 2-12.2
1:35
§ 2-12.3. Agreement with the Township of Wall. [Ord. #705, § 4]
Providing for the connection of certain property to the Sanitary Sewage
Collection System of the Borough of Brielle:
§ 2-12.4. Agreement Between the Boroughs of Brielle, Manasquan
and Sea Girt for the Collection and Recycling of Leaves. [Ord. #727,
§ 1 — 4]
normal business hours. The terms and conditions of said agreement
are hereby incorporated and made a part of this subsection.
2. The Mayor and Borough Clerk are hereby authorized to execute the
aforesaid Interlocal Service Agreement pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:8A-4.
3. This section shall become effective upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon the passage of a similar
ordinance authorizing the execution of said Agreement by the
Township of Wall and the Borough of Manasquan.
a. The Borough of Brielle and the Township of Wall are desirous of
entering into an agreement regarding the rights, duties and obligations
of each municipality and certain residents of the Township of Wall, with
respect to providing for the connection of certain property to the
Sanitary Sewer Collection System of the Borough of Brielle.
b. The form of the Agreement proposed between the parties is on file with
the Borough Clerk in the Municipal Building, 601 Union Lane, Brielle,
New Jersey and is available for public inspection during normal
business hours. The terms and conditions of said Agreement are hereby
incorporated and made a part of this subsection.
c. The Mayor and Borough Clerk are hereby authorized to execute the
aforesaid Interlocal Service Agreement pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1, et
seq.
d. This subsection shall become effective upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon the passage of a similar
ordinance authorizing the execution of the Agreement by the Township
of Wall.
a. The Borough of Brielle, Borough of Manasquan and the Borough of Sea
Girt are desirous of entering into an Agreement whereby the rights,
duties and obligations of each municipality with respect to providing for
the collection and recycling of leaves within the Borough of Brielle and
the Borough of Sea Girt.
b. The form of the Agreement proposed among the parties is on file with
the Borough Clerk in the Municipal Building, 601 Union Lane, Brielle,
New Jersey, and is available for public inspection during normal
§ 2-12.2 BRIELLE CODE § 2-12.4
1:36
§ 2-12.5. Agreement with the County of Monmouth for Participation
in the County's Emergency Telecommunications System (Enhanced
9-1-1 Services). [Ord. #830; Ord. #839, §§ 1 — 3, 6]
§ 2-12.6. Construction Code Services. [Ord. #841]
business hours. The terms and conditions of this Agreement are hereby
incorporated and made a part of this subsection.
c. The Mayor and Borough Clerk are hereby authorized to execute the
aforesaid Interlocal Service Agreement Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:8A-4.
d. This subsection shall become effective upon final passage and
publication according to law and upon the passage of a similar
ordinance authorizing the execution of said Agreement by the Borough
of Manasquan and the Borough of Sea Girt.
a. The Borough of Brielle chooses to be a participating local unit in
Monmouth County's Emergency Telecommunication System for
Enhanced 9-1-1 Service for calendar year 1994 through calendar year
2000.
b. The agreement will be for seven years with the stipulation that any
participating municipality may withdraw from the agreement at the end
of any calendar year providing it gives 30 days' notice in writing.
c. The cost for the participation in this agreement will be determined for
each calendar year during the first week of November of the preceding
year and will be distributed to the participating municipalities by
November 15th. The cost will be in accordance with the County's 9-1-1
shared cost proposal for each year.
d. The Mayor of the Borough of Brielle is hereby authorized to execute the
agreement with the County of Monmouth.
a. Preamble. The Borough of Brielle and the Borough of Sea Girt are
Municipal Corporations in the County of Monmouth, State of New
Jersey, and have been formed in compliance with the appropriate
statutes, and
The Borough of Brielle and the Borough of Sea Girt are desirous of
entering into an Interlocal Service Agreement to provide for the joint
administration of and the provision of Construction Code Services, said
service to include building, plumbing, electrical and fire inspection.
b. The Borough of Brielle shall act as the provider of Construction
Department Services for the Borough of Sea Girt. The services to be
provided shall be as follows:
Construction Code Enforcement
Building Subcode Services
§ 2-12.4 GENERAL § 2-12.6
1:37
Fire Subcode Services
Plumbing Subcode Services
Electrical Inspection Subcode Services
The provisions and coordination of said services shall be the
responsibility of Albert P. Ratz who shall serve as Construction Code
Official for the provider and all parties adhering to the terms of this
agreement.
In compliance with the Uniform Construction Code, the Construction
Code Official and all subcode officials shall serve for a period of four
years, except that said officials can be removed for good cause in
compliance with State Statute.
The Construction Code Official shall see to it that all building permits
for each municipality shall be issued in that municipality. The
Construction Code Official shall ensure that office hours are held in
compliance with the following schedule:
Borough of Brielle 3:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. (Monday through Friday)
Borough of Sea
Girt
4:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. (Wednesday)
c. The Construction Official shall ensure that the municipalities who adopt
this subsection and enter into a four year Interlocal Agreement shall be
in full compliance with the provisions of Chapter 5:23-4.5 Municipal
Enforcing Agencies: Administration and Enforcement of the Uniform
Construction Code. To ensure said compliance, the Construction
Official shall provide, at a minimum, a quarterly report, which shall
meet all the requirements of the Central File provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code and shall include the municipality, tax block and lot
number for any property within the municipality for which a building
permit has been issued or requested and any action taken or
contemplated.
This report shall reflect the information contained in the Central File
which will provide all the information as required by the Uniform
Construction Code and shall be enumerated on the forms established
for that purpose.
In the event of any amendment or modification to the Uniform
Construction Code as currently promulgated, the Construction Code
Official shall ensure that the parties to this agreement shall remain in
compliance with said code and the Construction Code Official shall take
whatever action is necessary to ensure such compliance.
The Borough of Brielle shall serve as the provider of service for
purposes of this subsection and shall be responsible for making all
payments required to maintain the Uniform Construction Code Services
herebefore enumerated.
§ 2-12.6 BRIELLE CODE § 2-12.6
1:38
§ 2-12.7. Police and Public Safety Dispatch Services. [Ord. #856]
§ 2-13. AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS.
§ 2-13.1. (Reserved)
§ 2-13.2. Treated Water Purchase Contract. [Ord. #737, § 1 — 4;
Ord. #938, § 1]
d. In recognition of said services the Borough of Sea Girt shall make
payment for said services to the Borough of Brielle in accordance with
the quarterly payment schedule hereinfor provided for through the
Interlocal Agreement.
a. The Borough of Brielle and the Borough of Manasquan are Municipal
Corporations in the County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey, and have
been formed in compliance with applicable statutes, and
The Borough of Brielle and the Borough of Manasquan desire to enter
into an Interlocal Agreement to provide for the joint administration
and provision of police and public safety (fire and first aid) dispatch
services.
b. The Borough of Manasquan shall act as the provider of police and
public safety dispatch services to the Borough of Brielle.
All Borough of Brielle police, fire and first aid alarm signals shall be
transmitted by the Borough of Manasquan's Dispatch Center.
The operation of the Joint Dispatch Center shall be subject to the
ultimate jurisdiction of a Committee which shall consist of the Mayors,
Police Chiefs and Police/Public Safety Committee Chairman of each
municipality, as outlined in the Interlocal Services Agreement to be
authorized by this subsection.
c. The Borough of Manasquan shall be the provider of service in this
agreement and shall be required to ensure that the dispatch services
herebefore enumerated are maintained.
a. The Borough of Brielle in the County of Monmouth, New Jersey, does
hereby determine that it will be economical and otherwise
advantageous to it and to the residents and property-owners of the
Borough for the Borough and the Improvement Authority to enter into a
contract providing for and relating to the treatment of System water by
means of the Project, which Project is to be constructed by or caused to
be constructed by said Authority and the cost and expense of such
treatment, and which contract, among other things, shall obligate the
Authority to proceed promptly with the construction and placing in
operation of the Project and obligate the Borough to pay to the
Authority such sums of money as may be necessary to provide for the
costs of financing, administering, operating and maintaining said
§ 2-12.6 GENERAL § 2-13.2
1:39
§ 2-13.3. Conveyance of Certain Interests to the Southeast
Monmouth Municipal Utilities Authority. [Ord. #993]
Project, all substantially on the terms of the contract authorized by this
ordinance.
b. The Borough of Brielle, in the County of Monmouth, New Jersey, shall
enter into the Contract Amendment, amending its Treated Water
Purchase Contract, dated as of September 1, 1987, with the Monmouth
County Improvement Authority, whereby the Borough shall agree to
purchase not to exceed 450,000 gallons of treated water per day,
provide for temporary increase and decreases in treated water
allocation and change the allocation of certain debt service costs for
certain bonds issued by the Authority in 2002 or thereafter to finance
the facilities, on the terms and conditions and substantially in the form
presented to this meeting. The Mayor shall be and hereby is directed on
behalf of the Borough to execute said Contract Amendment under the
corporate seal of the Borough which shall be affixed and attested by the
Borough Clerk, and to deliver the same.
c. The contract shall be in substantially the form submitted herewith and
filed with the Borough Clerk, and the terms and conditions thereof are
hereby approved and specifically agreed to.
a. The Borough Council by this enactment authorizes the Borough of
Brielle and appropriate Borough personnel to undertake all actions
necessary and appropriate to consummate the purchase of certain
water treatment and transmission facilities (the "purchased facilities")
currently owned by the Monmouth County Improvement Authority in
accordance with the terms and conditions set forth in the existing
treated water purchase contract entitled "Manasquan Reservoir Water
Treatment System Treated Water Purchase Contract" dated September
1, 1987 (the "Agreement").
b. The Borough of Brielle shall convey its proportionate interest in the
purchased facilities to the Southeast Monmouth Municipal Utilities
Authority which was previously created by enactment of a parallel
ordinance of the existing Treated Water Purchasers under the
Agreement.
§ 2-13.2 BRIELLE CODE § 2-13.3
1:40
ARTICLE VIII
ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
§ 2-14. CLAIMS PROCEDURE.
§ 2-14.1. Presentation of Claim. [Ord. #291; 1972 Code § 7-1]
Any person claiming payment from the Borough shall present a detailed
statement on the standard voucher form of the Borough, duly certified by
the claimant or the duly authorized agent of the claimant.
§ 2-14.2. Verification by Borough Clerk. [Ord. #291; 1972 Code
§ 7-2]
The Borough Clerk shall receive all vouchers wherein payment is claimed.
He shall examine the vouchers, verify the claim thereon as against delivery,
service and/or sales slips which shall have been receipted by the Borough
official or employee duly designated to certify that the materials have been
received or the services rendered to the municipality. Upon completion
of examination and verification, said slip shall be affixed to said voucher.
Where payment is claimed under a contract between the claimant and the
Borough, or where no evidence of receipt is in the hands of the Borough
Clerk, the Borough Clerk shall have the voucher certified by the responsible
Borough official or employee.
§ 2-14.3. Finance Committee: Composition; Approval of
Resolutions. [Ord. #291; 1972 Code § 7-3]
The Finance Committee shall be composed of such members as are
appointed at the annual organization meeting. In the absence of any such
member at a meeting, a Councilman shall be appointed as an acting
member of the Finance Committee for that meeting. At the regular
meetings, a resolution incorporating a detailed listing of all vouchers to be
paid shall be acted upon approving claims for payment. The members of the
Finance Committee shall indicate their approval.
§ 2-14.4. Approval by Mayor. [Ord. #291; 1972 Code § 7-4]
The Mayor shall, after passage of the resolution, examine all vouchers and
affix his signature thereon as well as to the resolution, indicating that he has
examined same and has officially approved the resolution and the vouchers
for payment.
§ 2-14.5. Payment by Treasurer; Signatures Required. [Ord. #291,
1972 Code § 7-5; New]
The Borough Clerk shall then turn over all vouchers to the Treasurer, who
shall forthwith prepare the necessary checks for payment thereof, and the
checks shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Business
Administrator. The Treasurer shall, after entry of the payment of all claims
in the proper books of account, mail or otherwise distribute checks to the
§ 2-14 GENERAL § 2-14.5
1:41
claimants. In the absence of the Mayor from the Borough, or in case of the
unavailability of the Mayor, the checks may be signed by the President of
the Borough Council.
§ 2-15. INSPECTION AND COPIES OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
§ 2-15.1. Right of Citizens to Inspect and Copy Records. [Ord. #548;
1972 Code § 71-1]
Any citizen, during the regular business hours maintained by the custodian
of any public record as defined by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., shall have the
right to inspect and copy such record by hand, under the supervision of
the custodian or his representative. The inspection or copying shall not
interfere with the operation of the office and the transaction of public
business.
§ 2-15.2. Fees for Copies of Records. [Ord. #548; Ord. #612; 1972
Code § 71-1; New. (Statutes)]
Copies of records shall be made available upon the payment of the following
price:
First page to tenth page $0.50 per page
Eleventh page to twentieth page $0.25 per page
All pages over 20 $0.10 per page
§ 2-15.3. Photocopying of Records by Citizens. [Ord. #548; 1972
Code § 71-3]
Any citizen seeking to copy more than 100 pages of records may use his
own photographic process approved by the custodian upon the payment of
a reasonable fee, considering the time and equipment involved, of not less
than $5 nor more than $25 per day.
§ 2-15.4. Denial of Right to Examine or Copy Records. [Ord. #548;
1972 Code § 71-4]
If the records sought to be examined or copied pertain to an investigation
by any authority or official, the right to copy or examine the records may be
denied if it shall be inimical to the public interest.
§ 2-15.5. Disposition of Fees. [Ord. #548; 1972 Code § 71-5]
All fees shall be deposited with the Borough Treasurer within 48 hours of
collection.
§ 2-14.5 BRIELLE CODE § 2-15.6
1:42
§ 2-15.6. Fee Schedule and Regulations for the Inspection and
Duplication of Video Tapes of the Police Department. [Ord. #548;
New]
The following fees and regulations are hereby established for services
extended and materials distributed by the Police Department:
§ 2-15.7. Municipal Court Discovery. [Ord. #944]
a. Viewing of Video Drinking Driving Tapes shall be by appointment only.
Each appointment shall be made upon 24 hours or more notice to the
Chief of Police.
b. Duplication of any video tape or tapes shall be the cost to the Borough
plus the sum of $10 per incident.
c. The viewing or reviewing of police reports, photographs or video tapes
shall be permitted at the Brielle Police Headquarters daily, Monday
through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
d. The viewing of video tapes shall be permitted provided at least 24 hours
or more notice is given to the Chief of Police or his designee. The Chief
of Police shall establish the time and date for the appointment of
viewing the tapes, provided however, the tapes shall be available within
seven days of the request for viewing.
e. No video tape shall be duplicated until the person requesting the
duplication of the video tape has paid the required fee.
f. All fees per this subsection shall be made payable to the Borough of
Brielle and shall be received by the Police Department. The Police
Department shall issue a receipt for all fees and monies received for the
services extended or the materials furnished. The Police Department
shall transmit all fees and monies to the Borough Treasurer within 48
hours of the receipt of these monies.
a. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Brielle Municipal
Court shall be submitted through the Municipal Prosecutor.
b. The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Borough of
Brielle for the discovery provided.
1. $0.75 per page for each of the first 10 pages photocopied.
2. $0.50 per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied.
3. $0.25 per page for each of the pages photocopied thereafter.
4. Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
5. $0.25 for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail.
§ 2-15.6 GENERAL § 2-15.7
1:43
§ 2-15.8. Fee for Certified Copies of Vital Records. [Ord. #992]
The fee charged for the provision of a certified copy of a certified of a vital
record (birth/marriage/death certificate) shall be $15.
§ 2-16. FINGERPRINTING. [Ord. #647; 1972 Code § 27-35; New]
§ 2-17. LENGTH OF SERVICE AWARDS PROGRAM (LOSAP). [Ord.
#918; Ord. #1007, Ord. #1010; Ord. #1043-2015]
6. Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
7. Duplication of videotapes constitute an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
8. On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Borough copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
c. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Borough of Brielle, e.g. another police department, the actual costs
paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
a. Fees. A fee of $15 shall be payable to the Borough for the processing of
fingerprint cards by the Police Department. In the event that the
fingerprint cards are sent to the Federal Bureau of Investigation for
examination and processing, the applicant shall pay such additional
fees as the Federal Bureau of Investigation may impose on the Borough.
a. A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members
of the Brielle Fire Department and the Brielle First Aid Squad for their
loyal, diligent, and devoted services to the residents of the Borough of
Brielle.
b. The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred
income account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set
forth below; that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a
plan that shall be established by the Borough of Brielle pursuant to P.L.
1997, c. 388; and that such plan shall be administered in accordance
with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the U.S. Internal Revenue
Code, and this section.
c. The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each member who
meets the criteria as follows:
1. Any volunteer who accumulates 100 points in a calendar year will
be considered an active volunteer for that year and therefore be
eligible for this program.
§ 2-15.7 BRIELLE CODE § 2-17
1:44
2. The annual contributions shall be $750 per eligible member.
3. Five years of service are required for vesting.
d. The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
1. For regular annual services, based on the available data for the
year 2000: $15,000 per year; and
2. For regular annual services in the event all current membership
should qualify: $45,750; and
3. For regular annual services in the event that all volunteer services
reach the CAP established in paragraph g of this section: $86,250;
e. Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for
volunteer services provided to the Brielle Volunteer Fire Department
and the Brielle First Aid Volunteer First Aid Squad in accordance with
the following schedule:
1. Volunteer Fire Department — Schedule A3
2. Volunteer First Aid Squad — Schedule B4
f. Brielle Fire Company #1 and the Brielle First Aid Squad shall be
required to appoint a LOSAP Officer who shall be charged with the
responsibility to certify, by sworn affidavit, to the Governing Body the
number of points attained by each member of the respective squads, in
accordance with Schedules A and B, on a quarterly basis. Reports shall
be due within five business days of the close of each quarter and shall
be submitted to the Municipal Clerk for distribution to the Mayor and
Council. No points shall be considered to be valid without the
certification of the LOSAP Officer.
g. The maximum number of active volunteer firemen shall be fixed at 60.
The maximum number of active fire police (Volunteer Fire Department)
shall be fixed at 25.
The maximum number of active first aid squad members shall be fixed
at 30.
h. If a member of either the Brielle Fire Company #1 or the Brielle First
Aid Squad has achieved the required number of points in a given year of
service, but then ceases to be an active participant prior to meeting the
five year requirement for vesting in compliance with the LOSAP
regulations, such individual shall have five years within which to
resume active status or their accrued earnings shall be forfeited to the
Borough's LOSAP account.
3. Editor's Note: The schedules referred to herein may be found at the end of this section.
4. Editor's Note: The schedules referred to herein may be found at the end of this section.
§ 2-17 GENERAL § 2-17
1:45
i. This section shall not take effect unless it is approved as a public
question at the General Election November 6th, 2001.
A member of Brielle Fire Company No. 1, in order to qualify for
payment under L.O.S.A.P. must now meet the requirement "to be an
active member in good-standing" and to achieve 100 points as outlined
in Schedule "A" of this Chapter.
A member in good-standing shall be defined as a member who has
completed 30% of fire calls and drills and has attended four General
Meetings of the Company.
SCHEDULE A
Fire Company
100 Points to Qualify
Meetings and Drills
Points Attendance
10 20% — 40%
15 41% — 60%
20 61% — 70%
25 71% — 80%
30 81% — 90%
40 91% — 100%
Officers
Points Office Held
10 Chief President
5 1st Asst Chief
5 2nd Asst Chief
5 Captain Trustee
5 Lieutenant Vice Pres
5 Engineer
5 Asst Engineer
10 FP/WR Capt
5 FP/WR Lt
5 FP Sergeant
Note: Treasurer and Secretary not included above because those
positions receive a stipend from the fire company.
§ 2-17 BRIELLE CODE § 2-17
1:46
Emergency Responses for Brielle First Aid Squad Only
Points Attendance
10 0% — 24%
25 25% — 49%
50 50% — 74%
75 75% — 100%
Emergency Responses for Brielle Fire Company #1
The Fire Company shall have a new allocation of points based directly
on the percent of emergencies each individual member responds to.
[Ord. #1043-2015]
Example: Number of Emergency Calls Responded to:
1% = 1 point 2% = 2 points
The maximum number of points shall be 75
Example: Number of Emergency Calls Responded to:
75% = 75 points 100% = 75 points
Special Events*
Points Event
10 Brielle Day
5 All Others
*Max = 25 points
Training — Cert. Issued
Points Hours
1 Per Hour
15 Max per class
20 Fire Fighter 1
Longevity Bonus
Points Yrs with BFD
5 0 — 5 Years
10 6 — 10 Years
15 10 — 15 Years
20 15 Years+
§ 2-17 GENERAL § 2-17
1:47
Specialized Training*
Points Event
5 Qualified Driver
5 Driver Course
10 Cert. EMT
5 Cert 1st Responder
*Not Eligible for Both Credits in Year Member Becomes Qualified.
EMS Assistance
Points Event
1 5 Responses
1 First Aid Drill
10 Bonus 100 Responses
SCHEDULE B
First Aid Squad
100 Points to Qualify
A member of Brielle EMS, Inc. (hereinafter referred to as the Squad),
in order to qualify for payment under L.O.S.A.P. must now meet the
requirement "to be an active member in good-standing" and to
achieve 100 points as outlined in Schedule "A" of this Chapter.
A member in good standing shall be defined as active members
having completed 10% of emergency responses (15% for ambulance
drivers) and has attended six general monthly business meetings of
the Squad.
Meetings and Drills
Points Attendance
1 Per Event
Officers
Points Office Held
10 Captain President
5 1st Lieutenant Secretary
5 2nd Lieutenant Treasurer
5 Sergeant Trustee
5 Engineer Vice Pres
5 Asst Engineer
§ 2-17 BRIELLE CODE § 2-17
1:48
§ 2-18. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
§ 2-18.1. Eligible Positions. [Ord. #997]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
Special Events
Points Event
5 Brielle Day
5 Blood Drives
1 All Others
Training — Cert. Issued
Points Hours
1 Per Hour
15 1st Responder
25 EMT
Specialized Training*
Points Event
5 EMT
5 CPR Instructor
5 FA Instructor
*Not Eligible for Both Credits in Year Member Becomes Qualified.
Longevity Bonus
Points Yrs with BFA
5 0 — 5 Years
10 6 — 10 Years
15 11 — 15 Years
20 15 Years+
a. Business Administrator.
b. Borough Attorney.
c. Borough Engineer.
d. Public Defender.
e. Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 2-17 GENERAL § 2-18.1
1:49
§ 2-18.2. Exempt Positions. [Ord. #997]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2:
§ 2-18.3. Additional Exemptions. [Ord. #997]
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in subsection
2-18.1 and the individual is not serving in a position as described in
subsection 2-18.2 above, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipally
may determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual; (1) was an active
participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on July 1, 2007 and
continuously since that time; or (2) has been appointed pursuant to a valid
promotional process; or (3) is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting"
basis to a position requiring State Certification as set forth in subsection
2-18.2 herein, and is in pursuit of the required certification; or (4) meets
such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local Finance Board or
the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 2-18.4. Implementation of Program. [Ord. #997]
This section shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
f. Municipal Court Judge.
g. Recreation Director.
a. Tax Collector.
b. Chief Financial Officer.
c. Construction Code Official.
d. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
e. Tax Assessor.
f. Registered Municipal Clerk.
g. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
h. Principal Public Works Manager.
i. Municipal Court Administrator.
§ 2-18.1 BRIELLE CODE § 2-18.4
1:50
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. NOISE CONTROL.
§ 3-1.1. Title. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972 Code § 65-1]
This section shall be cited as the "Noise Control Regulations of the Borough
of Brielle".
§ 3-1.2. Declaration of Findings and Policy. [Ord. #628; 1972 Code
§ 65-2]
Excessive noise is a serious hazard to the public health and welfare and
the quality of life; and a substantial body of science and technology exists
by which excessive noise may be substantially abated; and the people
have the right to and should be ensured an environment free from noise
that may jeopardize their health or welfare or degrade the quality of life.
The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions
hereinafter contained and enacted is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy and the provisions and prohibitions
hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of an ordinance for the
purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience,
safety, welfare, and the peace and quiet of the residents of the Borough
of Brielle. Now, Therefore, it is the policy of the Borough to prevent noise
which may jeopardize the health or welfare of its citizens or degrade the
quality of life.
§ 3-1.3. Terminology and Standards. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972
Code § 65-1]
All terminology used in this section, not defined below, shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
§ 3-1.4. Definitions. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972 Code § 65-4]
As used in this section:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Shall mean the sound pressure
level as measured in decibels on a sound level meter using the A-weighting
network. The level so read shall be designated dB(A) or dBA.
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL — Shall mean the sound pressure level of the
all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, being usually
a composite of sounds from many sources and/or the A-weighted sound
pressure level exceeded 90% of the time/L90 based on a one hour period.
CONTINUOUS NOISE — Shall mean a steady, fluctuating, or impact noise
which exists, essentially without interruptions, for a period of one hour, or
more.
§ 2-18.4 GENERAL § 3-1.4
1:51
CYCLICALLY-VARYING NOISE — Shall mean a steady, fluctuating, or
impulsive noise which may or may not contain a pure tone, which varies
in sound pressure level such that the same level is obtained repetitively at
reasonably uniform intervals of time.
DECIBEL — Shall a logarithmic (dimensionless) unit of measure often used
in describing the amplitude of sound. Decibel is denoted as "dB."
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean any municipal agency.
DEVICE — Shall mean any mechanism which is intended to produce, or
which actually produces noise when operated or handled.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Shall mean a motor vehicle used in response to
a public calamity or to protect persons or property from imminent danger.
EMERGENCY WORK — Shall mean work made necessary to restore
property to a safe condition following a public calamity, work to restore
public utilities, or work required to protect persons or property from an
imminent exposure to danger.
FLUCTUATING NOISE — Shall mean the sound pressure level of a
fluctuating noise varies more than 6 dB(A) during the period of observation
when measured with the slow meter characteristics of a sound level meter,
and does not equal the previously existing ambient noise level more than
once during the period of observation.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicles which are propelled or drawn
by mechanical equipment, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars,
trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers, campers, motorcycles, minibikes, gocarts,
snowmobiles, amphibiocraft on land, dune buggies, or racing
vehicles.
MOTORBOAT — Shall mean any vehicles which are primarily operated on
water, such as boats, barges, amphibious craft or hover craft, and which are
at any time propelled by mechanical power.
MUFFLER — Shall mean any apparatus consisting of baffles, chambers, or
acoustical absorbing materials whose primary purpose is to transmit liquids
or gases while causing a reduction in sound emission at one end.
NOISE — Shall mean sound which is unwanted or which causes or tends to
cause an adverse psychological effect on human beings.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Shall mean any sound which annoys, disturbs or
perturbs reasonable persons with normal sensitivities; or any sound which
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, hearing, peace or safety
of other persons.
PERSON — Shall mean individual, association, partnership, or corporation,
and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality
of the United States, a state or any political sub-division of the state.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE NOISE — Shall mean any noise for which the
information content of that noise is unambiguously communicated to the
§ 3-1.4 BRIELLE CODE § 3-1.4
1:52
listener, such as, but not limited to, understandable spoken speech or
comprehensible musical rhythms.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLES — Shall mean any powered vehicles, either
airborne, waterborne, or landborne, which are designed not to carry
persons or property such as, but not limited to, model airplanes, boats, cars,
rockets, and which can be propelled by mechanical means.
PROPERTY BOUNDARY — Shall mean an imaginary line at the ground
surface, which separates the real property owned by one person from that
owned by another person, and its vertical extension.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PUBLIC SPACE — Shall mean any street,
avenue, boulevard, highway, alley, or public space which is owned or
controlled by a public government entity.
PURE TONE — Shall mean any noise which can be distinctly heard as a
single pitch or a set of single pitches. For the purposes of measurement, a
pure tone shall exist if the one-third octave band sound pressure level in the
band with the tone exceeds the arithmetic average of the sound pressure
levels of the two contiguous one-third octave bands by 5 dB for frequencies
of 500 Hz and above, by 8 dB for frequencies between 160 and 400 Hz and
by 16 dB for frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hz.
REPETITIVE IMPULSIVE NOISE — Shall mean any noise which is
composed of impulsive noises that are repeated at sufficiently slow rates
such that a sound level meter set at "fast" meter characteristic will show
changes in sound pressure level greater than 2 dB(A).
SOUND — Shall mean a temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure, or
other physical quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes
compression and rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite
speed to distant points.
SOUND LEVEL METER — Shall mean an instrument, which includes a
microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output
meter and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels.
SOUND PRESSURE — Shall mean the instantaneous difference between the
actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in
space.
STATIONARY EMERGENCY SIGNALING DEVICES — Shall mean any
device, excluding those attached to motor vehicles, used to alert persons
engaged in emergency operations. These include, but are not limited to, fire
fighters, first aid squad members and law enforcement officers, whether
paid or volunteer.
STATIONARY NOISE SOURCE — Shall mean any device, fixed or movable,
which is located or used on geographically defined, real property other than
a public right-of-way.
STEADY NOISE — Shall mean a sound pressure level which remains
essentially constant during the period of observation, i.e., the fluctuations
are too small to meet the criterion for fluctuating noise.
§ 3-1.4 GENERAL § 3-1.5
1:53
§ 3-1.5. Enforcement and Authority. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972
Code § 65-5]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Police Department of the
Borough to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 3-1.6. Method of Enforcement. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972 Code
§ 65-6]
Violation of this section shall be cause for summons and complaint to
be issued forthwith; provided, however, that if the noise source is not a
motor vehicle moving on a public right-of-way, in lieu of a summons or
complaint, enforcement personnel may issue a twenty-four-hour notice, in
writing, which may be served personally or by certified mail to the last
known address of the person or persons in charge of or in control of the
device, building or premises to abate the violation of this section. Failure to
comply with the order so issued and served shall constitute a violation of
this section.
§ 3-1.7. Inspections and Records. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972 Code
§ 65-7]
In order to implement the purposes of this section, the Police Department,
the Code Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer or any qualified operator of
noise equipment approved by the Governing Body shall have the power to:
a. Conduct, or cause to be conducted, studies, research, and monitoring
related to noise.
b. Conduct programs of public education regarding the causes and effects
of noise but not giving specific advice for its abatement, and to
encourage the participation of public interest groups in related public
information efforts.
c. For reasonable cause and upon presentation of proper credentials,
enter any building, property, premises, or place and inspect any noise
source for the purpose of ascertaining the compliance or noncompliance
with any provision of this ordinance, or have access to, and
require the production of, books and papers pertinent to any matter
under investigation.
d. Require the owner or operator of any noise source to establish and
maintain records and make such reports as the Police Department may
reasonably prescribe.
e. Require the owner or operator of any noise source to measure the noise
emissions thereof in accordance with such methods and procedures and
at such locations and times as the Police Department may reasonably
prescribe.
§ 3-1.5 BRIELLE CODE § 3-1.8
1:54
§ 3-1.8. Noise Prohibited; General Prohibitions. [Ord. #235; Ord.
#628; 1972 Code § 65-8; Ord. No. 1055-2016]
It shall be unlawful for a person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which does
or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others.
§ 3-1.9. Specific Prohibitions-Nuisance. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628;
1972 Code § 65-9; New; Ord. #874; Ord. #940; Ord. #968; Ord.
#973; Ord. No. 1055-2016; Ord. No. 1061-2017]
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, or
excessive noise in violation of this section, but these enumerations shall not
be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
a. Radios, Television Sets, Amplifiers and Similar Devices. The playing,
use or operation of any radio receiving set, television, musical
instrument, amplifier, phonograph or other machine or device for
producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants or with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in
the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners. The operation of such a set,
instrument, amplifier, phonograph, machine or device so that it is
clearly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or
vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation
of this section.
1. Operating or permitting the use or operation of any radio receiving
set, musical instrument, television, phonograph, drum, or other
device for the production or reproduction of sound, in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance; or
2. Operating any such device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day in such a to two parties within a
building or plainly audible at 50 feet from such device when
operated within a motor vehicle parked on a public right-of-way or
on a public space, or within a motorboat.
b. Exterior Loudspeakers. Using or operating any mechanical device or
loudspeaker in a fixed or movable position exterior to any building, or
mounted upon any aircraft, motor vehicle or motorboat such that the
sound therefrom is plainly audible at or beyond the property boundary
of the source, or on a public way between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. the following day.
c. Loading Operations. Loading, unloading, opening or otherwise
handling boxes, crates, containers, garbage cans, or otherwise similar
objects between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the week
(Monday through Friday). Loading operations shall be prohibited
§ 3-1.8 GENERAL § 3-1.9
1:55
between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on Saturday. No loading
operations shall be permitted on Sunday.
d. Construction Noise. Operating or causing to be operated any
equipment used by contractors in commercial or residential
construction, repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings,
structures, streets, alleys, or appurtenances thereto, in residential or
commercial land use categories, at any time other than 8:30 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. weekdays and between 9:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Saturdays.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as to apply to any Federal,
State or County agency, undertaking a construction project that is
deemed to be in the public interest.
e. Vehicle Repairs or Testing. Repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing
any motor vehicle, off-road vehicle or motorboat in or near a residential
use district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance or violate
the provisions of subsection 3-1.11.
f. Places of Public Entertainment.
1. Operating, or permitting to be operating, any loudspeaker or other
source of sound in any place of public entertainment which
produces maximum levels of 90 dB(A) at any point that is normally
occupied by a human being as read with the slow response on a
sound level meter, without a conspicuous and legible sign located
outside such place, near the entrance, stating "WARNING. SOUND
ENVIRONMENT WITHIN MAY CAUSE TEMPORARY HEARING
IMPAIRMENT WHICH MAY BECOME PERMANENT WITH
CONTINUED EXPOSURE."
2. Owners and/or Operators of public entertainment shall also be
directly responsible for any noises emanating from their property,
outside of building such as patio, parking lot, walkways, porches,
but not limited thereto.
g. Powered Model Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
the following morning. Maximum sound pressure levels during the
permitted period of operation shall conform to those set forth in Table I
of subsection 3-1.11 and shall be measured at the property boundary of
the source or at a distance of 100 feet, if it is operated in a public place.
h. Refuse Compacting Vehicles. The operating or permitting the operation
of any motor vehicle which can compact refuse and which creates,
during the compacting cycle, a disturbing noise between the hours of
6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the week (Monday through Friday). The
operation of refuse compacting vehicles shall be prohibited on Saturday
except during the period 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. The operation of such a
vehicle on Sunday is prohibited.
i. Standing Motor Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of the
motor of any motor vehicle whose manufacturer's gross weight is in
§ 3-1.9 BRIELLE CODE § 3-1.9
1:56
§ 3-1.10. Emergency Exception. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972 Code
§ 65-10]
Noise caused in the performance of emergency work for the immediate
safety, health or welfare of the community or individuals of the community,
or to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity shall
not be subject to the provisions of this section. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to permit law enforcement, ambulance, fire, or other
emergency personnel to make excessive noise in the performance of their
duties when noise is clearly unnecessary. The use of stationary emergency
signaling devices shall be for emergency use only.
§ 3-1.11. Noise Levels by Land Use. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972
Code § 65-11; Ord. #874]
Maximum Permissible Continuous Sound Pressure Levels. It shall be
unlawful for any person to operate, or permit to be operated, any stationary
source of noise in such a manner as to create a sound pressure level which
exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use (Land Use Category)
in Table I when measured at the property boundary. When a noise source
can be identified and its noise measured in more than one land use category,
the limits of the most restrictive use shall apply at the boundaries between
different land use categories.
excess of 10,000 pounds or any attached auxiliary equipment for a
period longer than three minutes in any hour which such vehicle is
stationary on a public right-of-way in a residential district or in any
designated quiet zone, or in or on private property in a residential or
commercial zone and is not within a completely enclosed structure.
j. Bells and Alarms. The sounding or permitting the sounding of any
exterior burglar alarm on any building or motor vehicle unless such
burglar alarm shall terminate its operation within 15 minutes of its
being activated. Any motor vehicle upon which a burglar alarm has
been installed shall prominently display the telephone number at which
communication may be made with the owner of such motor vehicle.
k. Stationary Emergency Signaling Devices. Testing of only the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall occur at the same time each day that a test is performed,
but not before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. Any such testing shall only
use the minimum cycle test time.
l. Power Tools; Garden Equipment. Operating, or permitting to be
operated any powered saw, chain saw, sander, drill, grinder, garden
equipment, lawn mower, leaf blower or tools of like nature, used
primarily for domestic purposes, outdoors in residential zones at any
time other than 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. weekdays and between 10:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Saturdays and between 11:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
on Sundays and holidays.
§ 3-1.9 GENERAL § 3-1.11
1:57
Table I
Receiving Land Use
Category Time
Sound Pressure Level
Limit dB(A)
8:00 a.m. - 10:00
p.m.
R-1, R-2, R-2A 65
10:00 p.m. - 8:00
a.m.
45
8:00 a.m. - 10:00
p.m.
R-3, R-4 and R-5 65
10:00 p.m. - 8:00
a.m.
45
C-1, C-2 and C-3 At all times 65
§ 3-1.12. Motor Vehicle Noise Levels. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972
Code § 65-12]
Maximum Permissible Noise Levels of Motor Vehicles on Public Rights-of-
Way. No person shall operate a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way at
any time in such manner that the sound pressure level emitted by said
vehicle exceeds the levels set forth in Table II when measured at the
location established by subsection 3-1.13. This section shall apply to all
motor vehicles, whether publicly or privately owned, that are duly licensed.
Table II
Sound pressure level, dB(A)
Vehicle Class
Speed Limit
35 mph or less
Speed Limit
35 mph or
more
Federally Registered Interstate Motor
Carrier
86 90
All other motor vehicles with a
manufacturer's gross vehicle rating of
10,000 pounds or more, and any
combination of vehicles towed by
such motor vehicle
92 96
Motorcycles 88 92
Any other motor vehicle and any
combination of vehicles towed by
such motor vehicle
82 88
§ 3-1.11 BRIELLE CODE § 3-1.13
1:58
§ 3-1.13. Measurement Distance. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972 Code
§ 65-13]
For the purpose of subsection 3-1.12, the standard measurement height
shall be four feet (1.2 meters) and the standard horizontal measurement
distance from the center line of the roadway being monitored shall be 50
feet (15 meters). Whenever it is not feasible to use 50 feet, the distance may
be shortened to 25 feet (7.5 meters), in which case the values in Table II of
subsection 3-1.12 shall be increased by six dB(A).
§ 3-1.14. Maximum Permissible Noise Levels for Vehicles Operating
Off Public Rights-of-Way. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972 Code
§ 65-13]
No person shall operate a power propelled vehicle or recreational device
off a public right-of-way in such manner that the sound pressure level
emitted therefrom exceeds the limits set forth in Table III when measured
at the locations set forth. This section shall apply to all motorized vehicles
and recreational devices, whether publicly or privately owned, or whether
or not duly registered or licensed, including but not limited to passenger
cars, trucks, campers, motorcycles, mini-bikes, go-carts, snowmobiles,
amphibious craft, dune buggies, racing vehicles, water ski towing devices
and motor boats.
Table III
Vehicle Class Sound Pressure Level dB(A)
Motorboat 86
All other vehicles 83
EXHAUST -
The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any internal combustion
engine including a motor vehicle, lawn mower, chain saw or other device
powered by an internal combustion engine except through a muffler in
good working order which will effectively dissipate or prevent loud or
explosive noise emanating therefrom.
§ 3-1.15. Zoning Changes. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972 Code
§ 65-14]
No zoning change, adjustment, variance or exception, which affects the land
use categories, will be permitted unless the use to be allowed does not
violate the provisions of this section.
§ 3-1.16. Additional Remedy-Injunction. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628;
1972 Code § 65-18]
The operation or maintenance of any noise source in violation of any
provision of this section shall be deemed and is declared to be a public
nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order
§ 3-1.13 GENERAL § 3-1.16
1:59
or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, or in any other
manner available for the abatement of public nuisances.
§ 3-1.17. Other Remedies. [Ord. #235; Ord. #628; 1972 Code
§ 65-18]
§ 3-2. LITTERING; DISTRIBUTION OF LITERATURE.
§ 3-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #446; Ord. #478; 1972 Code § 61-1]
As used in this section:
LITERATURE — Shall mean any newspaper, magazine, handbill, pamphlet,
circular or any other paper of a commercial nature or otherwise.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind, but does not mean or
include any employee or administrator of the United States Postal Service.
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Shall mean any dwelling, house,
building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part
for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, wall,
driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to
such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, boulevards, avenues,
lanes, roads, alleys or other public ways and parts thereof, and any and
all public parks, squares, spaces, plazas, grounds and buildings and parts
thereof.
UNIMPROVED PROPERTY — Shall mean any and all lots, plots and parcels
of land containing no habitable structure or business use.
§ 3-2.2. Acts Prohibited. [Ord. #446; Ord. #478; 1972 Code § 61-3]
It shall be a violation of this section for any person without approval of the
Governing Body:
a. Any remedy available pursuant to this section shall be considered
separate and not exclusive of any other remedy available hereunder.
b. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any cause of action,
or legal remedy therefor, of any person for injury or damage arising
from any violation of this section.
a. Distribute, cast, throw or otherwise place any unsolicited literature on
the private property within the Borough.
b. Distribute, cast, throw or otherwise place any unsolicited literature on
any public place within the Borough.
c. Distribute, cast, throw or otherwise place any literature on any
unimproved property within the Borough.
§ 3-1.16 BRIELLE CODE § 3-2.2
1:60
§ 3-3. ANTI-DUMPING REGULATIONS.
§ 3-3.1. Title. [Ord. #579; 1972 Code § 61-6]
This section shall be known as the "Anti-Dumping Regulations".
§ 3-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. #579; 1972 Code § 61-7]
As used in this section;
JUNK — Shall mean any old, discarded or unused waste, iron or metal
or substance, glass, paper, machines, appliances, equipment, business or
household furniture or furnishing, or any parts or portions thereof or
accessories thereof, unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for
highway transportation, unused parts of motor vehicles and any material
commonly known and generally referred to as "junk" in the ordinary
meaning of the word.
LITTER, GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND RUBBISH — Shall mean all other waste
material, including all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, ashes,
paper wrappings, tin cans, bottles, abandoned automobiles, wood, glass,
bedding crockery and similar materials.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards,
alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds, and buildings.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway.
§ 3-3.3. Littering Prohibited. [Ord. #579; 1972 Code § 61-8]
No person shall throw, deposit, leave or abandon litter or junk in or upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place within the Borough, except in
public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles for collection.
§ 3-3.4. Property Placement of Litter in Receptacles. [Ord. #579;
1972 Code § 61-9]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 3-3.5. Streets and Sidewalks to Be Litter-Free. [Ord. #579; 1972
Code § 61-10]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Borough the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveways. Persons owning or
d. Direct, authorize or permit, in the capacity of employer, supervisor or
otherwise, any other person to violate the provisions of this section.
§ 3-2.2 GENERAL § 3-3.5
1:61
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter and junk.
§ 3-3.6. Business Establishments to Maintain Litter-Free Sidewalks.
[Ord. #579; 1972 Code § 61-11]
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Borough, the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the Borough shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business
premises free of litter and junk.
§ 3-3.7. Littering from Vehicles Prohibited. [Ord. #579; 1972 Code
§ 12; New]
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any public or private property within the Borough.
§ 3-3.8. Litter from Trucks Prohibited. [Ord. #579; 1972 Code
§ 61-13]
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Borough
unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any public property.
§ 3-3.9. Deposit Litter in Body of Water Prohibited. [Ord. #579;
1972 Code § 61-14]
No person shall throw or deposit litter or junk in any fountain pond, pool,
lake or other body of water lying within or bordering upon the Borough.
§ 3-3.10. Littering on Private Property Prohibited. [Ord. #579; 1972
Code § 61-15]
No person shall throw, leave, deposit or abandon litter or junk on any
private property within the Borough, including any property where a
business is located, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 3-3.11. Property Owner to Maintain Litter-Free Premises. [Ord.
#579; 1972 Code § 61-16]
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter and junk.
§ 3-3.12. Storage of Equipment, etc., on Business Property. [Ord.
#579; 1972 Code § 61-17; New]
No person shall leave, store or place upon any property, where a business
is conducted, any equipment, furniture, furnishings or manufactured stock
in trade that is used, acquired or in any way comes into the possession or
§ 3-3.5 BRIELLE CODE § 3-3.12
1:62
under the control of the person owning or in control of such property, unless
the same shall be within a building or other structure, without permission
of the Governing Body.
§ 3-3.13. Uncovered Vehicles. [Ord. #777]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped, or parked,
on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any objects have
fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle, or
otherwise endanger travelers or public property, shall immediately cause
the public property to be cleaned of all such objects and shall pay the costs
therefor.
§ 3-3.14. Construction Sites. [Ord. #777]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during, or after completing any construction or demolition project. It shall
be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a construction
site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or non-flyable
debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas, and to maintain
and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as
to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 3-3.15. Open or Overflowing Waste Disposal Bins. [Ord. #777]
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 3-3.16. Enforcement. [Ord. #579, 1972 Code § 61-18; Ord. #777]
It shall be the duty of the Code Enforcement Officer and/or any Borough
Police Officer to Administer and enforce this section.
§ 3-4. HEIGHT OF BRUSH AND HEDGES NEAR ROADS AND
INTERSECTIONS.
§ 3-4.1. Removal and Trimming Requirements. [Ord. #332; 1972
Code § 41-1]
The owner or tenant of any lands lying within the limits of the Borough shall
keep all brush, hedges and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any
roadway, and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways, cut to a
height of not more than 2 1/2 feet where it shall be determined necessary
and expedient for the preservation of the public safety, within 10 days after
notice to cut and remove the same.
§ 3-3.12 GENERAL § 3-4.2
1:63
§ 3-4.2. Service of Notice. [Ord. #332; 1972 Code § 41-2]
Such notice to cut and remove objectionable brush, hedges and other plant
life shall be given by the Code Enforcement Officer and may be served
upon any such owner or tenant, either personally or by certified mail, at
the address to which tax bills are sent; and if by the latter method, the
ten-day period within which such removal shall be accomplished, shall be
deemed to have commenced to run from the date of the return receipt of
such certified mail obtained by the postal authority for the delivery of such
certified notice. Every such notice shall, in addition to requiring the removal
aforesaid, warn the owner or tenant of the lands to which such notice refers
that failure to accomplish such removal within the time slated therein will
result in removal by or under the direction of the Code Enforcement Officer;
and the cost of such removal shall be charged to the owner or tenant of such
lands and shall be payable to the Borough of Brielle within 30 days after the
date of submission of charges.
§ 3-4.3. Failure to Comply; Cost of Removal to Become Tax Lien.
[Ord. #332; 1972 Code § 41-3]
Whenever the owner or tenant of such lands within the Borough, receiving
the notice provided for by the preceding section to remove from such lands
any of the substances hereinbefore mentioned, shall fail and neglect, within
the time prescribed in the notice, to effect removal of such substances,
such removal shall be accomplished by or under the direction of the Code
Enforcement Officer. An accurate record of the cost of such removal to the
Borough shall be determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, who shall
certify the cost thereof to the Governing Body, which shall examine the
certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against the lands; the amount so charged shall forthwith become
a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form part of
the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by
the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 3-4.4. Failure to Remove; Work Done by Borough. [Ord. #332;
1972 Code § 41-4]
In the event of the failure of any owner or tenant to keep all brush, hedges
and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25
feet of the intersection of two roadways, cut to a height of not more than
2 1/2 feet, after written notice thereof, the Borough may proceed to cause
the cutting and removal of such brush, hedges and other plant life under
the direction of the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 3-4.5. Cost of Removal to Become Tax Lien. [Ord. #332; 1972
Code § 41-5]
In any case where the Borough has cut and removed brush, hedges and
other plant life, the Code Enforcement Officer shall thereafter certify to the
§ 3-4.2 BRIELLE CODE § 3-4.5
1:64
Council the cost thereof, and if the amount so certified is, by resolution of
the Governing Body, determined to be correct and reasonable, the Borough
Clerk shall forthwith deliver a certified copy of said resolution to the Tax
Collector. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such
lands from which the brush, hedges and other plant life were cut and
removed, and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the
same rate as other taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the Tax
Collector in the same manner as taxes, as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26
and 40:48-2.27.
§ 3-4.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #332; 1972 Code § 41-7]
Any person who shall refuse or neglect, after written notice as above set
forth, to comply with the demands therein made with respect to the cutting
of the foregoing for the preservation of the public safety of the citizens
of the Borough, within the period of time above set forth, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to as established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, and
each and every day in which said owner or tenant shall refuse or neglect so
to cut said matter shall be and constitute a separate offense. (The imposition
and collection of any fine or penalty prescribed by this section shall not
bar the right of the Borough to collect the cost of the cutting of the brush,
hedges and other plant life, as hereinbefore specified; and the remedies
shall be accumulative.)
§ 3-5. REMOVAL OF BRUSH, WEEDS, DEAD AND DYING TREES,
STUMPS, ROOTS, OBNOXIOUS GROWTH, FILTH, GARBAGE,
TRASH AND DEBRIS FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 3-5.1. Brush, Weeds, Obnoxious Growths, Grass Over Six Inches
Danger to Health. [Ord. #256; 1972 Code § 41-10; New]
Where it shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public
health, safety, general welfare or to eliminate a fire hazard, an owner or
tenant of real property within the Borough shall remove from such lands,
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash and debris and grass above the height of six inches within
10 days after notice to remove the same from the designated official of the
Borough.
§ 3-5.2. Notice to Remove. [Ord. #256; 1972 Code § 41-11; New]
If an owner or tenant who has received notice in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 3-5.1 fails to remove from said lands the brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growth, filth,
garbage, trash and debris or grass above the height of six inches for which
said person was cited within 10 days of the notice to remove the same, the
Borough shall have the right to provide for the removal of the same by or
under the direction of Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 3-4.5 GENERAL § 3-5.3
1:65
§ 3-5.3. Removal by Code Enforcement Officer; Cost to be Tax Lien.
[Ord. #256; 1972 Code § 41-13; New]
In all cases where any brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash and debris and grass over the
height of six inches are removed from any lands by the Borough under the
provisions of this section, the Code Enforcement Officers in charge of the
removal of these materials shall certify the cost thereof to the Governing
Body. Upon receipt of the certificate of cost, the Governing Body shall
examine the same and if found correct shall cause the cost as shown
thereon to be charged against the property from which said material was
removed. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon such lands and
shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon said lands and shall bear the same interest rate as taxes
and shall be collected and enforced by the officers of the Borough in the
same manner as taxes.
§ 3-5.4. Penalties. [Ord. #256; 1972 Code § 41-14; New]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable to the penalty
established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. The continuation of such violation
for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense and the person
or persons allowing or permitting the continuation of the violation may be
punished as provided above for each separate offense.
§ 3-5.5. Definitions. [New]
As used in this section, the following definitions shall have the following
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Shall mean and include any person, persons, corporation,
partnership or firm, or other owner or tenant of the subject property.
§ 3-6. CURFEW FOR MINORS DURING HALLOWEEN SEASON AND
IN TIME OF EMERGENCY.
§ 3-6.1. Hours of Curfew for Minors Designated During Halloween
Season and in Time of Emergency. [Ord. #283; Ord. #433; Ord.
#486; Ord. #525; 1972 Code § 46-1; Ord. #810]
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years, unaccompanied
by his parent or parents, guardian or other adult person having the custody
or care of such minor, to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or remain in
or upon the public places, public highways, roads, places of amusement or
entertainment, places of business carried on for profits to which the public
is invited, vacant lots, cemeteries or other public places, either on foot
or in or on any vehicle, within the confines of the Borough, between the
hours of 7:30 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Prevailing Time of the following days: every
day during the period between October 20 to November 1st, inclusive, in
each year henceforth, with the exception of October 30th "Mischief Night"
§ 3-5.3 BRIELLE CODE § 3-6.1
1:66
during which time the curfew shall be in effect from 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Prevailing Time or in times of municipal emergency involving riots or civil
disorder, to be declared by the Mayor with the consent of the Public Safety
Committee of the Governing Body. Such declaration of municipal emergency
shall be posted conspicuously in the Municipal Building or in other building
in which the Governing Body usually holds its regular meetings.
§ 3-6.2. Responsibility of Parents and Guardians. [Ord. #283; Ord.
#486; 1972 Code § 46-2]
It shall be unlawful for the parent or parents, guardian or other adult person
having the care or custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to permit
such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in violation of subsection
3-6.1 between the times and within the period therein set forth.
§ 3-6.3. Nonapplicability. [Ord. #283; Ord. #486; 1972 Code § 46-3]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any minor below the age
of 18 years who shall be gainfully employed, who shall be a bona fide
student of a school of evening instruction, who shall be in attendance at a
function sponsored by a religious or school organization or who shall be in
attendance at a properly supervised recreational program, during the time
necessarily required to travel between such minor's residence and the place
of assembly.
§ 3-7. STORAGE OF UNLICENSED INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
§ 3-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. #301; 1972 Code § 85-1]
As used in this section:
INOPERABLE VEHICLE — Shall mean any motor vehicle which is not
capable of being used or operated is hereby deemed to be a motor vehicle
which cannot be moved under its own power from place to place lawfully on
a public highway.
STORE OR STORED — Shall mean the keeping of a motor vehicle upon any
lands and premises, public or private, for a period of more than 15 days.
§ 3-7.2. Storage of Inoperable Vehicles Prohibited; Exceptions.
[Ord. #301; 1972 Code § 85-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or to permit or cause to be
stored, upon any lands and premises, any motor vehicle which is not capable
of being presently used or operated, unless such motor vehicle is garaged.
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a motor vehicle located
on the lands and premises of a licensed new or used automobile dealer
or licensed service station operator where the motor vehicle is being or is
about to be repaired or is being disposed of or scrapped.
§ 3-8. BICYCLES.
§ 3-6.1 GENERAL § 3-8.1
1:67
§ 3-8.1. Authorization to Chief of Police. [Ord. #459; 1972 Code
§ 40-1]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to make, establish,
publish and enforce rules, regulations and penalties regarding ownership
and operation of bicycles as set forth in this section.
§ 3-8.2. Registration. [Ord. #459; 1972 Code § 40-2]
Each owner of a bicycle in the Borough may be required to register the
bicycle with the Police Department.
§ 3-8.3. Inspections. [Ord. #459; 1972 Code § 40-3]
The Police Department may, on a regular basis, a spot-check basis, or both,
inspect any bicycle operated in the Borough to determine whether or not
the bicycle is maintained in a safe condition.
§ 3-8.4. Standards of Operation. [Ord. #459; 1972 Code § 40-4]
Reasonable standards shall be established for the safe operation of bicycles,
including but not limited to standards of lighting and marking for night
operation, requirements that bicycles be walked and not ridden within 200
feet of school property on school days, and the like.
§ 3-8.5. Regulations for the Prevention of Bicycle Theft. [Ord. #459;
1972 Code § 40-5]
To inhibit and discourage theft, standards may be established concerning
requirements for locking and chaining bicycles in all locations except
residences within the Borough.
§ 3-8.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #459; 1972 Code § 40-6]
A schedule of penalties for violations of rules and regulations concerning
bicycles may be established. Except as specifically provided by the Statutes
of New Jersey, no penalty shall exceed the impounding of a bicycle for a
period of 30 days.
§ 3-8.7. Incorporation of Statutory Provisions by Reference. [Ord.
#459; 1972 Code § 40-7]
All relevant Statutes of New Jersey concerning the ownership and operation
of bicycles, including N.J.S.A. 39:4-10 et seq., are incorporated herein by
reference. No rule or regulation established pursuant to this ordinance shall
in any way contravene the meaning and intent of any such statute.
§ 3-9. SPEED OF POWER VESSELS.
§ 3-8.1 BRIELLE CODE § 3-9.1
1:68
§ 3-9.1. Definitions. [Ord. #375; 1972 Code § 68-1]
As used in this section:
MOTOR — Shall mean a permanently installed fuel-consuming mechanism
by which the vessel is or may be propelled and a detachable or outboard
motor, including an electrical outboard motor.
OPERATOR — Shall mean every person having the charge, control,
operation or direction of any "power vessel."
POWER VESSEL — Shall mean a vessel temporarily or permanently
equipped with a motor, and shall not be deemed to include a vessel
propelled wholly by sails or by muscular power.
§ 3-9.2. Speed of Power Vessels. [Ord. #375; 1972 Code § 68-2; New]
The speed of power vessels shall at all times be regulated so as to avoid
danger or injury to all manner of craft whether floating, moored, anchored
or underway, or to piers, wharfs, bulkheads, draw spans or other waterfront
construction, either directly or by the effect of the wash or wave raised
by such power vessel through it speed or otherwise.
§ 3-9.3. Operation in Reckless or Dangerous Manner. [Ord. #820]
No power vessel shall be operated in a reckless manner. Reckless operation
shall include operating such vessel in a manner which unnecessarily
interferes with the free and proper use of any waters or which unnecessarily
endangers other craft therein, or the life or limb of any person upon their or
such other craft or in the water.
§ 3-10. ABANDONMENT OF BOATS IN TERRITORIAL WATERWAYS.
§ 3-10.1. Prohibited. [Ord. #601; 1972 Code § 67-25; New]
§ 3-11. SAFETY EQUIPMENT REQUIRED AT DOCKS, WHARVES
AND PIERS.
a. Every boat in the territorial waterways of the Borough of Brielle which
is abandoned, or which becomes a menace to navigation or is
unseaworthy, or sinks, or grounds, or become otherwise disabled is
hereby declared to be a nuisance, and the owner or person in charge
thereof shall abate such nuisance within five days after receiving
written notice from the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough.
b. Any person who fails to remove this boat within five days of mailing of
notice or personal service of notice from the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Borough shall be liable for penalty as established in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5. Every day a particular violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 3-9.1 GENERAL § 3-11.1
1:69
§ 3-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. #390; 1972 Code § 47-1]
As used in this section:
PIER — Shall mean any fixed or floating structure for securing vessels,
loading or unloading persons or property or providing access to the water,
and including any wharf, dock, float or any other loading facility.
§ 3-11.2. Safety Equipment Required. [Ord. #390; 1972 Code
§ 47-2]
Any person, firm or corporation owning or occupying a pier, or portion of
a pier, along the shoreline of the Borough which is available for use by the
public shall provide and maintain the following safety equipment on both
sides of the pier for each 100 feet of pier or portion thereof:
§ 3-12. POSTERS OR SIGNS PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
[Ord. #43; Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 67-11]
No person shall place any posters or signs on property belonging to the
Borough or the Board of Education of the Borough without permission of
the Governing Body or the Brielle Board of Education.
§ 3-13. SPECIAL EVENTS. [Ord. #43; Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 67-17;
Ord. #1046-2015]
a. A movable ladder attached to such pier which shall be of sufficient
length to extend into the water for a depth of at least three feet at mean
low tide.
b. A ring buoy or other Coast-Guard-approved life-saving device securely
fastened to the pier by a lifeline which shall consist of cotton, manila or
hemp rope or other suitable material not less than 1/4 inch in diameter
and not less than 100 feet in length. Such ring buoy or such life-saving
device must be clearly visible and capable of being freely thrown.
a. Application to Conduct a Special Event.
1. Any individual, group or organization may make application to the
Governing Body of the Borough of Brielle to conduct a Special
Event within the political boundaries of the Borough of Brielle.
2. Said "Special Events" shall be limited to the following:
(a) Foot/Bike Race.
(b) Walk-a-Thon.
(c) Craft Show.
(d) Parade.
(e) Block Parties.
§ 3-11.1 BRIELLE CODE § 3-13
1:70
(f) Promotional Event.
3. All special events shall be limited to a maximum of three days.
Applicants shall comply with all requirements as stated in the
permit as to nature of the event, duration, applicant information,
insurance and execution of an Indemnification & Release
Agreement.
4. Application for such events shall be submitted at least 30 business
days prior to the event. The applicant's signature, executed in front
of a notary shall indicate the provisions within the application are
true and accurate. The contact person's information shall be clearly
indentified.
5. There shall be a nonrefundable application fee of $20 for a block
party and $50 for all other events. This shall be paid upon
submission of the application. The fee may be waived by the
Council for charitable or other events on a case by case basis.
6. A security deposit in the amount determined by the Council shall be
made to the Borough Clerk for reasonable anticipated Borough
costs and expenses for public works, police services or first aid.
This shall be in the form of a certified check payable to the
Borough, which shall be returned subsequent to the event.
7. All sponsors/applicants shall obtain a general liability policy of
insurance for the event per day naming the Borough as an
additional insured. This shall be in the minimum amount of
$250,000 for a block party and $1,000,000 for all others.
8. The applicant shall also execute and provide an indemnity and hold
harmless agreement holding the Borough harmless and expressly
provided that the organizer(s) agree to defend, protect and
indemnify and hold the Borough, its officers, employees and agents
harmless from any and all claims, damages and expenses.
9. Violations of any Borough ordinances such as noise, alcohol,
parking, etc. shall be prosecuted pursuant to same unless
specifically exempt by the Council for the event.
10. No sale of beer or other alcohol shall take place without prior
approval of the Council. Beer or wine may be served at block
parties (except to or by minors) as long as a fee is not charged.
11. All applications must be approved by resolution of the Mayor and
Council.
b. Unauthorized Parades. No parades, marches or public processions shall
be held in the Borough without special permission of the Governing
Body, and persons taking part in parades, marches or public
processions without such permission will be deemed to be in violation
of this section.
§ 3-13 GENERAL § 3-14
1:71
§ 3-14. SLEEPING OR LIVING IN VEHICLES. [Ord. #43; Ord. #433;
1972 Code § 67-22]
No person shall at any time use any automobile, truck or other vehicle
located on any public or private highway, road or street, or on any public or
private lot or premises in the Borough for sleeping or living purposes.
§ 3-15. JUMPING OR THROWING OBJECTS FROM BRIDGES. [Ord.
#563; 1972 Code § 67-17]
No person shall jump, leap or dive, nor throw or push any person or object,
from any portion of the State Highway Route No. 35 or State Highway Route
No. 70 bridges or from any bridge within the Borough.
§ 3-16. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
§ 3-16.1. Prohibited on Public or Semi-Public Property. [Ord. #540;
1972 Code § 67-19]
§ 3-16.2. Permit Required for Consumption in Public Places under
Supervision and Management of Borough. [Ord. #341; 1972 Code
§ 38-28]
It shall be unlawful for any person, including occupants of vehicles, to
consume or pretend to consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any
public sidewalk, public highway, public park, public recreation area, or in
or upon any other public place under the supervision and management of
the Borough unless a permit for that purpose shall have been issued by the
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control with the consent of the Governing
Body.
§ 3-16.3. Applicability. [Ord. #341; 1972 Code § 38-29]
The provisions of this section shall be in addition and supplemental to the
provisions of any other ordinance of the Borough.
a. Sales, Service or Consumption Prohibited. No person shall serve, sell
dispense, drink or consume any alcoholic beverages on a street of the
Borough, or upon any public or semipublic grounds, parks, sidewalks,
beaches or marine basins or in any automobile or other vehicle or in any
other means of transportation on public streets, highways, alleys,
avenues, grounds, sidewalks, beaches, parks, marine basins,
beachfronts or boardwalks in the Borough.
b. Possession of Container. No person shall have or retain in his
possession or throw or discard an empty or partially consumed
container, glass, bottle or can containing an alcoholic beverage while
walking, running or standing, or while occupying a motor vehicle or
other means of transportation on a public street, highway, avenue, alley,
road or public or semipublic grounds, park, sidewalk, marine basin,
parking lot, beachfront or boardwalk in the Borough.
§ 3-14 BRIELLE CODE § 3-16.4
1:72
§ 3-16.4. Purchase, Service, Consumption or Possession in
Accordance with State Statute. [Ord. #210; 1972 Code § 38-15; Ord.
#793]
No person under the legal age shall order, be served with, have in
possession, consume or be under the influence of any alcoholic beverage,
except as provided for by State Statute, within the confines of the Borough
of Brielle.
§ 3-16.5. Specific Prohibitions for Outside Public Entertainment.
[Ord. #1047-2015]
No place of public entertainment, business, or any commercial
establishment that has outside entertainment of any kind, be it on a deck,
patio, parking lot or other exterior location, may permit said entertainment
except on Fridays, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, as per the hours listed
below.
Live entertainment shall be limited to a piano player, a guitar player or a
group (not to exceed a trio).
Controlled background music may be permitted during the hours of 12:00
p.m. to 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, and from 12:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m. on Fridays,
Saturdays and holidays, provided that said music is in compliance with all
other ordinances of the Borough of Brielle.
For purposes of this subsection, controlled background music shall be
defined as music that is not created by live performance, but by other
means such as electronic or computer generated, the level of which can be
controlled, to lower or raise, by a dial, lever, or other industry standard.
During such days as said live public entertainment is permitted, the hours
for such entertainment shall be:
Fridays 6:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Saturdays 1:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Sundays 2:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Holidays 1:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.
(Unless the holiday falls on a Sunday then the Sunday regulation shall be in
effect).
For purposes of this subsection, holidays shall be limited to New Year's
Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday, President's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day (July 4th), Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
A commercial establishment wishing to conduct a special event may apply
to the Mayor and Council, in accordance with the provisions of the
ordinance governing such special events. No establishment may seek to
§ 3-16.4 GENERAL § 3-16.5
1:73
obtain more than three such permits for three separate events during the
course of a calendar year.
§ 3-17. CERTAIN ACTS AND DISPLAYS PROHIBITED.
§ 3-17.1. Offensive Language; Interference with People. [Ord. #770,
§ 1]
No person shall utter loud and offensive or indecent language or make
offensive remarks to or upon any person within the confines of the Borough,
or obstruct or interfere with any persons being within the confines of the
Borough.
§ 3-17.2. Public Attire, Sale of Obscene Literature, Obscene
Exhibitions. [Ord. #770, § 2]
No person shall appear on any street, avenue or public place in this Borough
in a state of nudity or in any obscene, indecent or lewd dress, or cause any
obscene, indecent or lewd exposure whatever, or be guilty of any obscenity,
lewdness or any indecent act or behavior; nor shall exhibit, sell or offer to
sell any obscene, indecent or lewd book, picture or thing, nor shall exhibit
or perform any obscene, indecent, immoral or lewd play or representation.
§ 3-17.3. Improper Noises or Disturbances. [Ord. #770, § 3]
No person shall make, aid or assist in making any unreasonable or improper
noise, disturbance, riot or breach of the peace within the Borough.
§ 3-17.4. Interfering with, Resisting Police Officer; Failure to Assist.
[Ord. #770, § 4]
No person shall, within the limits of said Borough, hinder or obstruct any
Borough Officer in the performance of his duties, nor shall any person
willfully refuse or neglect to assist any Borough Officer when lawfully called
upon by him so to do in the execution of any process or in the suppression
of any breach of the peace or disorderly conduct, or in case of an escape,
or when such officer is resisted in the discharge of his duty; nor shall any
person knowingly resist or oppose any officer or person authorized by law
in serving or attempting to serve any writ, bill, order or process or when
making any arrest, either with or without a warrant.
§ 3-17.5. Indecent Exposure or Attire. [Ord. #770, § 5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to appear or travel on any street, avenue,
highway, road, beach or waterway located in the Borough of Brielle, or to
appear in any public place, store or business in said Borough, in a state of
nudity or in an indecent or lewd dress or garment or to make any indecent
or unnecessary exposure of his or her person.
§ 3-16.5 BRIELLE CODE § 3-17.6
1:74
§ 3-17.6. Enforcement and Authority. [Ord. #770, § 6]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Police Department of the
Borough of Brielle to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 3-17.7. Method of Enforcement, Penalties. [Ord. #770, § 7]
Violation of this section shall be cause for summons and complaint to be
issued forthwith, notwithstanding and in addition to any other relief and
penalties provided in any other ordinance of the Borough.
§ 3-18. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-18.1. Drug-Free School Zone Map Adopted. [Ord. #773, § 1]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, 44 (C.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about September
7th, 1988 by Birdsall Engineering Inc., Borough of Brielle, Monmouth
County engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and
record of the location and areas within the municipality of property which is
used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary
or secondary school or school board, and of the areas on or within 1,000
feet of such property.
§ 3-18.2. Location and Boundaries of School Property. [Ord. #773,
§ 2]
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-18.1 of this section shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within
1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board which is used for school purposes until such time if
any that this section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries of school property and Drug-
Free School Zones.
§ 3-18.3. Notification of Changes in Location or Boundaries. [Ord.
#773, § 3]
The School Board, or the Chief Administrative Officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Borough of Brielle, Monmouth County,
Engineer and the Borough of Brielle, Monmouth County, Attorney of any
changes or contemplated changes in the location and boundaries of any
property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-18.4. Copies of Map on File. [Ord. #773, § 4]
The Clerk of the Municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection
§ 3-17.6 GENERAL § 3-18.4
1:75
3-18.1 of this section, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy
thereof to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request
such a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the
map approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further
directed that a true copy of such map and of this section shall be provided
without cost to the County Clerk and to the Office of the Monmouth County
Prosecutor.
§ 3-18.5. Map To Be Used as Evidence. [Ord. #773, § 5]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-18.1 of this section was prepared and is intended to be
used as evidence in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this
State, and that pursuant to State law, such map shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
b. (Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map), all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by (or leased to) a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9,
1987, that being the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (C. 2C:35-7).
c. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, c. 44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 3-18.1 of this section. The failure of the
map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of
such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record
that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school
board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
§ 3-18.4 BRIELLE CODE § 3-18.5
1:76
§ 3-19. ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 3-19.1. Purpose. [Ord. #812, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to:
§ 3-19.2. Scope. [Ord. #812, § 2]
The provisions of this section shall apply to any person or entity who owns,
operates or maintains any alarm system having an audible signaling device
or requiring a response by the Department of Police, Fire Department or
other municipal agency. The terms of this section shall in no way prohibit
alarm businesses from providing service by private source within or without
the Borough of Brielle so long as such person having premises protected
by an alarm system shall be responsible for the registration thereof in
accordance with subsections 3-19.4 and 3-19.5.
§ 3-19.3. Definitions. [Ord. #812, § 3]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean any mechanical or electrical device which
is designed or used for the detection of burglar, robbery, intrusion or
fire within a building, structure or facility or for alerting others to the
commission of an unlawful act or hazard within a building, structure, or
facility, or both; and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message
when actuated.
ALARM SYSTEMS — Include but are not limited to, dial alarms, audible
signaling devices and local alarms.
APPLICANT — Shall mean the person applying for the permit to maintain
an alarm system as hereinafter set forth.
d. All of the requirements set forth in L. 1988, c. 44 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free school zone map have
been complied with.
a. Provide standards and regulations for various types of intrusion,
burglary, fire and other emergency alarm devices and equipment,
whether they operate by producing a visual or audible signal, and
whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means of actuating a
device requiring response thereto by the police department, fire
department or other municipal agency.
b. Provide for the registration of alarm systems in order to prevent
response by public safety forces to false alarms and to minimize related
threats to public safety which can result from the negligent installation
and/or operation of such alarm systems and to improve response to
alarm calls.
§ 3-18.5 GENERAL § 3-19.3
1:77
AUDIBLE SIGNALING DEVICE — Shall mean any device, such as a bell,
siren, whistle, horn, gong, klaxon, or similar device employed to call
attention and which may be heard beyond the limits of the property
concerned.
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Brielle, Monmouth County, New
Jersey.
CENTRAL STATION — Shall mean a service providing among its services
the service of receiving on a continuous basis through trained employees,
emergency signals from alarm systems, and thereafter immediately relaying
the message to a special telephone number in the police department.
CHIEF OF POLICE — Shall mean the Chief of Police of the Borough of
Brielle or his designated representative.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Police Department of the Borough of
Brielle.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Shall mean a member of the
Department of Police or designated deputies. This person may also function
as the Alarm System Inspector.
DIAL ALARM — Shall mean that type of automatic telephone dialing device
using the telephone system to transmit an alarm of intrusion, fire, smoke,
flood or other peril to the Police Department.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean any alarm activated by inadvertence,
negligence or the unintentional act of some one other than an intruder, and
includes as well, alarms caused by the malfunctioning of the alarm device
or other relevant equipment, as well as any unexplained cause.
LOCAL ALARM — Shall mean any alarm device which, when actuated,
produces an audible signal or gives a warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood
or other peril to the outside or exterior of the premises.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any person owning or operating an alarm system
within the scope of this section who has been issued a permit to operate
said system.
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
§ 3-19.4. Registration and Permits. [Ord. #812, § 4]
a. No person shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system unless
the system has been registered and approved by the Chief of Police. The
alarm system shall be deemed registered at such time as the permit is
issued. Any person who owns or operates an alarm device or system, no
matter what type, shall make application for a continuance or
installation thereof, in writing to the Chief of Police, which application
shall include, but not be limited to the following, to wit:
1. The date;
2. The name, type and location of the device;
§ 3-19.3 BRIELLE CODE § 3-19.4
1:78
§ 3-19.5. General Regulations. [Ord. #812, § 5]
3. The name address and twenty-four-hour telephone number of the
alarm installer or person responsible for its maintenance;
4. A list of persons with their telephone numbers to be contacted in
the event of an alarm;
5. The person responsible to remit fees or fines assessed under this
section;
6. Provisions relating to false alarms, testing procedures,
indemnification and hold harmless provisions; and
7. All other information as may be required by the Chief of Police.
b. Local alarms, audible signaling devices and alarm systems monitored
by a central station, excluding internal smoke alarms not sounding
outside the premises, shall be registered with the Borough. For each
local alarm, audible signaling device and alarm systems monitored by a
central station, as provided herein, beginning January 1, 1992, the
owner or operator shall pay to the Borough a one time registration fee
of $10. The fee represents part of the cost of investigating and
processing the application and permit and is not refundable.
c. Any registration permitted hereunder shall be approved upon the
express condition that the registrant shall indemnify and hold the
Borough harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising
out of the activities.
d. For each dial alarm, the owner or operator shall pay to the Borough a
one time registration fee of $15, which includes the costs of installing
and maintaining the special telephone line or lines required in the
Police Department necessitated by these systems.
e. The Chief of Police shall issue a permit for the operation of an alarm
system if he or his designated representative is satisfied that the
registration information is complete and that the alarm system will be
operated in conformance to this section. The permit may be granted,
subject to any special conditions stated thereon, if necessary.
f. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to inform the Chief of
Police or his designated representative in writing of any changes in the
above information which may occur over time.
g. The permit shall be denied if the applicant has made any false,
misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application
for a permit.
a. Dial Alarms.
1. Dial alarms shall only be coded to dial a special telephone number,
which number shall be provided by the Chief of Police or his
§ 3-19.4 GENERAL § 3-19.5
1:79
designated representative, to the dial alarm permittee. No dial
alarm shall be coded to dial the number of the general police
switchboard.
2. The message must conform to an approved format.
3. Total length of a message must not exceed 15 seconds.
4. The message must be transmitted twice, but no more than four
times.
5. Any person having a dial alarm device which dials the general
police number, upon discovery thereof, shall receive notice in
writing from the Chief of Police or his designated representative
requiring the owner or operator of the dial alarm device to comply
with the terms of this section. If the owner or operator fails to
comply with the terms of this section within 30 days of the receipt
of the aforesaid notice, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a penalty of $50. Each and every day in which a violation of any
provision of this section exists shall constitute a separate violation.
6. All components of such equipment must be maintained in good
repair by the owner, and when evidence exists that there has been
failure to comply with the requirements of this section, the Chief of
Police or his representative is authorized to demand that such
device be disconnected until at such time as compliance with
current requirements is reestablished.
b. Alarms Monitored by a Central Station.
1. Central station alarms shall only dial a special telephone number,
which number shall be provided by the Chief of Police or his
designated representative, to the permittee.
2. Any person having a central station alarm service which dials the
general police number, upon discovery thereof, shall receive notice
in writing from the Chief of Police or his designated representative
requiring the permittee having the central station alarm service to
comply with the terms of this section. If the permittee fails to
comply with the terms of this section within 30 days of the receipt
of the aforesaid notice, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject
to a penalty of $50. Each and every day in which a violation of any
provision of this section exists shall constitute a separate violation.
3. All components of such equipment must be maintained in good
repair by the owner, and when evidence exists that there has been
failure to comply with the operational requirements of this section,
the Chief of Police or his representative is authorized to demand
that such device be disconnected until at such time as compliance
with current requirements is reestablished.
§ 3-19.5 BRIELLE CODE § 3-19.6
1:80
§ 3-19.6. Audible Signaling Devices. [Ord. #812, § 6]
All audible signaling devices shall be equipped with a timing device to limit
the sounding of the signaling device to 20 minutes or less.
§ 3-19.7. False Alarms: Penalties. [Ord. #812, § 7]
§ 3-19.8. Resetting of Alarms. [Ord. #812, § 8]
a. In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof, shall
immediately notify the Department in a manner prescribed by the Chief
of Police. In addition, in the case of false alarms, the Chief of Police shall
cause an investigation to be made and shall keep a record of said false
alarms on file. Upon conviction of violating this section, the following
penalties are prescribed:
1. For the first, second and third false alarm in any given calendar
year, a warning shall be issued.
2. For the fourth or any subsequent false alarms in the same calendar
year, a summons will be issued and a fine, according to the
following schedule, shall be paid to the Borough of Brielle:
(a) For the fourth false alarm $25.
(b) For the fifth false alarm $50.
(c) For the sixth false alarm $100.
(d) For the seventh false alarm $150.
(e) For the eighth and subsequent false alarms $200.
3. In the event of a conflict with the fines and penalties for fire and
smoke alarms contained herein with the New Jersey State Fire
Prevention Code, the State Code shall govern.
a. The permittee, or in his absence, his designee, shall be responsible for
resetting activated alarms upon being notified to do so by the Police
Department. Audible alarms shall be designed to reset within 20
minutes of initial activation, and dial alarms shall have a maximum
duration of 25 seconds.
b. Following an alarm activation, an alarm system permittee or his
designated representative shall, within 15 minutes after a request by a
Borough police officer or a member of a public safety force, allow
access to the protected premises and/or reset the alarm system.
c. Failure to Respond to Reset. If the permittee or a person responsible for
the management and supervision of the alarm system fails to respond to
a request for access to the protected premises and/or fails to reset an
alarm, he shall upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty of $50.
§ 3-19.6 GENERAL § 3-19.8
1:81
§ 3-19.9. Rule Making Authority. [Ord. #812, § 9]
The Chief of Police may promulgate written rules and regulations
supplementing this section in order to provide for recordkeeping and
efficient management of said system; provided, however, that the Borough
Council shall first approve said rules or any changes thereto by appropriate
resolution.
§ 3-19.10. Penalty. [Ord. #812, § 10]
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person found guilty of a violation
of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both, in addition to any other
penalties which may be imposable under any other section hereof. Each and
every day in which a violation of any provision of this section exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 3-20. SMOKING OR CARRYING LIGHTED TOBACCO IN
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS. [Ord. #816]
Insofar as municipalities have the authority to enact ordinances to control
or prohibit the use of tobacco products in municipal buildings, the
Governing Body hereby ordains that it shall be a petty disorderly person
charge for any individual to smoke or carry lighted tobacco products within
the Brielle Municipal Building and the Curtis House except in such room or
rooms so designated by the Council and posted by signage stating said fact.
§ 3-21. PROJECTILE WEAPONS PROHIBITED.
§ 3-21.1. Definitions. [Ord. #877, § 3-17.1]
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the following meanings:
Each and every day in which a violation of any provision of this section
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
a. ARROW, BOLT OR DART - Shall mean a projectile of any length
composed of, or made wholly or in part from, any natural, synthetic or
molded material, or any combination thereof, either formed or capable
of being formed, at its most distal end, to a pointed tip possessing any
degree of sharpness or beveling whatsoever, or capable of having
attached thereto by any means a separate and distinct component as
aforedescribed.
b. BOW, CROSSBOW OR SLINGSHOT - Shall mean any device or
instrument which is, or is in the nature of, an air-propelled gun, catapult
spring-gun or device of a similar nature in which the propelling force is
a spring, elastic band, tension band or coil composed of natural and/or
synthetic material (regardless of whether the device is designated for
use in "hunting", "recreational" or "target" applications by virtue of the
§ 3-19.8 BRIELLE CODE § 3-21.1
1:82
§ 3-21.2. Prohibitions. [Ord. #877, § 3-17.2]
§ 3-21.3. Penalties. [Ord. #877, § 3-17.3]
measurement of the propulsion employed, whether in "fps" [feet per
second], "pounds", or the like), carbon dixoide, compressed or other
vapor, air or compressed air, or is ignited by compressed air, capable
of firing or ejecting an arrow, bolt, dart or other missile with sufficient
force to injure a person.
c. FIREARM - Shall mean any gun, device or instrument as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1(f).
d. PROJECTILE - Shall mean any solid or semi-solid projectable ball, pellet
or missile, which is, or may be designed so as to include an impactsensitive
membrane which fractures upon surface contact and delivers
or is capable of delivering any gas, vapor, noxious or non-noxious
substance, including, but not limited to, "paint balls".
a. No person shall, within the Borough of Brielle, cast any arrow, bolt, dart
or other projectile from a bow, crossbow, or slingshot or discharge a
firearm so as to cause any arrow, bolt, dart or other projectile to cross
through, pass over, or terminate its flight or path in or upon, the
property of another within the Borough.
b. No person shall, within the Borough of Brielle, cast any arrow, bolt, dart
or other projectile from a bow, crossbow, or slingshot or discharge a
firearm across any State, County, municipal or publicly-traveled road or
highway, so as to cause any such arrow, bolt, dart or other projectile to
cross through, pass over, or terminate its flight or path in or upon, any
State, County, municipal or publicly-traveled road or highway within
the Borough.
a. Any persons violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction of their first offense hereunder, be
punishable by the imposition of a fine in an amount of not less than, nor
more than, $500.
b. Any persons violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction of their second offense hereunder, be
punishable by the imposition of a fine in an amount of not less than, nor
more than $1,000.
c. In the event that the second conviction of any person violating or failing
to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall have occurred
within one year from the conviction of the initial ordinance violation,
such person shall also be punishable as a repeat offender, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, and, in addition to the fine imposed by paragraph b
hereof, shall be fined in an amount not less than, nor more than, $1,000.
d. Any person thrice convicted of violating or failing to comply with any of
the provisions of this section shall be punishable by the imposition of a
§ 3-21.1 GENERAL § 3-21.3
1:83
§ 3-21.4. Enforcement and Authority. [Ord. #877, § 3-17.4]
It shall be the duty and the responsibility of the Police Department of the
Borough of Brielle to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 3-22. TOWERS AND WRECKERS.
§ 3-22.1. Rotating List of Towing Contractors Established. [Ord.
#907, § 3-22.1]
There is hereby established a rotating list of towing and storage contractors
authorized to provide vehicle towing and storage services required by
the Borough of Brielle. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the
administration of the rotating list. Nothing in these rules and regulations
shall be construed so as to prevent any owner or operator from selecting his
own towing service from the approved rotational towers list.
§ 3-22.2. Definitions. [Ord. #906, § 3-22.2]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC TOWING SERVICES — Shall mean the removal and transportation
of a vehicle from a highway, street or other public or private road, parking
area or from a storage facility. This chapter and the definitions herein shall
not include the recovery of a vehicle from a position beyond the public rightof-
way or berm or from being impaled upon any other object outside of the
public right-of-way or berm.
CLASSIFICATION OF TOWING SERVICES — Shall mean:
fine in an amount of not less than, nor more than, $1,000, or
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days, or
both, or to a period of community service not exceeding 90 days at the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
Light-Duty.
Commercially manufactured chassis with a rated capacity of less
than 10,000 pounds GVWR.
1.
Commercially manufactured lifting apparatus with a minimum
capacity of four tons.
2.
3. Dual rear wheels.
4. Universal tow sling or wheel lift with system safety chains.
5. Steering wheel lock.
6. One snatch block with a three-ton rating.
7. Dolly equipped.
a.
§ 3-21.3 BRIELLE CODE § 3-22.2
1:84
DISABLED VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which has been abandoned,
impounded or rendered inoperable as a result of a mechanical failure,
involvement in an accident or criminal activity. A vehicle, the location of
8. Proper safety lights.
9. Amber rotation emergency flashing light.
10. Two floodlights to the rear of the vehicle.
11. One motorcycle sling.
12. Large broom and shovel.
Heavy-Duty:
Commercially manufactured chassis with a rated capacity of not
less than 32,900 pounds GVWR.
1.
Commercially manufactured lifting apparatus with a minimum
capacity of 25 tons.
2.
3. Two snatch blocks with a twelve-ton rating.
4. Air brake hookup lines.
5. Tow sling/tow bar or wheel lift with System 7 safety chains.
6. Proper safety lights.
7. Amber rotation emergency flashing light.
8. Two floodlights to the rear of the vehicle.
9. Steering wheel lock.
b.
Car Carrier; Flatbed.
Commercially manufactured chassis with a rated capacity of not
less than 10,000 pounds GVWR.
1.
One hydraulically powered winch with a pulling capacity of not less
than four tons.
2.
3. Fifty feet of 3/8 inch cable.
Seventeen feet or longer hydraulically operated slide-back or tilt
bed.
4.
5. One snatch block four-ton capacity.
6. Tie down chains.
7. Proper safety lights.
8. Amber rotation emergency flashing lights.
c.
§ 3-22.2 GENERAL § 3-22.2
1:85
which constitutes a hazard to the motoring public, shall be deemed disabled
for the purposes of this section.
IMPOUNDMENT — Shall mean the act of storing and confining a vehicle
upon an order of the Police Department at either the towing operator's
storage area or at a Borough facility as a result of abandonment,
involvement in an accident or suspected criminal activity.
INSIDE BUILDING STORAGE FACILITY — Shall mean a vehicle storage
facility that is completely indoors, having one or more openings or storage
bins in the walls for the storage of vehicles, and that is secured by a locking
device on each bin or opening.
OUTSIDE SECURED STORAGE FACILITY — Shall mean a vehicle storage
facility that is not completely indoors and that is secured by a fence, wall or
other man-made barrier that is at least six feet in height and is protected
with an on-site security or alarm system. Outside storage facilities shall also
maintain adequate lighting to protect stored vehicles from vandalism. The
amount of spaces is 20 cars.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED STORAGE FACILITY — Not permitted.
OWNER — Shall mean a person, firm, corporation or partnership who owns
and/or operates a vehicle on the roads and highways within the Borough
of Brielle, which vehicle, by reason of being disabled or abandoned on the
roads and highways of the Borough, requires towing and/or storage.
TOW OPERATOR — Shall mean a person, firm, corporation or partnership
engaged in the business of providing towing, road and storage services for
vehicles.
§ 3-22.3. Towing and Storage Services Required. [Ord. #906,
§ 3-22.3]
a. Towing. Towing services shall be available and provided on a seven-dayper-
week twenty-four-hour-per-day basis for the entire geographic area
of the Borough of Brielle. The contractors on the rotating list must be
able to respond to any tow scene within 20 minutes of the Borough's
request.
b. The contractor shall be responsible for the cleanup of debris in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.8, with the exception of chemicals,
medical or hazardous waste materials.
c. Storage. Storage shall be provided for all vehicles towed until claimed
by the vehicle owner or disposed of in accordance with applicable law.
The contractor shall provide adequate land area sufficient to store 20
vehicles. Each storage area must be enclosed by a security fence. In
addition, inside garage area space for at least one vehicle must be
available. All storage facilities must be within a radius of one mile of
Brielle Police Headquarters.
§ 3-22.2 BRIELLE CODE § 3-22.4
1:86
§ 3-22.4. Police Impounds. [Ord. #906, § 3-22.4]
Motor vehicles, which are stolen, abandoned, involved in a crime or
involved in fatal accidents or accidents which, in the judgment of the police,
may become fatal shall be considered police impounds. Police impounds
shall be towed to either the towing operator's storage area or a location
designated by the police.
§ 3-22.5. Equipment Required. [Ord. #906, § 3-22.5]
§ 3-22.6. Eligibility for Rotating List. [Ord. #906, § 3-22.6]
It shall be the responsibility of the Borough of Brielle with the advice of
the Chief of Police or his designee to approve all applications for towing
operators to be utilized on a rotational basis for the purpose of providing
emergency towing, road and storage services to the owners of motor
vehicles utilizing Borough roads when he determines that the following
requirements have been met by the applicant. On forms prepared by the
Borough and provided by the Police Chief or his designee, all towing
operators shall submit written documentation that they are in compliance
with the qualification requirements set forth below:
a. All contractors on the rotating list shall provide and maintain the
following minimum equipment:
1. One wrecker, sufficient to tow vehicles: minimum four tons.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the contractor painted
or permanently attached to both sides of the tow vehicle in
compliance with State law.
3. Towing vehicles equipped with brooms, shovels, speedy dry and
other street-sweeping equipment for the purpose of cleaning debris
off the roadway.
4. A storage facility, which can accommodate 20 medium-sized
vehicles. The storage shall be lighted, fenced and/or secured in
order to guarantee the safe storage of all vehicles in accordance
with the minimum requirements for indoor and outdoor and
secured storage facilities as aforementioned in this section.
b. All equipment must meet applicable state standards and shall be
subject to periodic inspection by the Borough.
a. The fee for the license issued under this section shall be $100, paid on
receipt of said license from the Borough Clerk. The license shall remain
valid from January 1 to December 31 of each year. It may be renewed
annually by the operator paying a fee of $100, provided that the
operator continues to comply with all the terms and conditions of this
section. Applications received and approved prior to April 30 will be
added to tow list effective July 1. Applications received and approved
prior to October 31 will be added to tow list effective January 1.
§ 3-22.4 GENERAL § 3-22.6
1:87
§ 3-22.7. Rates and Charges for Passenger Vehicles, Motorcycles,
All Terrain Vehicles and Mopeds. [Ord. #906, § 3-22.7]
Rates and charges for passenger vehicles, motorcycles, all terrain vehicles
and mopeds shall be as follows:
b. By making the application to be utilized as a tower or wrecker by the
Police Department and by accepting such employment, the person or
firm agrees to:
1. Provide a prompt response to each call.
2. Clean all debris at the accident site emanating from the accident.
3. Provide the Police Department with the following information on
vehicles unclaimed over 15 days:
(a) The year, make, color and vehicle identification number (VIN).
(b) The owner's name and address.
(c) A copy of the certified letter advising the owner of the vehicle's
whereabouts.
(d) A photograph of the vehicle.
4. Maintain a record in a bound volume of all towing and wrecking
jobs handled, the name of the owner or operator involved, the
charge made for the service, the date and amount of payment and
the location towed from.
5. Comply with all other terms and conditions of this section.
c. In addition to meeting all other criteria of this section and in order to be
eligible for placement upon the rotating list of authorized towers, the
contractor shall supply a certificate of liability insurance by a company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, certifying that the
contractor maintains workers' compensation and garage liability
insurance of not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit and garage
keepers' liability of not less than $100,000 per vehicle, said garage
keepers' legal liability insurance policy to further provide for fire, theft
and explosion. All public liability insurance, including garage liability
and garage keepers' legal liability coverage, shall name the Borough of
Brielle, its officers, agents and employees as additional insurers on the
policy, shall hold them harmless, indemnify them from any and all
claims filed against the Borough arising out of any act or failure to act
on behalf of the contractor and shall contain an endorsement providing
30 days' notice to the Borough in the event of any material changes of
the policy or cancellation thereof. Those contractors meeting the
eligibility requirements shall be approved and added to the rotating list
by resolution of the Borough Council, upon advice of the Chief of Police.
a. Maximum Basic Towing Charges.
§ 3-22.6 BRIELLE CODE § 3-22.7
1:88
§ 3-22.8. Rates and Charges for Trucks and Omnibuses with Gross
Weight of 1 1/2 Tons or More. [Ord. #906, § 3-22.8]
1. Days. (6:00 a.m. — 6:00 p.m.)
(a) First mile or less: $60.
(b) Each additional mile: $1.75.
2. Nights, (6:00 p.m. — 6:00 a.m.) weekends and New Jersey State
holidays:
(a) First mile or less: $70.
(b) Each additional mile: $1.75.
b. Maximum Storage Fee Charges.
1. Inside storage in a secured facility: $27 per day.
2. Outside storage: $22 per day.
a. Maximum Towing Charges.
1. First mile or less: $75.
2. Each additional mile: $1.75.
b. Maximum Storage Fee Charges.
1. Inside building: 10 to 20 spaces $36 per day.
2. Outside building: 10 to 20 spaces, $22 per day.
3. Outside unsecured: 10 to 20 spaces, $18 per day.
c. Road Repair Services. The above fee shall be exclusive of any other
repair service costs provided by the towing operator, including but not
limited to such activities as repairing flat tires or installing new and/or
spare parts in a disabled vehicle. The towing operator shall be
permitted to charge an additional fee based on the tower's prevailing
hourly labor rates and rates for parts or materials. Wherever
applicable, it shall be the responsibility of the towing operator to first
inform the owner of the vehicle of the hourly labor rates and the
estimated total cost for parts and/or materials prior to the performance
of the road repair services.
d. Heavy-Duty Wreckers. The maximum fee permitted for heavy-duty
towing services shall not exceed $175 per hour at any time or on any
day.
e. Recovery. The maximum fee permitted for the recovery of vehicles of
10,000 pounds and up shall not exceed $200 per hour, which rates
include operator and vehicle.
§ 3-22.7 GENERAL § 3-22.8
1:89
§ 3-22.9. Towing Information Supplied to Borough. [Ord. #906,
§ 3-22.9]
f. Flatbeds. No additional fee shall be charged for the flatbed towing of
passenger vehicles, motorcycles, all terrain vehicles and mopeds unless
a request is made by the police or the owner of the vehicle for flatbed
towing. The maximum fee to be charged for flatbed towing is $80 for
daytime and $90 for nighttime towing for the first mile or less, plus
mileage charges in accordance with subsection 3-22.7.
g. Other Expenses. Charges for other basic towing service will be at the
rate of $100 per hour in 15 minute intervals of $25 per fifteen minute
interval.
Cleanup services will be free for the first 20 minutes of cleanup. All
cleanup services in excess of 20 minutes will be charged a single flat
fee of $25.
a. The contractor shall provide to the Borough the following information
concerning vehicles and employees.
1. The year, make, model, vehicle identification number, type of
vehicle, registration number and proof of insurance.
2. The full name and address of all employees and license numbers.
3. The addresses where the contractor shall be regularly based,
telephone numbers available on a twenty-four-hour-per-day basis
and the names of all operators, their addresses and the serial
numbers of their New Jersey motor vehicle licenses.
4. Certification of approved emergency warning lights.
b. Information; Fingerprinting.
1. The contractor shall submit to the Borough of Brielle Police
Department the following information on vehicles unclaimed over
15 days:
(a) The year, make, model, color and vehicle identification
numbers.
(b) The owner's name and address.
(c) A copy of a certified letter advising the owner of the vehicle's
location and circumstances surrounding the same.
(d) A photograph of the vehicle.
(e) The mileage of the vehicle.
2. The contractor shall submit to fingerprinting for the purposes of
obtaining criminal history information on the applicant from
Federal and State records.
§ 3-22.8 BRIELLE CODE § 3-22.9
1:90
§ 3-22.10. General Provisions. [Ord. #906, § 3-22.10]
c. The contractor shall provide the Borough of Brielle with records of all
towed vehicles, storage and towing charges upon request.
a. The hours of 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. shall apply to the day rate on
Monday through Friday, except New Jersey State holidays. The night,
weekend and holiday rate shall otherwise apply.
b. The contractor shall charge the motor vehicle owner/operator or
insurance company directly for all services provided.
c. The contractor may charge an hourly rate for standby time incurred for
winching, uprighting, excessive cleanup and other circumstances which
fall outside the scope of services classified as normal in subsections
3-22.6 and 3-22.7 at the prevailing/established rate.
d. In times of emergencies and/or natural disasters, the Borough of Brielle
reserves the right to contract other towing service operators who may
not be on the rotation list.
e. The owner of a vehicle involved in an accident shall have the right, if he/
she so desires, to designate a tow operator of his/her choice. The
owner's tower must be on the approved rotational towers list.
f. Employees of the towing operator, in responding to a call, shall request
and be afforded police assistance during the course of providing
towing, emergency road services or removal of abandoned or accident
vehicles which such employees find it necessary to turn around, back
up, tow in the opposite direction of traffic or cross the median.
g. Towing operators shall not permit a vehicle to be removed from the
scene of a vehicular accident, the scene of a crime or any other instance
or situation without the prior approval and permission of a police officer
and/or superior at the scene.
h. If a tower responds to a call and the vehicle owner uses their own tower,
responder will be put back on top of call list.
i. In the event that the towing operator fails to respond within 20 minutes
from the time of the call, the Police Department reserves the right to
contact the next available towing operator on the rotational list.
j. In no instance shall the towing operator request payment from the
Borough of Brielle for any services rendered to the owners of private
vehicles.
k. It shall be the responsibility of all towing operators to provide all
motorists utilizing the towing operator's services with a written
schedule of fees which lists all fees to be charged for towing, storage,
and road services within the Borough of Brielle. Said schedule shall be
printed on the business card or towing receipt of the towing contractor.
Towing operators shall not exceed the maximum charges set forth in
§ 3-22.9 GENERAL § 3-22.10
1:91
§ 3-22.11. Supervision of Tow Operator Services. [Ord. #906,
§ 3-22.11]
the fee schedule for towing and the storage of vehicles regulated under
the provisions of this section.
l. The towing and storage fees and fee schedules of all towing operators
serving the Borough on a rotational basis shall be filed with the Chief of
Police and the Borough Clerk and shall be made available to all citizens
upon request. The fee schedule shall be available at the Municipal
Building located at 601 Union Lane, Borough of Brielle, Monday
through Friday, except holidays, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and
4:00 p.m.
m. No towing contractor that receives a call pursuant to the rotational list
shall be permitted to substitute another towing contractor without
approval of the Police Department.
n. During any week in which a towing contractor is the designated tower
on the rotational list, the towing contractor must maintain Saturday
office hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. for customer
pickup of vehicles and retrieval of personal property.
o. During any time in which a towing contractor is on call, the towing
contractor shall maintain a direct telephone access to permit direct
contact with the towing operator and the use of answering machines or
answering services by the towing operator shall be prohibited.
a. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules
and regulations for the supervision, inspection and same operation of
tow trucks, wreckers and other related vehicles and equipment in
accordance with the standards outlined in this section. The Chief shall
maintain due vigilance over all towing operators to make certain that
the tow trucks and other related vehicles and equipment are
maintained in a safe working condition for transporting and hauling
disabled vehicles. The Chief or his designated representative shall have
the right at all times to inspect all tow vehicles and related equipment
which perform services pursuant to this section.
b. At any time, should the Chief or his designee determine that the
vehicles and/or equipment being used are unsafe, he shall have power
and authority to direct that immediate correction or repair of any
automotive defect, malfunction or violation of motor vehicle regulations
within a specified period of time to be determined by the Chief. The
Chief of Police is authorized and empowered to establish and transmit
from time to time to all tow operators on the rotational list, such
additional rules and regulations not inconsistent with these provisions
of this section as may be reasonable and necessary in carrying out the
provisions of this section.
§ 3-22.10 BRIELLE CODE § 3-22.12
1:92
§ 3-22.12. Suspension and Removal for Noncompliance. [Ord. #906,
§ 3-22.12]
§ 3-22.13. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. #906, § 3-22.13]
Any person, firm or corporation who willfully violates any of the provisions
of this section, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding
$1,250 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Each and every violation of this section or each and every day that any
violation shall be permitted to continue shall be construed as a separate and
distinct violation hereof. The Police Department is specifically designated as
the enforcement officers to serve and execute process for violation of this
chapter.
§ 3-23. PERMITTING CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS TO SOLICIT
CONTRIBUTIONS FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES IN THE RIGHT-OFWAY
OF A STATE OR COUNTY ROAD OR HIGHWAY.
a. The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend a towing operator
from the rotational duty service list for a period of up to 30 calendar
days for failure to comply with any subsection of this section. A
subsequent violation may result in the permanent removal of a towing
operator from the rotational duty service list for a twelve-month period.
A towing operator may appeal the Chief's ruling of either a suspension
or a permanent removal. In such cases, an appeal may be filed with the
Borough Clerk within 10 business days of the Chief's decision. A
hearing may be held by the Borough of Brielle Council within 30
business days of the filing. The Borough of Brielle Council shall render
its determination within 20 business days following the conclusion of
the hearing. The Governing Body's determination as rendered shall be
final and conclusive under this section.
b. In addition, failure to comply with the Borough's zoning, land use and
property maintenance codes may subject any operator to suspension
from the rotational duty service list upon request to the Chief of Police
from the Borough's Construction Code Official/Zoning Officer and/or
Property Maintenance Officer. Any towing operator suspended from the
rotational duty service list for any violation of the Borough's zoning,
land use and development and/or property maintenance codes shall
have the right to due process and appeal as set forth in paragraph a
above.
c. Any complaints or disputes arising from the towing and storage of
motor vehicles without the consent of owner shall be made in writing by
the owner and forwarding same to the Chief of Police. Said owner shall
have the right to due process and appeal as set forth in paragraph a
above.
§ 3-22.12 GENERAL § 3-23.1
1:93
§ 3-23.1. Soliciting Charitable Contributions on Roads or Highways:
Permits Required. [Ord. #941]
Charitable organizations as defined in N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20, shall be permitted
to solicit contributions for charitable purposes in the right-of-way of a
road or highway maintained or under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation or the Monmouth County Board of Chosen
Freeholders subject to the charitable organization obtaining prior written
approval from the governmental entity having jurisdiction over the road or
highway.
In the case of any State road or highway or intersection thereof, a written
permit shall be obtained from the Department of Transportation in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 16:40-1 et seq.
In the case of any County road or highway or intersection thereof, a written
permit shall be obtained from the Monmouth County Board of Chosen
Freeholders in accordance with rules and regulations established by it.
Solicitation shall be subject to the specific terms and conditions of the
permit granted by the County or State. The State or County permit, as
applicable, shall be in the possession of the solicitor during all times of
solicitation and be available for inspection by local, County and State law
enforcement officers.
§ 3-23.2. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #941]
The following rules and regulations shall apply to charitable organizations
soliciting under the term of this section.
a. Charitable organizations shall solicit only for charitable purposes.
b. Solicitations shall be permitted only at signalized intersections or when
an existing traffic control device causes temporary interruption in the
flow of normal traffic, such as at the opening of a movable bridge.
c. Each person soliciting charitable contributions on behalf of a charitable
organization shall be at least 18 years old.
d. Solicitation is encouraged to be off the traveled way.
e. Solicitors shall not stop traffic or impede the flow of traffic. Traffic shall
already be stopped before solicitation may occur and shall cease when
traffic is moving. The use of flagmen is prohibited.
f. Solicitation shall only be permitted during daylight hours. State,
County, local law enforcement officers or representatives of the
Department of Transportation may suspend solicitation operations at
any time if any condition of the permit is violated, or, if in the law
enforcement officer's or the Department's sole discretion, traffic is
being impeded or delayed or the public safety is at risk.
§ 3-23.1 BRIELLE CODE § 3-23.2
1:94
§ 3-23.3. Solicitation at Intersection of State and County Highways.
[Ord. #941]
If the charitable solicitation is proposed at the intersection of a State or
County highway, the charitable organization must obtain written approval
from both the Department of Transportation and the Monmouth County
Board of Chosen Freeholders.
§ 3-23.4. Solicitation at Border of Any Other Municipality; Approval
Required. [Ord. #941]
If the charitable solicitation is proposed at the border of Brielle and any
other municipality, the charitable organization must obtain approval for the
solicitation from the adjoining municipality.
g. Solicitors shall not drink alcoholic beverages, use drugs, or be under
the influence of drugs or alcohol while soliciting.
h. Solicitors shall not harass the public.
i. All solicitors shall wear safety vests that are in accordance with
Department of Transportation standards.
j. Parking of vehicles shall comply with applicable traffic regulations.
k. Solicitors shall not install any traffic control devices.
l. Signs advertising the roadway solicitation are permitted, provided the
signs are of a temporary construction and breakaway to the extent
possible. Signs shall be a maximum of 16 square feet.
Signage shall be in accordance with the temporary signage standards
contained in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, 1988, or
superseding issue.
At least two warning signs shall be placed as follows:
1. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 500 FEET AHEAD.
2. The second sign following shall identify the name of the charitable
organization.
Signs shall not be permitted in the traveled way or in medians less
than eight feet in width. All signs warning, noticing or advertising a
solicitation shall be removed immediately following the solicitation
event.
m. The charitable organization shall be responsible for cleaning up any
debris from the right-of-way.
§ 3-23.2 GENERAL § 3-23.5
1:95
§ 3-23.5. Filing of Application Forms Required. [Ord. #941]
A copy of the application form filed with the Department of Transportation
or the Monmouth County Board of Chosen Freeholders shall be filed with
the Municipal Clerk, and shall specify the location, date, duration and time
of the proposed charitable solicitation. One application form may cover
multiple dates during the same calendar year.
§ 3-23.6. Municipality Not Liable. [Ord. #941]
The Borough of Brielle shall not be liable in any civil action for damages
for property damage or personal injury resulting from a motor vehicle
accident arising out of or in the course of a charitable organization soliciting
charitable donations.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 3-23.5 BRIELLE CODE § 3-23.6
1:96
ARTICLE I
MERCANTILE LICENSES
§ 4-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 4-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #254; Ord. #278; Ord. #671; 1972 Code
§ 63-1; Ord. No. 1072-2018]
As used in this article:
BUSINESS (AS USED IN BOTH SINGULAR AND PLURAL SENSE) —
Shall mean and include all kinds of vocations, occupations, enterprises,
establishments and all other kind of activities and matters, together with all
devices, machines, "vehicles" and appurtenances used therein, any of which
are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on
any "premises" in the Borough as set forth in Section 40:52-1 of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey and the acts amendatory thereof and
supplemental thereto.
CANVASSER AND SOLICITOR — Shall mean any "person" traveling either
by foot, wagon, automobile, motor-truck or any other type of conveyance
from place to place, from house to house or from street to street, taking
or attempting to take orders for sales of goods, wares and merchandise,
personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for
services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such
"person" has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale,
or whether or not such "person" is collecting advance payments on such
sales. Further, these terms shall include any "person" who hires, leases,
uses or occupies any building, structure, boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodging
house, apartment, shop or any other place within the Borough of Brielle for
the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.
CANVASSING — Shall mean door-to-door soliciting or soliciting by the use
of circulars, visitations, or any other means, where the canvasser or his or
her employer has not been invited or requested by the owner (as defined
below), to obtain a listing of real property or to confer with the owner
regarding a real estate transaction.
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINE — Shall mean any automatic "vending
machine" used for the sale of cigarettes, cigars, tobacco and/or matches,
and controlled by the insertion of a coin or coins.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Shall mean and include any printed or written
matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of
any matter or literature:
Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
things; or
a.
Which directs attention to any "business" or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interests thereof by sale; or
b.
§ 4-1 GENERAL § 4-1.1
1:97
HANDBILL DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean and include any "person" engaged
in distributing "commercial or noncommercial handbills," other than
newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, for himself or any other
"person," upon any of the public and private streets, places and "premises,"
other than his own "premises," in the Borough. This definition shall not
prohibit sale of newspapers, regularly published, through newsboys,
newsmen or from news store "premises" in the Borough.
INSIGNIA — Shall mean any tag, plate, badge, emblem, sticker or any other
kind of device which may be required for any use in connection with any
license.
JUKEBOX — Shall mean any music-vending machine, contrivance or device
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any
slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or
may be operated for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Shall mean any
machine, including video machines, operated mechanically, electrically or
otherwise, which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc,
may be operated by the public generally for use as a game, entertainment or
amusement, whether or not registering a score. It shall include such devices
as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines
and all games, operation or transactions similar thereto under whatever
name they may be included.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Shall mean and include any printed
matter or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet,
pamphlet, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise
reproduced original or copies of any letter or literature not included in the
aforesaid definition of a "commercial handbill." The aforegoing definition
of "noncommercial handbill" shall not include any newspaper of general
circulation, as defined by general law, or any religious handbook, magazine,
newspaper or periodical.
OWNER — Shall mean the lessee, sublessee, assignee, managing agent or
other person having the right of ownership or possession or to sell, rent or
lease any real property.
PERSON — Shall mean and include individual natural "persons,"
partnerships, joint ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts,
Which directs attention to or advertises any show, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee
is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; or
c.
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter,
is predominately and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for private benefit and gain of
any "person" so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
The foregoing definition of "commercial handbill" shall not include any
newspaper or general circulation, as defined by general law, or any
religious handbook, magazine, newspaper or periodical.
d.
§ 4-1.1 BRIELLE CODE § 4-1.1
1:98
corporations or unincorporated groups, or any officers, agents, employees,
servants, factors or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof, in
any capacity, acting either for himself or for any other "person" under either
personal appointment or pursuant to law.
PREMISES — Shall mean and include all land, structures, places, and
also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any
"business," and also any personal property which is either affixed to or is
otherwise used in connection with any such "business" conducted on such
"premises."
PURCHASER — Shall mean any occupant, prospective occupant, lessee,
prospective lessee, buyer, prospective buyer, or any agent thereof.
VEHICLE — Shall mean any machine, device, apparatus or thing in or
on which passengers, baggage, merchandise and goods and chattels of
every kind is or may be transported, carried or conveyed, whether such
transportation, carriage or conveyance be on the land, water on in the air.
VENDING MACHINE — Shall mean and include any machine or device,
whether automatic or not, controlled by the insertion of a coin or coins,
for the vending or service of food, liquids, confections, goods, wares,
merchandise or articles of any type, kind of description.
§ 4-2. MERCANTILE LICENSE OFFICER.
§ 4-2.1. Definition. [Ord. #254; Ord. #671; 1972 Code § 63-2]
MERCANTILE LICENSE OFFICER — Shall mean the officer authorized by
this section to exercise the powers and duties herein prescribed.
§ 4-2.2. Appointment; Term; Powers and Duties. [Ord. #254; Ord.
#671; 1972 Code § 63-3]
The Mercantile License Officer shall be appointed for a term of one year and
shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council and when so
appointed he shall exercise the powers and duties prescribed in this section.
The Governing Body shall, by resolution, fix the salary to be paid to such
Mercantile License Officer.
§ 4-3. LICENSE OR PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN
BUSINESSES.
§ 4-3.1. License or Permit Required. [Ord. #254; 1972 Code § 63-4]
It shall not be lawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct
any business as defined in this Chapter, or any sale as defined in this
Chapter, or to operate or conduct a business as a transient merchant,
itinerant vendor, peddler, canvasser, solicitor or handbill distributor, as
defined in this Chapter, or to operate or put to use any cigarette vending
machine, jukebox, vending machines or mechanical amusement device, or
to use in connection with the foregoing any vehicle, premises, machine or
§ 4-1.1 GENERAL § 4-3.1
1:99
device, in whole or in part, unless a license or a permit therefor is first
procured and kept in effect at all such times as required by this Chapter or
any other law or ordinance of the Borough.
§ 4-3.2. Business Activities Subject to Provisions of Chapter. [Ord.
#254; 1972 Code § 63-5]
For the purposes of this Chapter, any person shall be deemed engaging in
business and subject to the provisions of this Chapter when he does one act
of:
§ 4-3.3. Responsibility of Agents, Servants or Employees of Business
Entities. [Ord. #254; 1972 Code § 63-6]
The agents, servants, employees or other representatives of corporations,
partnerships, resident or nonresident individual natural persons, joint
adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or unincorporated
groups shall be personally responsible for the compliance with this Chapter
by their principals and by the businesses they represent.
§ 4-3.4. Prerequisites for Licenses for Certain Sales. [Ord. #254;
Ord. #671; 1972 Code § 63-7; Ord. No. 1072-2018]
a. Selling any goods or service, or
b. Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire, or
c. Acquiring or using any vehicle, machine or device or any premises in
the Borough for business purposes.
a. For a "Going-Out-of-Business Sale" or a "Removal of Business Sale" or a
"Fire or Other Altered Goods Sale," no person shall be granted a license
unless:
1. He has been the owner of a business as described in the application
for a license hereunder for a period of at least six months prior to
the date of the proposed sale; and
2. He has not held a similar sale at the location stated in the
application within one year last past from the date of such
application; and
3. It applies to only one business and is not conducted or advertised in
cooperation or by participation with any other business; and
4. He shall file with the Mercantile Licensing Officer a complete
inventory of goods that are to be offered for sale.
b. Canvassing or Soliciting for Sale, Lease or Purchase of Real Property.
1. Canvassing Requirements: Notices.
§ 4-3.1 BRIELLE CODE § 4-3.4
1:100
(a) Any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability company,
or other institution or entity that canvasses in order to obtain
listings of real property, or to bring about the sale, lease, or
purchase of real property, must provide advanced written
notice to the Mercantile Officer before engaging in such
activities. The advanced notice must provide the following
information:
(1) The names and addresses of the person's engaging in the
canvassing or soliciting.
(2) The names and addresses of the individuals or companies
by which such persons are employed.
(3) A listing of the street or streets in the Borough in which
the canvassing or soliciting will take place.
(4) The starting and ending dates in which the canvassing or
soliciting will take place.
(b) The notice required hereunder must be filed with the
Mercantile Officer no less than 14 business days prior to the
scheduled start date.
(c) Provided the notice requirements have been satisfied, the
Mercantile Officer shall issue a permit allowing the canvassing
or soliciting to take place. This permit shall be valid for a
period not to exceed 30 days from the date of issuance. Once
expired, the permit must be renewed following the same notice
requirements.
2. Prohibited Acts. No person shall engage in the following acts:
(a) Promote, influence, or attempt to promote or influence a
property owner, occupant, or tenant to list for sale, sell, or
remove from a lease real property by referring to race, color,
sexual orientation, ethnicity, or religious affiliation of
neighbors, prospective buyers or other occupants or
prospective occupants of real property.
(b) Induce directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or
indirectly, the sale or listing for sale of real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of
persons of any particular race, religion, or national origin in
the area has resulted or may result in:
(1) The lowering of property values.
(2) A change in the racial, religious, or ethnic composition of
the block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is
located.
(3) An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area.
§ 4-3.4 GENERAL § 4-3.4
1:101
(4) A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area.
(c) Make any representations (or misrepresentations) concerning
the listing or sale of the anticipated listing for sale or the sale
of any real property in any residentially zoned areas for the
purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing
for sale of other real property in such area.
(d) Make any representation to any prospective purchaser that
any block, neighborhood or area has, will, or might undergo an
adverse change with respect to the religious, racial, or ethnic
composition of the block, neighborhood or area for the purpose
of discouraging the purchase of property in a particular area.
(e) Place a sign purporting to offer for sale any real property that
is not in fact offered for sale.
(f) Advertise for sale or rental property which is non-existent or
which is not actually for sale or rental.
(g) Engage in or hire or conspire with others to commit acts or
activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce,
cause panic, incite unrest, create or play upon fear with the
purpose of inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing
for sale of real property.
(h) To solicit or canvass any owner whose name and property
address is included on the list maintained by the Municipal
Clerk of persons requesting that they not be canvassed or
solicited.
(i) To engage in any economic reprisal or any other form of
intimidation against any person because that person has filed a
complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in
any investigation, proceeding or conference under the terms of
this article.
(j) To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in
any of the practices forbidden by this article or to obstruct or
prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this
article.
(k) Refer, directly or indirectly or by implication, to race, color,
creed, ethnicity, or sexual orientation in any advertisement or
other solicitation offering real property for sale or rental.
(l) Solicit or attempt to solicit the sale or rental or the listing for
sale or rental of real property without furnishing in written
form to the owner or occupier of such real property the name
of the person or organization soliciting such sale, rental or
listing.
3. Enforcement.
§ 4-3.4 BRIELLE CODE § 4-3.4
1:102
(a) The Police Department and/or the Mercantile Officer are
charged with enforcing the provisions of this article.
(b) Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful
practice forbidden by this section may, by himself or by his
attorney at law, make, sign and file a complaint directly with
the Police Department or the Mercantile Officer, or shall
forward the complaint to the Police Department for
investigation.
(c) In addition to any other enforcement actions, the Police
Department or the Mercantile Officer may refer the complaint
to the Real Estate Commission, the New Jersey Division on
Civil Rights, or any other appropriate State or Federal agency
for disposition.
4. Violations and Penalties to Be Assessed.
(a) Any person convicted of impermissibly canvassing or soliciting
a property owner enrolled on the Borough's "No Knock List" is
subject to the following fines and penalties:
(1) A maximum fine of $2,000 per offense, with each "No
Knock" registrant impermissibly canvassed or solicited
constituting a separate offense.
(2) Revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this article,
and a period of ineligibility, not to exceed one year, to
engage in the canvassing or soliciting activities covered by
this article.
(b) Convictions for violations of any other provision of this article
carry a fine not to exceed $500, with each property owner
canvassed, solicited, or discriminated against, as prohibited
under this article, constituting a separate offense.
(c) Activities proscribed under subsections b.4(a) and (b) above
constitute separate offenses subject to cumulative fines and
penalties.
5. Exceptions.
(a) This article does not apply to real estate that is publicly
advertised for sale or to "open houses," sponsored by the
owner or listed real estate agent for a specific home on a
specific day.
(b) All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent
herewith are repealed, but only to the extent of the
inconsistency.
§ 4-3.4 GENERAL § 4-3.4
1:103
§ 4-3.5. Limited Effect of Licenses for Certain Sales. [Ord. #254;
1972 Code § 63-8]
In cases covered by subsection 4-3.4, the license shall:
§ 4-3.6. Exceptions to License Requirement. [Ord. #254; 1972 Code
§ 63-9]
The provisions of subsections 4-3.4 and 4-3.5 shall not apply to or affect:
§ 4-3.7. Uninvited Peddling or Solicitation of Sales at Private
Residences Prohibited. [Ord. #254; 1972 Code § 63-10; New]
(c) If any part of this Ordinance No. 1072-2018 is invalidated for
any reason by competent authority, that part is severed and the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
(d) This Ordinance No. 1072-2018 shall take effect following its
final passage by the Borough Council, approval by the Mayor,
and 20 days after publication as required by law.
a. Authorize only one type of sale described in the application at the
location named therein; and
b. Authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory filed with
the Licensing Officer and shall forbid additions or replacements; and
c. Continue for a period not exceeding three months from the date of
granting of license and shall not be renewable, assignable or
transferable.
a. Any person acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction; or
b. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duty as public
officials.
a. The practice of going in and upon private residences in the Borough by
transient merchants, itinerant merchants, itinerant vendors, peddlers,
canvassers, solicitors, salesmen or others of like occupation, not having
been requested or invited so to do by the owner or owners, occupant or
occupants of the private residences, for the purpose of soliciting orders
for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, magazines, services or
the like or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the
same, without having first obtained a license from the Borough Clerk
for their purpose and having paid a license fee, as hereinafter provided,
is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is hereby specifically prohibited
and punishable as hereinafter provided.
b. No person shall peddle, solicit sales, canvass or otherwise between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the following day, and the foregoing
shall be prohibited on Sundays and legal holidays.
§ 4-3.4 BRIELLE CODE § 4-3.8
1:104
§ 4-3.8. Canvassing and Soliciting for Real Estate. [Ord. No.
1058-2017]
a. License and Notice Requirements.
1. Any person, corporation, partnership, limited liability, company, or
other institution or entity that canvasses in order to obtain listings
of real property, or to bring about the sale, lease, or purchase of
real property, must provide advanced written notice to the
Mercantile Officer before engaging in such activities. The advanced
notice must provide the following information:
(a) The names and addresses of the person's engaging in the
canvassing or soliciting.
(b) The names and addresses of the individual's or companies by
which such persons are employed.
(c) A listing of the street or streets in the Borough in which the
canvassing or soliciting will take place.
(d) The starting and ending dates in which the canvassing or
soliciting will take place.
2. The notice required hereunder must be filed with the Mercantile
Officer no less than 14 business days prior to the scheduled start
date.
3. Provided the notice requirements have been satisfied, the
Mercantile Officer shall issue a permit allowing the canvassing or
soliciting to take place. This permit shall be valid for a period not to
exceed 30 days from the date of issuance. Once expired, the permit
must be renewed following the same notice requirements.
b. No person shall engage in the following acts of prohibited
discrimination:
1. Promote, influence, or attempt to promote or influence a property
owner, occupant, or tenant to list for sale, sell, or remove from a
lease real property by referring to race, color, sexual orientation,
ethnicity, or religious affiliation of neighbors, prospective buyers or
other occupants or prospective occupants of real property.
2. Induce directly or indirectly, or attempt to induce directly or
indirectly, the sale or listing for sale of real property by
representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons
of any particular race, religion, or national origin in the area has
resulted or may result in:
(a) The lowering of property values.
(b) A change in the racial, religious, or ethnic composition of the
block, neighborhood, or area in which the property is located.
§ 4-3.8 GENERAL § 4-3.8
1:105
(c) An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the area.
(d) A decline in the quality of the schools serving the area.
3. Make any representations (or misrepresentations) concerning the
listing or sale of the anticipated listing for sale or the sale of any
real property in any residentially zoned areas for the purpose of
inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of other
real property in such area.
4. Make any representation to any prospective purchaser that any
block, neighborhood or area has, will, or might undergo an adverse
change with respect to the religious, racial, or ethnic composition
of the block, neighborhood or area for the purpose of discouraging
the purchase of property in a particular area.
5. Place a sign purporting to offer for sale any real property that is not
in fact offered for sale.
6. Advertise for sale or rental property which is non-existent or which
is not actually for sale or rental.
7. Engage in or hire or conspire with others to commit acts or
activities of any nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause
panic, incite unrest, create or play upon fear with the purpose of
inducing or attempting to induce the sale or listing for sale of real
property.
8. To solicit or canvass for real estate a property owner enrolled on
the Borough's "No Knock List" (see subsection 4-6.3A).
9. To engage in any economic reprisal or any other form of
intimidation against any person because that person has filed a
complaint, testified, assisted or participated in any manner in any
investigation, proceeding or conference under the terms of this
article.
10. To aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of
the practices forbidden by this article or to obstruct or prevent any
person from complying with the provisions of this article.
11. Refer, directly or indirectly or by implication, to race, color, creed,
ethnicity, or sexual orientation in any advertisement or other
solicitation offering real property for sale or rental.
12. Solicit or attempt to solicit the sale or rental or the listing for sale
or rental of real property without furnishing in written form to the
owner or occupier of such real property the name of the person or
organization soliciting such sale, rental or listing.
c. Enforcement.
§ 4-3.8 BRIELLE CODE § 4-3.8
1:106
§ 4-4. LICENSING PROCEDURE.
1. The Police Department, the Mercantile Officer and the Zoning
Officer are in charge of enforcing the provisions of this subsection.
2. Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an alleged unlawful
practice forbidden by this subsection may, by himself or by his
attorney-at-law, make, sign and file a complaint directly with the
Police Department, the Mercantile Officer or the Zoning Officer, or
shall forward the complaint to the Police Department for
investigation.
3. In addition to any other enforcement actions, the Police
Department, the Mercantile Officer or the Zoning Officer may refer
the complaint to the Real Estate Commission, the New Jersey
Division on Civil Rights, or any other appropriate State or Federal
agency for disposition.
d. Violations and Penalties.
1. Any person convicted for violations of any provision of this
subsection is subject to the following fines and penalties, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5:
(a) A maximum fine of $2,000 per offense, with each offense
constituting a separate offense; or
(b) Imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding 90
days; or
(c) A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
2. Any person convicted of impermissibly canvassing or soliciting for
real estate a property owner enrolled on the Borough's "No Knock
List" (see subsection 4-6.3A) is subject to the following fines and
penalties, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5:
(a) A maximum fine of $2,000 per offense, with each "no knock"
registrant impermissibly canvassed or solicited constituting a
separate offense; or
(b) Imprisonment in the County Jail for a term not exceeding 90
days; or
(c) A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
e. Exemptions.
1. This subsection does not apply to real estate that is publicly
advertised for sale or to "open houses," sponsored by the owner or
listed real estate agent for a specific home on a specific day.
§ 4-3.8 GENERAL § 4-4.1
1:107
§ 4-4.1. Application for License; Payment of Fee. [Ord. #254; 1972
Code § 63-11]
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this
Chapter shall submit an application for such license to the Borough Clerk
at the Municipal Building, Brielle, New Jersey, which application shall be
accompanied by the full amount of the fees chargeable for the license
applied for.
§ 4-4.2. Contents of Application. [Ord. #254; Ord. #671; 1972 Code
§ 63-12]
The application shall be a written statement upon the forms provided by the
License Officer and shall contain the following:
§ 4-4.3. Additional Information Required of Canvassers, Solicitors
and Certain Other Applicants. [Ord. #254; Ord. #671; 1972 Code
§ 63-13]
In addition to the requirements of subsection 4-4.2, persons applying for
licenses as solicitors, canvassers or handbill distributors shall furnish this
further information on their respective applications, or attach the same
thereto:
a. Previous license history of the applicant and whether any previous
revocation or suspension and the reasons therefor.
b. Statement that applicant is not violating the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough. If applicant occupies a nonconforming use, proof of date of
occupancy and operation must be given.
c. Statement that applicant is not in default under the provisions of this
Chapter or indebted or obligated in any manner to the Borough, except
for real estate taxes and/or water and sewer assessments.
d. Such other facts relative to the general personal history of the
applicant, or its officers and managers if the applicant is not an
individual, so as to enable the Borough License Officer to a fair
determination of the eligibility of the applicant.
e. Name of person to whom license will be issued and his residence
address. If applicant is not an individual, then the names, positions and
residence addresses of all officers and managers of the applicant.
f. The premises at which the business is to be carried on and the name
and address of the owner of the premises.
a. A listing of all misdemeanors, felonies or violations of any municipal
ordinances for which applicant has been convicted, the nature of the
offense and the punishment assessed therefor. If applicant is not an
individual, these provisions shall apply to its officers and managers.
§ 4-4.1 BRIELLE CODE § 4-4.3
1:108
§ 4-4.4. Qualifications for License. [Ord. #254; 1972 Code § 63-14]
No license or renewal shall be issued to a person not of good moral
character, if applicant is not an individual, these provisions shall apply to its
officers and managers.
§ 4-4.5. Police Investigation of License Applicant; Report and
Recommendation. [Ord. #254; Ord. #268; 1972 Code § 63-15]
Upon written request of the Licensing Officer or the Borough Clerk, the
Chief of Police shall ascertain if the applicant has any criminal record and
report in writing affirmatively or negatively thereon within a reasonable
time, not to exceed seven days after the request is made. In the even of an
affirmative report, the Chief of Police shall recommend therein his approval
or disapproval of the granting of a license, giving his reasons therefor,
such recommendation to serve as one of the factors to be considered by
b. The fingerprints of the applicant or applicants having the management
or supervision of the applicant's business.
c. The place or places in the Borough where applicant proposes to carry
on business, peddle, solicit, canvass or distribute, and the length of
time he proposes to do so.
d. The place or places within or without the Borough where applicant,
within two years next preceding the date of the application, did carry on
business, solicit, canvass or distribute.
e. A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold or offered for sale, where manufactured and
located, and proposed method of delivery.
f. A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or
proposed to be done in order to attract customers.
g. Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant
proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative.
h. Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the
person or persons having the management or supervision of the
applicant's business, or the method or plan of doing such business, as
the Borough Mercantile License Officer may deem proper to fulfill the
purposes of this ordinance in the protection of the public good.
i. A photograph of the applicant or applicants taken within 30 days
immediately prior to the date of filing of the application, which picture
shall be two by two inches, the head and shoulders of the applicant in a
clear and distinguishing manner.
j. If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with the
license registration number or other means of identification.
§ 4-4.3 GENERAL § 4-4.5
1:109
the Licensing Officer in making his determination as to whether a license
should or should not be issued.
§ 4-4.6. Investigation by Mercantile License Officer, Approval and
Issuance of License; Disapproval; Appeal. [Ord. #254; Ord. #268;
Ord. #671; 1972 Code § 63-16]
After submission of the application and the required fees to the Borough
Clerk, the Mercantile Licensing Officer shall cause such investigation to
be made of the applicant's business responsibility and moral character as
he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. Upon receipt
of a report from the Chief of Police, and upon examination of the latter's
recommendations, if any, and completion of his own investigation, if the
Mercantile Licensing Officer shall find that the business responsibility and
moral character of the applicant are both satisfactory, he shall indicate his
written approval on the application within 30 days after the application is
filed with the Borough Clerk. Should the Mercantile Licensing Officer find
that either the business responsibility or moral character of the applicant
is not satisfactory, he shall then indicate his written disapproval on the
application within the same period of time. If approved, the license shall
issue forthwith in the name of the Borough Clerk. If disapproved, the
Mercantile License Officer shall forthwith notify the applicant and the
Borough Clerk in writing of such disapproval and the reasons therefor, and
the applicant shall have 10 days from the receipt of notice of disapproval to
appeal from the decision of the Mercantile License Officer to the Governing
Body, who after due hearing, can affirm or reverse the decision of the
Borough Mercantile License Officer.
§ 4-4.7. Renewal or Transfer of License. [Ord. #254; Ord. #314;
1972 Code § 63-17]
§ 4-5. REGULATIONS AND FEES.
§ 4-5.1. Due Date of License Fees. [Ord. #254; 1972 Code § 63-18]
All license fees shall be due on January 1 annually.
a. Applications for renewal of license shall be a written statement on the
forms provided by the Licensing Officer; except, however, where
licensee has not reapplied for a license during any one calendar year,
the licensee's application for renewal of a license shall follow the same
procedure as is outlined in the preceding sections for an original
application.
b. Applications for transfer of a license shall follow the same procedure as
is outlined in the preceding sections for an original application.
§ 4-4.5 BRIELLE CODE § 4-5.2
1:110
§ 4-5.2. Duration of License; Transfer and Transfer Fee. [Ord. #254;
1972 Code § 63-19]
All licenses shall commence January 1 annually and shall expire on
December 31 in the year of issuance. On transfer of location of licensed
business to a new location within the Borough, or on the sale of a going
business remaining in the Borough, licenses may be transferred, provided
the annual license fee for the year has been paid and a transfer fee of $5 is
paid to the Borough Clerk.
§ 4-5.3. Duplicate License; Fee. [Ord. #254; 1972 Code § 63-20]
A duplicate license may be issued by the Borough Clerk to replace any
license previously issued, which license has been lost, stolen, defaced or
destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the
filing by the licensee of an affidavit sworn to before a notary public of the
State of New Jersey attesting to such fact and the payment to the Borough
Clerk of a fee of $5.
§ 4-5.4. License Fees Not Refundable. [Ord. #254; 1972 Code
§ 63-21]
No rebate or refund of any license fee or any part thereof shall be made by
reason of retirement of licensee from business or by reason of the nonuse
of such license for all or any portion of the licensed year, or by reason of a
change of location or business or by reason of fire or other accident or other
casualty rendering the use of such license ineffective.
§ 4-5.5. Contents of License. [Ord. #254; Ord. #671; 1972 Code
§ 63-22]
Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
§ 4-5.6. Regulations for Licensees. [Ord. #254; Ord. #671; 1972
Code § 63-23]
Every licensee under this Chapter shall:
a. The name of the licensee and any other name under which such
business is to be conducted.
b. The kind and address of each business so licensed.
c. The amount of license fee therefor.
d. The dates of issuance and expiration thereof.
e. Such other information as the Borough Mercantile License Officer shall
determine.
a. Permit access to the licensed premises at all reasonable times by the
Mercantile License Officer for inspection thereof.
§ 4-5.2 GENERAL § 4-5.6
1:111
§ 4-5.7. License Fees. [New]
b. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations
applicable to such licensed business.
c. Avoid all forbidden, improper, unlawful or unnecessary practices,
businesses or conditions which do or may affect the public health,
morals or welfare.
d. Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on premises after
expiration of his license and during the period when his license is
revoked or suspended.
e. Post and maintain his license upon the licensed premises in a place
where it may be seen at all times. In the case of cigarette vending
machines jukeboxes, vending machines and mechanical and electronic
amusement devices, the license or licenses herein provided for shall be
posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine or
device in the premises wherein the same is to be operated, or
maintained to be operated, and shall have affixed thereto any insignia
delivered for use therewith upon the outside of the same so that it may
be seen at all times.
f. Carry and display, at all times, his license and identification to any
person requesting the same if licensee is a solicitor, canvasser or
handbill distributor.
g. Not loan, sell, give or assign to any other person, or allow any other
person to use and display, or to destroy, damage or remove, or to have
in his possession, except as authorized by the Mercantile License
Officer or by law, any license or insignia which has been issued to said
licensee.
h. In the event the license is issued for a vehicle, automobile, truck or
wagon or any other automotive device, then the licensee shall post and
maintain upon the automotive vehicle an insignia or sticker to be issued
with the license.
a. Schedule of License Fees. The licensee fees to be paid annually for
conducting the business or businesses herein named at the premise or
premises to be designated in the license or licenses issued hereunder
shall be as follows:
All businesses with 3,000
square feet or less
$50 annually
Over 3,000 square feet $100 annually
No square footage involved $50 annually
In addition thereto, any business making use of electronic or
mechanical amusement or vending machines, there shall be an
additional fee of $35 each machine.
§ 4-5.6 BRIELLE CODE § 4-6
1:112
§ 4-6. ENFORCEMENT, ADMINISTRATION AND PENALTIES.
§ 4-6.1. Enforcement. [Ord. #254; Ord. #671; 1972 Code § 63-25]
This section shall be enforced by the Mercantile License Officer and the
Police Department of the Borough.
§ 4-6.2. Delivery of Property Purchased Outside Borough. [Ord.
#254; 1972 Code § 63-26]
No license shall be required for a delivery in the Borough of any property
purchased or acquired in good faith from such person at his regular place
of business outside of the Borough where no intent by such person is shown
to exist to evade the provisions of this Article.
§ 4-6.3. Special Permits for Charitable, Educational or Religious
Organizations. [Ord. #254; 1972 Code § 63-27]
The Governing Body may authorize the issuance of special permits, without
the payment of any license fees or other charge therefor, to any public,
charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious organizations, for
the conduct or operation of a temporary nonprofit enterprise for a public,
charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious purpose. However,
applicant shall submit the usual application form in the manner as
hereinbefore required and shall operate, if granted a permit, in accordance
with the requirements of this Article.
§ 4-6.3A. "No Knock List." [Ord. #1035]
All Brielle residents may register their name, address, and/or unit/
apartment number with the Borough Clerk to be placed on a "No Knock
List," indicating that they do not want canvassers, peddlers, or solicitors or
hawkers of any sort to approach their homes and/or seek personal contact
with the occupants of the registered home. Any resident who registers
acknowledges that Brielle Police, and the Fire and First Aid Squads are
exempt from this provision.
Once registered residents shall remain on the list until they request to be
removed in writing to the Municipal Clerk.
The Municipal Clerk shall maintain the list, keep it current, and provide
copies to the Police Department who shall be charged with enforcement
and shall provide each solicitor, canvasser, hawker or groups thereof, with
a copy of the list to ensure their compliance.
§ 4-6.4. Causes for Revocation of License after Notice and Hearing.
[Ord. #254; 1972 Code § 63-28]
Any permit or license granted or issued pursuant to this section may be
revoked by the Governing Body after notice and hearing, for any of the
following causes:
§ 4-6 GENERAL § 4-6.4
1:113
§ 4-6.5. Service of Notice. [Ord. #254; Ord. #671; 1972 Code
§ 63-29]
Notice of hearing for revocation of license under subsection 4-6.4 shall be
given in writing by the Borough Clerk or the Mercantile License Officer,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of
the hearing. Such notices shall be mailed by certified mail to the licensee
at his address indicated on his license application at least five days prior to
the date set forth for the hearing.
§ 4-6.6. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. #254; Ord. #671; 1972 Code
§ 63-30]
In addition to the provisions for revocation, the Mercantile License Officer,
the Police Department of the Borough, or any taxpayer or resident of the
Borough may make complaint in the Municipal Court of the Borough of
Brielle for any violation of this Article, section, paragraph or provision
thereof. Upon conviction in such case, for each and every violation, the
person committing, taking part or assisting in such violation or violations
shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
a. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
b. Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise.
c. Any violation of this ordinance.
d. Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude.
e. Conducting the business licensed under this ordinance, through
applicant himself, or any of his agents, servants or employees, in any
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the
peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare
of the public.
§ 4-6.4 BRIELLE CODE § 4-6.6
1:114
ARTICLE II
GARAGE SALES
§ 4-7. GARAGE SALES.
§ 4-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. #542; 1972 Code § 57-1]
As used in this section:
GARAGE SALE — Shall mean and include all sales entitled "garage sale,"
"lawn sale," "attic sale," "rummage sale" or "flea market," or any similar
casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any means
whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
GOODS — Shall include any goods, warehouse merchandise or other
tangible personal property capable of being the object of a sale regulated
hereunder.
PERSON — Shall mean and include individuals, partnerships, voluntary
associations and corporations.
§ 4-7.2. License Required; Fee. [Ord. #542; 1972 Code § 57-2; New]
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, allow or conduct a garage sale
on premises in the Borough without first filing with the Police Department
the information hereinafter specified and obtaining a license known as a
"garage sale license." The fee for such license shall be $5.
§ 4-7.3. Issuance and Display of License. [Ord. #542; 1972 Code
§ 57-3]
§ 4-7.4. Filing of Information. [Ord. #542; 1972 Code § 57-4]
The information to be filed with the Police Department, pursuant to this
section, shall be as follows:
a. A garage sale license shall be issued to any one person or for the same
premises only twice within a twelve-month period, and no such license
shall be issued for more than two consecutive calendar days.
b. Each license issued pursuant to this section shall be prominently
displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted
throughout the entire period of the licensed sale.
a. Name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting such sale.
b. Name of the owner of the property on which such sale is to be
conducted, and consent of the owner if the applicant is other than the
owner.
c. Location at which the sale is to be conducted.
§ 4-7 GENERAL § 4-7.4
1:115
§ 4-7.5. Hours of Sale. [Ord. #542; 1972 Code § 57-5]
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. only.
§ 4-7.6. Signs Advertising Sale. [Ord. #542; 1972 Code § 57-6]
No more than one sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, shall be
permitted or displayed for the purpose of advertising a garage sale. The
sign shall have a space allotted thereon upon which shall be prominently
endorsed the name and address of the person conducting the sale. It shall
be posted for not more than two days prior to the date of the sale and only
upon the premises on which said sale is conducted, and such sign shall be
removed within 24 hours after completion of the sale.
§ 4-7.7. Nonapplicability of Provisions. [Ord. #542; 1972 Code
§ 57-7]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 4-7.8. Maintenance of Good Order. [Ord. #542; 1972 Code § 57-9]
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
d. Number of days of the sale.
e. Date and nature of any past sale.
f. Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
a. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
b. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
c. Any person selling or advertising for sale any item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement in which separate items do not exceed five in number.
d. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the Borough and not otherwise
prohibited by any other ordinance or statute.
e. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the
burden of establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on
the organization or institution claiming such exemption.
§ 4-7.4 BRIELLE CODE § 4-7.8
1:116
the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such person shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles
to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets within the area and
neighborhood of such premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable
orders of any member of the Police or Fire Departments in order to maintain
the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 4-7.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #542; 1972 Code § 57-10]
Any person conducting a garage sale without being properly licensed
therefor and who shall violate any of the other terms and regulations of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty as established in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day that such sale shall continue without being
duly licensed shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 4-7.8 GENERAL § 4-7.9
1:117

ARTICLE III
TAXICABS
§ 4-8. TAXICABS AND TAXICAB DRIVERS.
§ 4-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-1]
As used in this section:
DRIVER — Shall mean any "person," who drives a "taxicab" within this
Borough.
LICENSED — Shall mean in accordance with the appropriate section of this
section.
OPERATION OF A TAXICAB — Shall consist of transporting in such
"taxicab" one or more "persons" for hire along any of the streets in this
Borough. Accepting a passenger being transported for hire within this
borough from a point within this Borough to a point outside of the Borough
limits, or discharging a passenger transported for hire from a point outside
of the Borough limits, shall be deemed to be "operation of a taxicab"
within the meaning hereof. The "operation of a taxicab" in any of the
above-described manners by one other than the "owner" shall be deemed
operation by the "owner" thereof as well as by the "person" actually driving
the same. The transportation of any "person" other than the "owner" or
"driver" in any motor vehicle bearing a sign therein or thereon using the
word "taxi," "taxicab" "cab" or "hack" shall be prima facie evidence of
operation.
OWNER — Shall mean any "person," corporation or association in whose
name title to any "taxicab" is registered with the New Jersey Department of
Motor Vehicles or who appears in such records to be the conditional vendee
or lessee thereof.
PERSON — Shall mean and include the plural as well as the singular, and
artificial as well as natural "persons."
TAXICAB — Shall mean and include any automobile or motorcar commonly
called "taxi," engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which
is held out, announced or advertised to operate or run, or which is operated
or run, over any of the streets within the Borough, and which accepts
passengers for transportation from points or places to points or places
within or without the said borough.
§ 4-8.2. Licenses Required. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-2]
No person shall operate any taxicab within this Borough unless both the
taxicab and the driver thereof are licensed pursuant to this section and
conform to all the provisions hereof.
§ 4-8 GENERAL § 4-8.3
1:119
§ 4-8.3. Classes of Licenses. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-3]
There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses, to be known
as "taxicab driver's license" and "taxicab owner's license" respectively.
§ 4-8.4. Driver's License. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-4]
A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person named therein to operate
within this Borough any taxicab duly licensed hereunder.
§ 4-8.5. Owner's License. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-5]
A taxicab owner's license shall entitle the taxicab therein described to be
operated in this borough by a driver duly licensed hereunder.
§ 4-8.6. Number of Owner's Licenses Permitted. [Ord. #355; 1972
Code § 80-6]
The Governing Body does hereby determine that the number of taxicabs
necessary for the convenience of the citizens of the Borough shall not
exceed two in number. The number of taxicab owner's licenses which may
be issued is limited to that number. Should the public convenience and
necessity require a greater or lesser number, the same may be fixed by
resolution of the Governing Body.
§ 4-8.7. Expiration of Licenses. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-7]
Any license issued pursuant to the terms of this section shall expire at 12:00
midnight on December 31 of the year in which it was issued unless sooner
surrendered, suspended or revoked.
§ 4-8.8. Applications for Issuance or Renewal of Licenses; Forms.
[Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-8]
All applications for the issuance or renewal of any license of either class
shall be made to the Governing Body in duplicate on forms adopted by
said Governing Body and obtained from the Borough and designed to elicit
information respecting the identification and responsibility of the applicant.
§ 4-8.9. Information Required on Application; Verification; Payment
of Fee; Posting of Notice. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-9]
Each applicant for a license of any class shall supply the information
requested on the application in full and verify the correctness thereof by his
oath or affirmation and thereafter file the completed application with the
License Officer, together with the full amount of the proper fee hereafter
fixed therefor: the License Officer shall thereupon post notice after such
application in at least one public place in the Borough.
§ 4-8.3 BRIELLE CODE § 4-8.10
1:120
§ 4-8.10. Photographs Required for Driver's License. [Ord. #355;
1972 Code § 80-10]
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall file with his application
two photographs, each 3 1/2 inches by 3 1/2 inches in size, clearly depicting
the facial features of the applicant, both of which photographs shall
thereupon become the property of the Borough and be retained with the
application form unless the license shall be issued, in which event one of
such photographs shall be permanently affixed to the license card in a space
provided thereon.
§ 4-8.11. Fingerprinting of Applicant for Driver's License;
Investigation. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-11]
Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall, at the time of filing
his application, be fingerprinted by the Borough Police Department: an
impression of such fingerprints shall thereupon be forwarded forthwith by
the Police Department to the Bureau of Identification of the New Jersey
State Police for a report of applicant's criminal record, which report, when
received, shall be permanently affixed to the application before
consideration thereof by the Governing Body.
§ 4-8.12. Insurance Required of Applicant for Owner's License.
[Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-12]
Every applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall, together with his
application, submit an insurance policy of a company duly licensed to
transact business under the insurance laws of this State, conditioned for the
payment of a sum of not less than $100,000 to satisfy all claims for damages
by reason of bodily injury to or the death of any one person resulting from
an accident, and a sum of not less than $300,000 to satisfy all claims for
damages by reason of the bodily injuries to or the death of all persons
on account of any such accident, by reason of the ownership, operation,
maintenance or use of such taxicab; and conditioned for the payment of a
sum not less than $50,000 to satisfy any claim for damages to property of
any one person resulting from an accident, and a sum not less than $50,000
to satisfy all claims for damages to property of all persons on account of any
such accident, by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use
of such taxicab upon any public street.
§ 4-8.13. Annual License Fees; Partial Refund Upon Denial of
License. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-13]
The annual fee for each taxicab driver's license hereafter issued or any
renewal thereof shall be $25 for each year or portion of a year for which the
license is issued or renewed, and the annual fee for each taxicab owner's
license issued or renewed shall be $100 for each year or portion of a year
for which the license is issued or renewed. Such fees shall not be prorated
nor any part thereof refunded for any reason, except that upon the denial
of an application for issuance or renewal of a license by the Governing
§ 4-8.10 GENERAL § 4-8.13
1:121
Body, 50% of the fee deposited shall be returned to the applicant and 50%
shall be retained by the Borough as compensation for investigation of the
application.
§ 4-8.14. Refusal to Issue or Renew License; Revocation or
Suspension. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-14]
The Governing Body may, in its discretion, refuse to issue or renew, or may,
after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend:
§ 4-8.15. Issuance of License Card to Driver; Display. [Ord. #355;
1972 Code § 80-15]
Each applicant granted a taxicab driver's license shall be issued a license
card in evidence thereof in a form approved by the Governing Body and
signed by the Borough Clerk in its behalf; such license card shall at all times
be prominently displayed and adequately protected in the interior of any
taxicab operated by the licensee so that the face thereof shall be at all times
in the full view of and plainly legible to any passenger seated in the rear
seat of such taxicab; the license card shall at all times be and remain the
property of the Borough and, at the directions of the Governing Body, shall
at any time be surrendered to the Borough Clerk.
§ 4-8.16. Only Actual Operator's License Card to be Displayed. [Ord.
#355; 1972 Code § 80-16]
No taxicab driver's license card other than that of the licensee actually
operating the cab at the time shall be displayed therein.
a. Any license of either class if the applicant for the license has been
convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction, or convicted of
being a disorderly person or of a violation of Title 39, "Motor Vehicles
and Traffic Regulation," of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, or who
violates any provision of this Chapter or has any judgment unsatisfied of
record against him arising out of an automobile accident, or who has
made false answers in his application for such license or any renewal
thereof or who has failed or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and
adequate taxicab service, or who has not complied fully with all
requirements of this ordinance for such class of license; or, in addition,
b. Any taxicab driver's license if the licensee or applicant has in any
degree contributed to any injury to person or damage to property
arising out of negligent operation of a motor vehicle, or has any
communicable or contagious disease; or
c. Any taxicab owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be
licensed, by reason of unsafe or unsanitary condition, is dangerous to
the safety or health of the occupants or others, or if the policy of
insurance required herein has once lapsed, or such coverage not
maintained at all times.
§ 4-8.13 BRIELLE CODE § 4-8.17
1:122
§ 4-8.17. Rate Schedule; Display. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-17]
Every taxicab operated under this section shall have a rate card setting
forth the authorized rates of fare, displayed in such a place as to be in full
view of all passengers.
§ 4-8.18. Driver to Maintain Daily Manifest; Forms; Inspection;
Report of Accidents or Losses. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-18]
Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all
trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination
of each trip and amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall
be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of
duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the
owner and shall be of a character approved by the Police Department. Such
records shall be subject to inspection by the Borough Police Department.
There shall also be reported to the Borough Clerk the happening of an
accident involving such taxicab or the loss of property left in the taxicab by
a passenger, within 24 hours after such event.
§ 4-8.19. Maintenance of Taxicabs; Inspections. [Ord. #355; 1972
Code § 80-19]
The owner and operator of each taxicab operating in the Borough shall
keep his taxicab in good running order so that it makes a presentable
appearance and affords comfortable safe rides to passengers, free from
mechanical defects, loose fenders, dents, loose doors, broken or soiled
upholstery and broken or cracked glass. The owner and operator of each
taxicab operating in the Borough shall present his taxicab to the Chief of
Police or other designated officer prior to the issuance or renewal of his
license and thereafter upon request of Chief of Police or other designated
officer so that it may be inspected to determine whether it complies with
the provisions of this section.
§ 4-8.20. Receipts to be Given to Passengers Upon Requests. [Ord.
#355; 1972 Code § 80-20]
The operator of each taxicab shall at all times have available a suitable cash
receipt book to write out, sign and give to any passenger requesting the
same a written receipt in the amount of the fare paid.
§ 4-8.21. Rules and Regulations Authorized. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code
§ 80-21]
The Governing Body may, by resolution, make such general rules and
regulations and such special findings and rulings as may be necessary
for the proper regulation and control of the operation of taxicabs in the
Borough and enforcement of this section, in addition thereto and not
inconsistent therewith, and may alter, amend, repeal and publish the same.
§ 4-8.17 GENERAL § 4-8.22
1:123
§ 4-8.22. Violation of Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code
§ 80-22]
The violation by the taxicab owner or the taxicab driver of any rules,
regulations, special findings and rulings which are hereafter promulgated
by the Governing Body and included within a resolution adopted by the
Governing Body shall be sufficient cause for revocation of any license
granted to such taxicab owner or taxicab driver pursuant to this section and
shall be sufficient cause for the refusal by the Governing Body to renew
such license in addition to any and all other grounds heretofore specifically
mentioned in this section.
§ 4-8.23. Violations; Penalty. [Ord. #355; 1972 Code § 80-23]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-8.22 BRIELLE CODE § 4-8.23
1:124
ARTICLE IV
LIMOUSINES
§ 4-9. LIMOUSINES.
§ 4-9.1. Definitions. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code § 60B-1]
As used in this section:
CRUISING — Shall mean the practice of driving about the streets of the
Borough so as to solicit passengers or to bring the presence of the formal
limousine to the attention of prospective passengers.
DRIVER — Shall mean any person who drives a formal limousine within the
Borough while in the employ of one who utilizes the Borough as a principal
place of business.
FORMAL LIMOUSINE — Shall mean any automobile or motor car, legally
designated by the State of New Jersey as a livery vehicle engaged in the
business of carrying passengers for hire located in the Borough, which is
held out, announced or advertised to operate to run, or which is operated
or run, over any of the streets or public highways of this State, and which
is hired by charter or for a particular contract, by the day or hour, or
other fixed period; or to transport passengers to a specified place or places,
or which charges a fare or price agreed upon in advance between the
operator and the passenger, provided that the term "formal limousine"
shall not include limousine and delivery vehicles owned and operated by
persons with principal place of business located outside the Borough of
Brielle; nor shall it include taxicabs, hotel buses, buses employed solely in
transporting school children or teachers or autobuses, which are subject to
the jurisdiction of the Board of Public Utilities Commissioners, or interstate
autobuses required by Federal or State law or by the rules of the Board of
Public Utilities Commissioners to carry insurance against loss from liability
imposed by law on account of bodily injury or death.
OPERATION OF THE FORMAL LIMOUSINE BUSINESS — Shall mean and
consist of a business which transports in such formal limousine one or
more persons for hire by charter along any of the streets in this Borough
accepting a passenger to be transported for hire within this Borough or
from a point outside of the Borough limits, or discharging a passenger
transported for hire from a point outside of the Borough limits to a point
within the Borough limits, and such terms shall be deemed to mean the
"operation of formal limousine business" within the meaning thereof. The
"operation of a formal limousine" in any of the above-described manners by
one other than the owner shall be deemed operation by the owner thereof
as well as by the person other than the owner or driver in any motor vehicle
bearing a sign therein or thereon using the term "formal limousine" shall be
prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Shall mean person, corporation or association operating a
limousine business within the Borough whose name or title to any formal
limousine is registered within the New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles
§ 4-9 GENERAL § 4-9.1
1:125
or which appears in such records to be the conditional vendee or lessee
thereof.
RECOGNIZED — Shall mean recognized by resolution pursuant to the
appropriate sections of this section.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, park, parkway, highway or other
public roadway.
§ 4-9.2. Resolution Required. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code § 60B-2]
No person utilizing the Borough as a principal place of business shall pick
up for hire any persons for any formal limousine in the Borough unless both
the formal limousine and driver thereof are recognized by resolution of the
Governing Body pursuant to the terms of this section and conform to all the
provisions thereof.
§ 4-9.3. Classes of Recognition. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code § 60B-3]
There are hereby established two classes of recognition by resolution to be
known as "recognition of driver" and "recognition of business" respectively.
§ 4-9.4. Recognition of Business; No Limit. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code
§ 60B-4]
§ 4-9.5. Recognition of Driver; No Limit. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code
§ 60B-5]
§ 4-9.6. Application for Recognition. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code
§ 60B-6]
a. A recognition by resolution of a limousine business shall entitle the
formal limousine business therein described to be operated in this
Borough by an owner until the recognition is surrendered, suspended,
or revoked and shall not be transferable.
b. There shall be no limit to the amount of limousine businesses
recognized by resolution of the Governing Body.
a. Recognition of a limousine driver by resolution of the Governing Body
shall entitle the person named therein to operate within this Borough
any formal limousine duly recognized hereunder until the recognition is
surrendered, suspended or revoked and that recognition shall not be
transferable.
b. There will be no limit to the amount of limousine drivers recognized by
resolution of the Governing Body.
a. All applications for recognition of formal limousine business or driver
shall be in writing, in duplicate, and shall contain the full name and
address of the business or driver. Any and every change of address of
§ 4-9.1 BRIELLE CODE § 4-9.6
1:126
§ 4-9.7. Qualifications for Application for Recognition of Formal
Limousine Driver. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code § 60B-7]
§ 4-9.8. Receipt or Discharge of Passengers. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code
§ 60B-8]
the business or driver shall be reported in writing to the Borough Clerk
within three days after such change.
b. All applications shall be filed with the Borough Clerk, who shall submit
the application to the Governing Body at the next succeeding meeting
for recognition.
c. Any person obtaining a business or driver's recognition, must be at
least 18 years of age and a citizen of the United States. If a corporation,
such corporation shall be organized and existing under the laws of the
State of New Jersey and shall maintain an office in the Borough of
Brielle.
d. No formal limousine recognized under this section shall be maintained
or operated on the streets of the Borough except by a driver recognized
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
a. Each applicant for recognition to be a formal limousine driver shall be
at least 18 years of age, a citizen of the United States and a holder of an
appropriate State driver's license issued by the Department of Motor
Vehicles, State of New Jersey.
b. He must furnish with the application for such recognition two recent
photographs of himself, three inches in length and four inches in height
in duplicate.
c. Every resolution recognizing a driver may be revoked upon the accrual
of six or more points on the driver's record pursuant to the New Jersey
State Motor Vehicle Statute.
d. All changes of residence on the part of the driver recognized under this
section shall be reported in writing to the Governing Body through the
Borough Clerk and directed to the Police Department of the Borough.
a. Drivers of formal limousines shall not receive or discharge passengers
in the roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk or as nearly
as possible thereto, or, in absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme righthand
side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers,
except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged on
either the right or left-hand sidewalk or at the side of the roadway in the
absence of a sidewalk.
b. Cruising shall be prohibited by formal limousines.
§ 4-9.6 GENERAL § 4-9.9
1:127
§ 4-9.9. Identification Required. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code § 60B-9]
Every driver of a limousine shall be issued a formal limousine business
personal identification which shall include a photograph of the recognized
driver with his name, driver's license number, recognition of driver
resolution number, and indication that said driver is in the employ of the
formal limousine business.
§ 4-9.10. Recognition Fees; Terms of Recognition. [Ord. #650; 1972
Code § 60B-10 New]
§ 4-9.11. Revocation, Suspension or Nonissuance of Recognition.
[Ord. #650; 1972 Code § 60B-11]
The Governing Body may, in its discretion, refuse to recognize or may, after
notice and hearing, revoke or suspend recognition:
§ 4-9.12. Substitution of Vehicles; Transfer Fee. [Ord. #650; 1972
Code § 60B-12]
Should a formal limousine be withdrawn from services for necessary repairs
or for replacement, the Borough Clerk shall issue a transfer license thereof
to substitute another vehicle in place of the one withdrawn, provided that
all sections of this section are complied with in respect to the proposed
substitution. There shall be a fee of $25 for the issuance of the transfer.
a. The annual formal limousine business recognition fee shall be $100.
The license shall be effective for one calendar year commencing
January 1 of each year.
b. The annual formal limousine driver's recognition fee shall be $25 and
the license shall be effective for the period of one calendar year
commencing January 1 of each year.
a. If the applicant has been convicted of a crime in this or any other
jurisdiction, or convicted of being a disorderly person pursuant to the
New Jersey Statutes Annotated or has violated any provision of this
section or has any judgment of record unsatisfied against him arising
out of an automobile accident, or has failed or fails to render a
reasonable prompt, safe and adequate formal limousine service, or has
not complied fully with all the requirements of this section for such
class of license.
b. If the driver operates under unsafe or unsanitary conditions, or which
are dangerous to the safety or the health of the occupants or others, or
if the policy of insurance required by this section has once lapsed or
such coverage is not maintained at all times.
§ 4-9.9 BRIELLE CODE § 4-9.13
1:128
§ 4-9.13. Substitution of Driver; Daily Fee. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code
§ 60B-13; New]
Should there arise an occasion where due to emergent circumstances such
as illness, the substitution of a previously recognized driver is necessary, the
Borough Clerk may issue a temporary one day municipal limousine driver's
permit provided the substitute driver meets the qualifications as set forth in
this section.
There shall be a fee of $10 for the issuance of each daily permit.
§ 4-9.14. Insurance. [Ord. #650; 1972 Code § 60B-14; New]
No formal limousine shall be licensed until an insurance policy or certificate
in lieu thereof and power of attorney executed shall have been filed with the
Borough Clerk with liability of not less than $250,000/$500,000 and not less
than $50,000 for insurance for property damage.
§ 4-9.13 GENERAL § 4-9.14
1:129

ARTICLE V
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 4-10. RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 4-10.1. Preamble. [Ord. #1002]
The Monmouth County Regional Health Commission is a Regional Health
Commission created and operated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-83 et seq.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-83 et seq., the function of a Regional Health
Commission is to provide public health services to its constituent members.
The Borough of Brielle is a member of the Monmouth County Regional
Health Commission.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-64, and N.J.S.A. 26:3-93, local boards of health may
enact and amend health ordinances that remain in effect unless altered or
repealed by a Regional Health Commission.
The Monmouth County Regional Health Commission has enacted Ordinance
No. 9-01 to amend an ordinance establishing a code regulating retail food
establishment, and fixing fees for licensing and plan review, and setting
penalties for violations thereof.
The Governing Body of the Borough of Brielle ordains that Monmouth
Regional Health Commission No. 1's Ordinance No. 9-01 is hereby adopted
to wit:
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A CODE
REGULATING RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, AND FIXING FEES FOR
LICENSING AND PLAN REVIEW THEREOF, AND PENALTIES FOR
VIOLATIONS THEREOF.
§ 4-10.2. Adoption of Retail Food Establishment Code. [This Code is
on file in the office of the Borough Clerk. Ord. #1002]
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties for
violations is hereby established pursuant to Revised Statutes 26:3-69.1 to
69.6 and Revised Statutes 26:3-92 and 26:3-93. A copy of said Code is
annexed hereto, and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein set forth.
§ 4-10.3. Title. [Ord. #1002]
The said Code established and adopted by this Article is commonly known
as the "Chapter 24-Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Vending Machines," New Jersey State Sanitary Code.
§ 4-10 GENERAL § 4-10.4
1:131
§ 4-10.4. Copies on File. [Ord. #1002]
Three copies of said "Chapter 24-Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments
and Food and Beverage Vending Machines," New Jersey State Sanitary
Code, have been placed on file in the Office of the Health Commission upon
the introduction of this Article and will remain on file there until final action
is taken on this Article for the use and examination of the public.
§ 4-10.5. Inspections; Authority to Enter Premises. [Ord. #1002]
The said Regional Commission, and its agents or employees, including
but not limited to, its Health Officer, shall have the right of entry, at any
reasonable hour, into and upon any public or private building, or premises
for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of such Code and of this Article,
or determining whether such provisions or the rules and regulations of this
Regional Commission are being compiled with and obeyed. No person shall
oppose such entry or hinder or interfere with this Regional Commission or
any of its agents or employees, or Health Officer, all as aforesaid, in the
performance of their duties.
§ 4-10.6. Fees. [Ord. #1002]
The said Regional Health Commission Food Establishment Ordinance No.
9-01, hereby fixed the following fees:
a. Minimum fees for annual licensing of retail Food Establishments are
hereby fixed as follows:
1. Mobile Vehicles $75 per year.
2. Special Events, lasting one week in duration or less $50 per year.
3. Establishments Other Than Licensed Restaurants:
(a) Minimum Fee All Establishments $125 per year.
(b) Between 4,000 and 10,000 square feet $350 per year.
(c) Over 10,000 square feet $650 per year.
4. Restaurants:
(a) Seating Capacity up to 50 $125 per year.
(b) Seating Capacity from 51 to 100 $225 per year.
(c) Seating Capacity Over 100 $375 per year.
5. Food License Late Fee. A late fee charge will be levied by the
licensing municipality on those food establishment owners and/or
operators who do not renew their license on the anniversary date.
The late fee charge will be in addition to the cost of the
establishment's annual food licensing fee. The late fee charge is set
as follows: the late fee equals 20% of the food establishment's
§ 4-10.4 BRIELLE CODE § 4-10.6
1:132
§ 4-10.7. Compliance with Food Retail Establishment Code
Required. [Ord. #1002]
All retail food establishments shall be operated in compliance with the
provisions of the aforesaid Code of this Article and Title 24, Revised
Statutes of New Jersey.
§ 4-10.8. Enforcement. [Ord. #1002]
This Article may be enforced by and in the name of this Regional Health
Commission by proceedings instituted and prosecuted in a court having
jurisdiction of such proceedings in the Regional.
§ 4-10.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #1002]
Any person who violates any provisions of this Article or Code established
herein shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than
$10 nor more than $500 for each violation, each day a particular violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. Upon refusal or neglect, upon
and after conviction, to pay the amount of said penalty or fine, the person
so convicted shall be subject to be committed to the County Jail for a period
not exceeding 90 days, all in the discretion of the Municipal Magistrate or
other office before whom the complaint shall be brought.
annual licensing fee except that the minimum late fee charge shall
be set no lower than $20.
If upon reinspection, the establishment is rated conditional or
below for the same or similar violation, there will be a reinspection
fee of $100. Establishments are still subject to additional penalties
upon inspector's discretion.
b. Fees for the plan review of retail food establishments are hereby fixed
as follows:
1. Establishments Other Than Restaurants:
(a) Between zero and 4,000 square feet $225 per plan.
(b) Between 4,001 and 10,000 square feet $450 per plan.
(c) Over 10,001 square feet $750 per plan.
2. Restaurants:
(a) Seating capacity up to 100 $250 per plan.
(b) Seating capacity over 100 $500 per plan.
3. Limited Establishment Alterations $125 per plan.
§ 4-10.6 GENERAL § 4-10.10
1:133
§ 4-10.10. Penalty for Violation of New Jersey State Law. [Ord.
#1002]
In the event that any violation of this Code shall also be a violation of a
New Jersey State Law, for which a greater penalty is provided for than that
contained in the aforesaid Code and this Article, The Municipal Magistrate,
before whom the complaint is brought, based upon such violation, shall in
his or her discretion, have the right to impose, in the place and in lieu of any
penalty provided for herein, that is so provided for in the New Jersey State
Law which has been so violated.
§ 4-10.11. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. #1002]
Every act in such Code or herein designated as being unlawful is hereby
prohibited and every act herein expressly prohibited, is hereby designated
as being unlawful.
§ 4-10.12. Payment of License Fees. [Ord. #1002]
The license fees covered pursuant to subsection 4-10.6a of this Article
shall be paid to such respective local Board of Health of such municipality
participating in the Regional Health Commission within which such fees are
assessed and collected.
§ 4-10.13. Payment of Plan Review Fees. [Ord. #1002]
The plan review fees covered pursuant to subsection 4-10.6b, et seq. of
this Article shall be paid directly to the Monmouth County Regional Health
Commission No. 1 within that health agency's jurisdiction which such fees
are assessed and collected.
§ 4-10.14. Nontransferability. [Ord. #1002]
The license of any retail food establishment covered under this Article is not
transferable upon the sale of such retail food establishment and the new
owner of any such retail food establishment must apply for a new license
and pay the appropriate fee provided for in subsection 4-10.6a et seq. of this
Article.
§ 4-10.10 BRIELLE CODE § 4-10.14
1:134
ARTICLE VI
DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND OTHER SECONDHAND
GOODS
§ 4-11. DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND OTHER
SECONDHAND GOODS.
§ 4-11.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 1049-2016]
The purpose and intent of this section is to assist law enforcement officials
and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals and other
secondhand goods by requiring minimum identification, reporting,
maintenance, and distribution criteria for licensed dealers in these goods.
No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or occupation
of the buying, selling, or pawning of precious metals or other secondhand
goods without complying with the requirements of this section in the exact
manner described herein.
§ 4-11.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1049-2016]
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean a current valid New Jersey
Driver's License or Identification Card, a current valid photo driver's license
issued by another US state, a valid United States Passport, or other
verifiable US Government issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
police department on request.
DEALER — Shall mean any person, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or
operates any of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes
of resale of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined
herein; pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined
herein. For the purposes of this ordinance, transient buyers, as defined
herein, are subject to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any
other dealers.
GIFT CARD/MERCHANDISE CREDIT — Shall mean any restricted
monetary equivalent or script that is issued by retailers or banks to be used
as an alternative to a non monetary gift.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Shall mean a dealer who conducts business
intermittently within the municipality or at varying locations.
MERCANTILE OFFICER — Shall mean as defined by this section.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — Shall mean the statutory officer whose duties are
defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed clerk of
the "City," "Town," "Township," "Village," or "Borough."
PAWNBROKER — Shall mean any person, partnership, association or
corporation: lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness;
purchasing personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated
§ 4-11 GENERAL § 4-11.2
1:135
price; or doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending
money on goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral
security.
POLICE CHIEF — As defined by Chapter 2, subsection 2-6.3 of the Code of
the Borough of Brielle.
PRECIOUS METALS — Shall mean gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and
their alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Shall mean individuals and retail sellers, not to include
wholesale transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Shall mean every transaction conducted
between a dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals,
jewelry, or any other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or
pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Shall mean used goods such as antiques, gold,
silver, platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift
cards, any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, purses, pocketbooks, furs and other valuable articles. For
the purposes of this ordinance, secondhand goods shall not include goods
transacted in the following manner: i) judicial sales or sales by executors or
administrators; ii) occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from
private homes; iii) auctions of real estate; iv) the occasional sale, purchase,
or exchange of coins or stamps by a person at his permanent residence or
in any municipally owned building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting
coins or stamps and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange
of such coins or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign,
handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
SELLER — Shall mean a member of the public who sells or pawns used
goods such as precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a
dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — Shall mean a dealer, as defined herein, who has not
been in a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at
any address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register or
who intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 4-11.3. License Requirement for Dealers. [Ord. No. 1049-2016]
No person, partnership, Limited Liability Company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of precious
metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within the jurisdiction
of the municipality, without having first obtained a license therefor from the
Mercantile License Officer, which license shall bear a number issued by the
§ 4-11.2 BRIELLE CODE § 4-11.3
1:136
Mercantile License Officer. The application for a license to the Mercantile
License Officer shall set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the
dealer, whether or not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and
whether or not he or she has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly
persons offense(s), or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s)
thereof Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of
those articles or secondhand goods referred to in subsection 4-11.2 above
are being bought in any location within the municipality shall constitute
engaging in business as a dealer of secondhand goods for purposes of
this section. No person, partnership, Limited Liability Company, corporation
or other entity shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for
purchase of such articles or goods without stating in the advertising the
license number issued to a person or entity by the municipality. In any print
advertisement, the license number shall appear in type no smaller than
eight point in the lower- right-hand corner of the advertisement. In any
advertisement in electronic media, the license number shall be visually or
audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the license number shall be a
violation of this section and shall be subject to the penalties established in
subsection 4-11.10.
§ 4-11.4. Exclusions. [Ord. No. 1049-2016]
Nothing in this section shall apply to or require the obtaining of a license
by any charitable or religious society that shall conduct sales of personal
property when the proceeds thereof shall be applied to the payment of
the expenses thereof and to the charitable or religious object for which
the society exists, and nothing in this section shall apply to or require the
obtaining of a license by any art, antique or historical society that shall
conduct an exhibition and sale of art objects, pictures, paintings, prints,
historical articles and furniture generally known and designated as antiques
and kindred objects; and nothing in this section shall apply to or require the
obtaining of a license by any agricultural show, fair or garden society selling
or closing out certain of their exhibits, if such society was an incorporated
association, not for pecuniary profit, of this State prior to the 26th day of
March, 1935, or if incorporated subsequent thereto, such society shall have
a bona fide membership of at least 100 persons.
§ 4-11.5. Application Process for Dealers; Approval or Denial. [Ord.
No. 1049-2016]
a. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this section, the
Mercantile License Officer shall refer such application to the Chief of
Police or his (or her) designee, who shall make an investigation of the
prospective licensee, pursuant to this section for the purpose of
determining the suitability of the applicant for licensing. The
investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
1. The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in subsection 4-11.2
§ 4-11.3 GENERAL § 4-11.5
1:137
above, although nothing in this section shall be construed to
warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
2. The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
3. Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly person offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
4. The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business, however
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by subsection 4-11.7d of this section will be stored as well
as the location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under subsection 4-11.7a.
b. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
section within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Mercantile License Officer, fully completed by the applicant. If a
criminal record check has been requested within the thirty-day period
and has not been received by the Chief of Police within that period, the
Chief of Police may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a
conditional issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding
criminal record.
c. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Mercantile License
Officer, who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the
Chief of Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation
of denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Mercantile License Officer accepts the
recommendation of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant
shall be notified in writing within 10 days of such denial and the
Mercantile License Officer shall forward to the applicant a statement of
the reason or reasons for such denial.
§ 4-11.5 BRIELLE CODE § 4-11.5
1:138
§ 4-11.6. Identification of Seller; Recordkeeping Requirements for
Dealers. [Ord. No. 1049-2016]
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
d. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in subsection 4-11.6, the retention and inspection
requirements of subsection 4-11.7, or any other portion of this section.
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the
Mercantile License Officer shall issue or deny the license accordingly,
contingent upon the receipt of a bond as required by subsection 4-11.8
of this section.
e. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before the Mayor and Council, at which time the
applicant shall be permitted to introduce such evidence as may be
deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of denial of a license to act as a dealer of secondhand
goods.
f. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
a. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in
subsection 4-11.2.
b. Require each seller to execute a "Declaration of Ownership," which
shall contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I
am the sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods
being sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not
possess the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age
of 18 years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
c. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
§ 4-11.5 GENERAL § 4-11.6
1:139
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
2. The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
3. A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
4. A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in subsection 4-11.2, in a format
acceptable by the Chief of Police;
5. A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Photographs of serial numbers on items
that contain serial numbers shall be taken.
6. The receipt number which shall also be listed on the subject article.
7. A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
8. The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
9. If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling of coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1, N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.;
10. The time and date of the transaction.
d. The information outlined in paragraph c above, must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this section
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized Police Officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in paragraph f below. Through the use of applicably required computer
§ 4-11.6 BRIELLE CODE § 4-11.6
1:140
§ 4-11.7. Retention; Revocation; Other Restrictions. [Ord. No.
1049-2016]
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment.
The information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined
in paragraph c above.
e. In the event of a database failure, all transaction information is
required to be submitted to a Bridle Police email approved by the Chief
of Police within 24 hours from the date of purchase. If the dealer's
computer equipment suffers a malfunction and is not operable, the
dealer must submit all transactions on paper forms approved by the
Chief of Police within 24 hours from the date of the purchase. In the
event that email or paper form reporting is used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in paragraph c
above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this section and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
subsection 4-11.7.
f. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in subsection 4-11.7 Itinerant
businesses and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the
Chief of Police of the address where these records and articles will be
stored.
g. All records maintained by the Chief of Police pursuant to this section
shall be confidential and shall not be made available to any individual or
institution as otherwise provided by law. The information pursuant to
this section may be shared with any Federal, State, County or local law
enforcement, or regulatory agency with jurisdiction over persons
engaged in businesses that conduct reportable transactions.
a. In accordance with both N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 and this section, all precious
metals, jewelry, and other secondhand goods purchased, received for
pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are to be made
available for inspection by the Chief of Police or his (or her) designee at
the designated business address for a period of at least 10 calendar
§ 4-11.6 GENERAL § 4-11.7
1:141
days from the date the transaction information is actually reported
to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above in
subsection 4-11.6. All precious metal or other secondhand goods
subject to inspection must remain in the same condition as when
purchased or received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of,
changed, modified, or melted by the dealer until the ten-day retention
period has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be
responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where the
purchased item(s) are being held.
b. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
4-11.6b upon the sale of those goods, the dealer has the right to sign a
theft by deception complaint under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 against the seller at
the Brielle Municipal Court. A law enforcement officer shall seize the
goods and provide the dealer with a receipt. If the dealer signs a
complaint and the seller is convicted of theft by deception and is found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
c. If market conditions would create a hardship on the dealer by holding
precious metals or other secondhand goods for such period, the dealer
may present the property to the Chief of Police in order that it may be
photographed and, if deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, an
investigation may be implemented. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority to grant the dealer a waiver (at the risk of the dealer) of the
requirement under this section. In no case shall the dealer sell the
items prior to the established period without the written permission of
the Chief of Police or his designee.
d. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years, a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
subsection 4-11.6c.
e. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this section from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or his (or her)
designee identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be
made and the item to be purchased.
f. Suspension. The Chief of Police or his (or her) designee is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to subsection 4-11.10
of this section.
1. Grounds for Suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this section, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
§ 4-11.7 BRIELLE CODE § 4-11.7
1:142
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
2. Procedure for Suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or his (or her) designee shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension, and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to paragraph
g,2. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately, pending the
outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must immediately
cease engaging in the business of purchasing for resale, receiving
for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or other
secondhand goods in the Municipality until reinstatement.
3. Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or his (or her) designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified, or upon the decision of a timely filing of
an appeal as provided in paragraph g,2.
g. Revocation. A license issued under this section may be revoked by the
Mayor and Council upon written recommendation from the Chief of
Police or his (or her) designee that the dealer is no longer qualified,
capable or competent to comply with the requirements of this section.
This penalty shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer
may incur under subsection 4-11.10.
1. Grounds for Revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this section; a second violation
under this section less than one year after an earlier violation
under this section; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
2. Procedure for Revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that revocation is warranted, the Chief of Police
or his (or her) designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk in
writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically be issued, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. The determination by the Chief of Police or
his (or her) designee shall be final unless the licensee files a written
notice of appeal with the Municipal Clerk within 10 days after
receiving the written notice of the decision. The appeal shall be a
hearing before the Mayor and Council. Written notice of the time
and place of such hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least
72 hours prior to the date set for such hearing. Notice may be given
either by personal delivery or by regular mail to the address listed
on the license. At the hearing before the Mayor and Council the
licensee shall have an opportunity to answer, introduce evidence,
§ 4-11.7 GENERAL § 4-11.7
1:143
§ 4-11.8. Bond. [Ord. No. 1049-2016]
Each licensee shall deliver a bond to the Municipal Clerk, executed by the
applicant as principal, and executed by a surety company authorized to do
business under the laws of the State of New Jersey, as surety. The bond shall
be subject to the review and approval by the Borough Attorney, as defined
in N.J.S.A 40A:9-139, and be in the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned upon
the due and proper observance of and compliance with the provisions and
requirements of all existing or future Borough ordinances relating to the
conduct of the secondhand dealer business, and conditioned also that the
bond shall be and remain for the benefit of any person or persons who
shall have received judgment against a licensee by reason of any damage
sustained by any such person as a result of the operations of the licensee,
which damage shall be established by a judgment of a court of proper
jurisdiction. The bond shall contain the following language: "The obligation
of this bond shall, in addition to the Borough of Brielle, be and remain for
the benefit of any person who shall obtain a judgment against the obligor as
a result of damage sustained in operation pursuant to any license granted
by the Borough of Brielle." The bond shall be kept for a minimum of one year
from the date of issuance of license and must be renewed annually along
with the license.
§ 4-11.9. Fees; Period of License Validity. [Ord. No. 1049-2016]
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or a
dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under this
section, is $250. The annual renewal fee for a license is $150. These fees are
separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation to
the mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of Police,
as provided by subsection 4-11.6d of this section. Payments are to be made
in the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a oneyear
period from January 1st through December 31st. All applications for
renewal must be filed on or before November 1st for renewal by January 1st
of the following year.
and present testimony of witnesses, and upon due consideration
and deliberation by the Mayor and Council, the license may be
revoked, suspended or other actions taken, or the complaint may
be dismissed. The decision of the Mayor and Council shall
constitute final administrative action of the municipality.
3. Following revocation or suspension by the Mayor and Council, the
dealer must relinquish his or her license and must immediately and
indefinitely cease operating as a dealer of precious metals or other
secondhand goods within the municipality.
h. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Mercantile License
Officer, in writing, of the street address of said new location prior to the
move.
§ 4-11.7 BRIELLE CODE § 4-11.10
1:144
§ 4-11.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1049-2016]
Violation of any provision of this section by any dealer shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations of N.J.S.A.
40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation of operating
license as provided in subsection 4-11.7f and subsection 4-11.7g above.
Each and every violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each
violation shall result in an additional suspension period. Any person who is
found guilty of violating the provisions of this section within one year of the
date of a previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation
may be sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender
and, in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided
in subsection 4-11.7g. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided
herein, and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for
the violation of this section.
§ 4-11.11. Time Limit for Conformance; Repealer; Severability.
[Ord. No. 1049-2016]
a. Any person, partnership, Limited Liability Company, corporation, or
other entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in
precious metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the
provisions of this section within 90 days following the effective date of
this section.
b. Nothing contained in this section is intended to replace any pre-existing
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1
et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale
of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any other
statutory provision regarding any subject matter discussed herein.
c. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 4-11.10 GENERAL § 4-11.11
1:145
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
Editor's Note: For regulations concerning pit bulls see Board of
Health Chapter 2 at the end of this book.
§ 5-1. LICENSING OF DOGS.
§ 5-1.1. License Fee Established. [Ord. #144-13, Ord. #343; Ord.
#546; Ord. #622; Ord. #661; Ord. #662; 1972 Code § 48-1; New;
Ord. #809; Ord. #1000]
The annual license fee for dogs in the Borough shall be $10.80 for each
dog to be licensed, in addition to the fee of $1.20 for the registration tag
of each license. Dog owners issued licenses for non-spayed or non-neutered
dogs shall be charged an additional $3 fee. Owners presenting a statement
by a veterinarian that such dog has been sterilized are exempt from the
additional fee of $3. The time for the licensing of all dogs shall be in the
month of January each year. The owner of a newly acquired dog who has
attained licensing age during the year shall make application for license and
registration tags within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment
said registration tag must be worn by the dog at all times. A late fee of $5
shall be charged after March 31st of each license year.
A dog shall be of licensing age if such dog has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
No license shall be issued for any dog unless the applicant for the license
presents proof of a valid current rabies vaccination certification.
§ 5-1.2. Penalties. [1972 Code § 48-1; New; Ord. #814]
§ 5-2. REGULATION OF DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS.
§ 5-2.1. Dogs at Large Prohibited; Leash Required. [Ord. #144-13;
Ord. #343; Ord. #661; Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 48-2]
No person who owns or harbors any dog shall allow such dog, whether
registered or not, to run at large in this Borough. Any dog, when taken off
the property of the owner or harborer, shall be on a leash not longer than
eight feet in length.
a. Violations of Section; Penalty. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, any person who violates, or who fails or refuses to comply with
this section, shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $50, nor more
than $500, for each offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the
local Board of Health, or by and in the name of the Borough.
§ 4-11.11 BRIELLE CODE § 5-2.2
1:146
§ 5-2.2. Noise Disturbance from Animals. [1972 Code § 365-9]
No person shall own, keep, possess, or harbor any animal or animals which,
by frequent or habitual howling, barking, meowing, squawking, or other
noise-making, cause a noise disturbance. The provisions of this section shall
also apply to all private or public facilities, including any animal pounds,
which hold or treat animals. A barking dog is defined as a dog barking
continuously for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes.
§ 5-2.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #662; 1972 Code § 48-3;
§ 48-6]
Each person violating subsection 5-2.1 or subsection 5-2.2 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty established in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
§ 5-2.4. Soiling by Pets; Removal of Feces Required. [Ord. #685,
1972 Code § 48-26; New; Ord. #959]
§ 5-2.5. Wildlife Feeding Prohibited. [Ord. #959]
a. Removal of Feces Required. No person owning, harboring, keeping,
walking or in charge of any pets shall cause, permit or allow such pets
to soil, defile defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, street, sidewalk, passageway, road, bypath, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public
property whatsoever, or upon any private property without the
permission of the owner of the private property in the last instance,
provided that said permission does not constitute a violation of Board of
Health standards.
If any person shall permit such pets to soil, defile, defecate on or
commit any nuisance on the areas aforesaid, he or she shall
immediately remove all feces and droppings deposited by such pets,
which removal shall be in a sanitary manner by shovel, container,
disposal bag, etc., and the feces and droppings shall be removed by
person from the aforesaid designated areas and disposed of by said
person in a sanitary manner that will not endanger the public health,
safety or welfare.
Pets shall be defined as a domesticated animal (other than a disability
assistance animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
b. Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates or who fails to comply
with the provisions of this subsection shall, upon conviction be liable to
the penalty established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
a. Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrate a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
§ 5-2.2 GENERAL § 5-2.5
1:147
§ 5-3. ANIMAL CONTROL SERVICE.
§ 5-3.1. Duties. [Ord. #403; Ord. #660; 1972 Code § 48-13]
The Borough shall obtain and maintain the services of a qualified Animal
Control Service to take into custody and impound animals at large in
violation of these regulations.
§ 5-3.2. Impounding. [Ord. #479; Ord. #531; Ord. #660; 1972 Code
§ 48-14]
Animals taken into custody by the Animal Control Service so designated and
provided by the Borough shall be under the control and procedures of such
Animal Control Service hired by the Borough.
§ 5-4. ANIMALS RUNNING AT-LARGE PROHIBITED.
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words
used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used
in the singular number include the plural number. The word shall is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter
any edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing
wildlife. Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish/and
or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
b. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any
other property owned and operated by the Borough of Brielle, any
wildlife; excluding confined wildlife (for example wildlife confined in
zoos, parks or recreation centers, or unconfined wildlife at
environmental education centers).
c. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the Police
Department and/or the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of
Brielle. Any person found to be in violation of this subsection shall be
ordered to cease the feeding immediately.
d. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of this
subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 for the first
offense. Subsequent violations shall result in a fine not to exceed $200
and/or performance of community service in the Department of Public
Works for a period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 5-2.5 BRIELLE CODE § 5-4.1
1:148
§ 5-4.1. Animals Running at-Large Prohibited. [Ord. #185; 1972
Code § 48-8]
No owner or other person having the control or management of any cattle,
swine, sheep, goats, domestic rabbits, chickens or fowl or other animals
shall permit such animals to run at-large within the limits of the Borough.
§ 5-4.2. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #185; Ord. #433; 1972 Code
§ 48-10]
Every person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-5. BITES AND ATTACKS.
§ 5-5.1. Determination of Ownership of Animal. [Ord. #510; 1972
Code § 48-18]
In any case in which an animal shall bite a human being in the Borough,
it shall be the duty of the person so bitten to determine ownership of the
animal in question.
§ 5-5.2. Report to Health Board or Health Officer. [Ord. #510; 1972
Code § 48-19]
If ownership shall be determined, the same shall be reported to the
Secretary of the Board of Health or the Health Officer of the Borough, who
shall instruct the owner as to the procedures for examination of the animal.
§ 5-5.3. Quarantine and Examination of Animal. [Ord. #510; 1972
Code § 48-20]
The decision to quarantine and/or examine the animal shall be based upon
the following determinations of the Health Officer:
a. An aggravated bite shall result in a house quarantine of not less than 10
days.
b. An unaggravated bite shall result in penned quarantine of the animal, in
a place designated by the Health Officer, for daily observation by a
licensed veterinarian appointed by the Health Officer. The cost of the
quarantine shall be borne by the owner or owners of the animal or
parents or guardian, if the owner is not of legal age.
c. In the event of a savage attack, the Health Officer, with the concurrence
of at least one member of the Board of Health, may order the biting
animal sacrificed by a licensed veterinarian and the remains, or portion
thereof, transported to the laboratory of the New Jersey State
Department of Health by the owner. If this is so ordered, the owner of
the animal will bear all transportation costs and any other costs
associated with the sacrifice, sample preparation and/or examination.
§ 5-4.1 GENERAL § 5-5.4
1:149
§ 5-5.4. Responsibility for Examination of Animal; Costs. [Ord.
#510; 1972 Code § 48-21]
§ 5-5.5. Responsibility for Treatment of Injuries; Costs. [Ord. #510;
1972 Code § 48-22]
Obtaining treatment for injuries sustained from a biting animal in the
Borough shall be the responsibility of the person bitten. The Board of Health
of the Borough shall no way be responsible for providing treatment or for
the success of the treatment.
§ 5-5.6. Failure to Comply; Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #510;
1972 Code § 48-23]
If, within 10 days after receipt of written notice from the Health Officer,
the responsible person shall fail to remit payment in accordance with the
preceding sections of this Chapter, the Health Officer may file a complaint
in Municipal Court against such person. If the court shall find that person
guilty of failure to perform, pursuant to this Chapter, the Court shall order
the person to pay and reimburse the Borough for all costs as herein set
forth, including reasonable costs of maintaining the action; and the Court
may, in addition, levy a fine not to exceed $100.
§ 5-6. REGULATION OF WILD AND DOMESTIC ANIMALS.5
§ 5-6.1. Prohibition of Wild and Domestic Animals. [New]
No person shall be allowed to keep anywhere within the Borough limits, any
horse, cow, pig, goat, sheep, lamb or other wild or domestic animals that
shall produce noise or odors which may be obnoxious or offensive to the
inhabitants of the Borough or part thereof.
a. If ownership of the animal cannot be determined, or in the case of a
wild animal, the Health Officer shall inform the bitten person (or in case
of a minor, the parent of such person) as to the procedures to be
followed for examination of the animal. The bitten person (or parents,
as the case may be) shall then comply with such procedures at his or
her own cost and expense.
b. If the persons responsible for examination of the animal shall fail to
perform their duties as herein set forth, then the Health Officer, with
the concurrence of at least one member of the Board of Health, may
direct the Animal Warden to transport the animal to the laboratory of
the New Jersey State Department of Health, and all costs and expenses
incurred by the Borough of Brielle in so doing shall be assessed against
the responsible person.
5. Editor's Note: For additional regulations see Board of Health Section BH:2-2.
§ 5-5.4 BRIELLE CODE § 5-6.2
1:150
§ 5-6.2. Violations. [New]
Every person violating any of the provisions of this Section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-7. RABIES CERTIFICATION REQUIRED FOR DOGS AND CATS.
[New]
Every owner or custodian of a dog and/or cat within the Borough shall
be required to have his or her dog and/or cat maintain a current rabies
vaccination on the animal.
§ 5-8. LICENSING AND REGULATION OF CATS.
§ 5-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. #786]
As used in this section:
ANIMAL — Shall mean dog or cat.
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Shall mean any person or agency
designated or certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions
of this section.
CAT — Shall mean any member of the domestic feline species; male, female
or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any cat which has attained the age
of seven months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen,
not part of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the agency or department of the
Borough or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this section.
NEUTERED — Shall mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction
as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, shall include every
person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat and every person
who has such a cat in his or her keeping, or who harbors or maintains a cat
or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any premises occupied by
that person.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership,
organization or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 5-8.2. Provisions Relating to Rabies Vaccination of Cats. [Ord.
#786]
a. Vaccination and Licensing Requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor or maintain any cat over seven months of age within Brielle
§ 5-6.2 GENERAL § 5-8.2
1:151
§ 5-8.3. Licensing Requirements. [Ord. #786; Ord. #809; Ord. #865;
Ord. #1000]
unless such cat is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions of this
section do not apply to cats held in a cattery, or those held by a State or
Federal licensed research facility, or a veterinary establishment where
cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical, or other
treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels or pet shops.
b. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in paragraph d.
c. Vaccination Certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to
the owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the
State.
d. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the local Board of Health,
upon presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of
an infirmity or other physical conditions, or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such a cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
a. Cats Must Have License Number Displayed. Any person who shall own,
keep or harbor a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and
procure from the Clerk of the Municipality or other official designated
by the Governing Body thereof to license cats in the Borough in which
he/she resides, a license and official registration tag with license
number, or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned, kept, or
harbored, and shall place upon such cat a collar, or other device with
the license number securely fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable
methods of displaying license number shall include, but are not limited
to, break-away or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are not
transferable.
b. Time for Applying for License. The owner of a newly acquired cat of
licensing age, or of any cat which attains licensing age, shall make
application for license tag or sleeve for such cat within 10 days after
such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within Brielle for no longer than 90 days.
c. Cats Brought into Brielle. Any person who shall bring, or cause to be
brought into Brielle, any cat licensed in another state or the current
year, and bearing registration tax or sleeve, and shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within Brielle for a period of more than 90
days, shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or
sleeve for each such cat. Any person who shall bring or cause to be
brought into Brielle any unlicensed cat, and shall keep same or permit
same to be kept within Brielle for a period of time of more than 10 days,
§ 5-8.2 BRIELLE CODE § 5-8.3
1:152
shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for
each such cat.
d. Application, Contents, Preservation of Information. The application
shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of a cat for which
license and registration are sought, and whether it is of a long- or shorthaired
variety; also the name, street and post office address of the
owner, and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on said application and the registration number issued for
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or
other local official designated to license cats in the Borough.
e. License Forms and Tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the municipality and shall be numbered serially, and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the Borough.
f. Evidence of Inoculation with Rabies Vaccine or Certification of
Exemption; Requirement for License. No Municipal Clerk or other
official designated by the Governing Body of any Borough to license
cats therein shall grant any such license and official registration tag or
sleeve for any cat, unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the
cat to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with a rabies
vaccine of a type approved by and administered in accordance with the
recommendations of the United States Department of Human Services,
or has been certified exempt as provided by paragraph d of subsection
5-8.2. The rabies inoculation shall be administered by a duly licensed
veterinarian, or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to do the
same.
g. License Fee Schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of
$15 for each unneutered cat, and $12 for each neutered cat. Persons
who fail to obtain a license as required within the time period specified
in this section, will be subject to a delinquent fee of $5. The time period
specified shall be March 31st of the license year.
h. Fees, Renewals, Expiration Date of License. License from another
municipality shall be accepted. The person applying for the license and
registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay the fee fixed or authorized. The
fee for the renewal of license and registration tag or sleeve shall be the
same as for the original, and said license, registration tag or sleeve and
renewal thereof shall expire on December 31 in the following year. Only
one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in the
licensing year for any cat in Brielle. Any valid New Jersey license tag or
sleeve issued by the New Jersey municipality shall be accepted by
Brielle as evidence of compliance.
i. Loss of License. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
designated Borough official may issue a duplicate license and/or
registration sleeve for that particular cat at a fee of $0.50.
j. Proof of Licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining, or harboring a cat upon the request of
§ 5-8.3 GENERAL § 5-8.3
1:153
§ 5-8.4. Penalty. [Ord. #786]
§ 5-9. PROHIBITION TO BAN THE SALE OF DOGS AND CATS FROM
PET SHOPS.
§ 5-9.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1060-2017]
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — Shall mean an animal control center or animal
shelter, maintained by or under contract with any State, County, or
municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or significant part,
the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue
organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Shall mean any not-for-profit
organization which has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the
United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in
whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in
permanent homes.
CAT — Shall mean a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
any health official, police officer, animal control officer, or other
authorized person.
k. Interfering with Persons Performing Duties Under This Section. No
person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this section.
l. Disposition of Fees Collected. License fees and other moneys collected
or received under the provisions of this section shall be forwarded to
the Treasurer of the Municipality, and shall be placed in a special
account separate from any of the other accounts of the Borough and
shall be used for the following purpose only, collecting, keeping and
disposing of cats liable to seizure, for local prevention and control of
rabies, providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the local
Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have been
exposed to rabies, and for administering the provisions of this section.
Any unexpected balance remaining in such special account shall be
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following, and may be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of the said
third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter,
there shall be transferred from such special account to the general
funds of the Borough any amount then in such account which is in
excess of the total amount paid into the special account during the last
two fiscal years next preceding.
a. Violations of Section; Penalty. Except as otherwise provided in this
section, any person who violates, or who fails, or refuses to comply with
this section, shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $50, nor more
than $500, for each offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the
local Board of Health, or by and in the name of the Borough.
§ 5-8.3 BRIELLE CODE § 5-9.1
1:154
DOG — Shall mean a member of the species of domestic dog, Canis
familiaris.
OFFER, FOR SALE — Shall mean to sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise
for the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or
cat.
PET SHOP — Shall mean a retail establishment where dogs and cats are
sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general
public at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or
animal rescue organization, as defined.
§ 5-9.2. Restrictions on the Sale of Animals. [Ord. No. 1060-2017]
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. #84; 1972 Code § 38-1]
This Chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough in accordance with the provisions of an act of
the legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933, its
supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.,
and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #84; 1972 Code § 38-1]
For the purpose of this Chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [New]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this Chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
a. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
1. An animal care facility; or
2. An animal rescue organization.
§ 5-9.1 GENERAL § 6-3.2
1:155
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [New]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Mayor and
Council, which shall also administer the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [New]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Borough
without obtaining a license in accordance with the act referred to in section
6-1 and the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees; Number of Licenses. [Ord. #84; Ord. #136,
Ord. #205; Ord. #397; Ord. #487; Ord. #541, Ord. #593; Ord. #636;
1972 Code §§ 38-2; 38-3; Ord. #729, § 1; New; Ord. #771; Ord.
#878; Ord. #1,000]
The annual fees of licenses for the sale and distribution of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough shall be as follows:
Annual License Maximum
Number Class of License Fee
Number of
Licenses
Plenary Retail Consumption
License
$2,225 8
Limited Retail Distribution
License
$50 1
Plenary Retail Distribution
License
$1,620 1
Club License $50 Unlimited
Seasonal Retail Consumption $1,650 2
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
The provisions of New Jersey's State Limitation Law, as provided in Chapter
72 of the Laws of 1960 and as the same may be hereafter amended,
shall control the number of and the issuance of plenary retail consumption
licenses and plenary retail distribution licenses.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [Ord. #84; Ord. #270; Ord. #422; Ord. #605;
1972 Code § 38-4]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served to or consumed
in any licensed premises on any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m., except Sundays and New Year's Day each year as is hereinafter
provided.
§ 6-3.2 BRIELLE CODE § 6-4.2
1:156
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [Ord. #84; Ord. #270; Ord. #422; Ord. #605; 1972
Code § 38-4; New; Ord. #788]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall apply on Sundays.
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [Ord. #84; Ord. #270; Ord. #422; Ord.
#605; 1972 Code § 38-4]
Provisions of subsection 6-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. Alcoholic
beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the licensed
premises at all times, unless January 1 is a Sunday, in which case alcoholic
beverages may not be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the licensed
premises between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
§ 6-4.4. Retail Sale or Delivery for Off-premises Consumption. [Ord.
#84; Ord. #618; 1972 Code § 38-4.1; Ord. #779; Ord. #835]
No licensee shall sell or deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale or delivery
of distilled spirits at retail in its original container for consumption off the
licensed premises before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. (Prevailing Time)
except as provided for by any rule or regulation of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
§ 6-4.5. Sales to Certain Persons. [New]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or person
under the legal age, nor permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
any licensed premises by any of the above named persons.
§ 6-4.6. Closing Provisions. [New]
During the hours in which sales of alcoholic beverages are hereinabove
prohibited, the entire licensed premises shall also be closed and no person
shall be admitted or permitted to remain therein, except the licensee or
bona fide employees of the licensee and except as provided in subsection
6-4.7.
§ 6-4.7. Clearing of Premises. [Ord. #84; Ord. #433; Ord. #422;
1972 Code § 38-5]
The licensed premises shall be cleared of all patrons within 30 minutes after
the closing time.
§ 6-4.8. Hours of Music and Entertainment and Use of Lighted
Signs Advertising Alcoholic Beverages. [Ord. #84; 1972 Code
§ 38-6; New]
All music and entertainment shall cease in all licensed premises at 1:30
a.m., and all lighted signs advertising the alcoholic beverage business
§ 6-4.2 GENERAL § 6-4.8
1:157
conducted on the licensed premises, including hotels and restaurants, shall
be turned out at 2:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.9. Prevailing Time. [Ord. #84; 1972 Code § 38-7]
The hours mentioned in this Chapter shall be deemed Eastern Standard
Time or Daylight Saving Time, whichever shall be the official time of the
Borough.
§ 6-4.10. Occupancy Limited; Standard Established. [Ord. #610;
1972 Code § 38-32]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, delivered to, or consumed in,
or allowed to be sold, served, or delivered to, or consumed in any licensed
premises in which the number of persons is greater than one person to each
seven square feet of floor area which is not covered by a bar or working
space.
§ 6-5. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-5.1. Purchase, Consumption or Service on Licensed Premises.
[Ord. #210; 1972 Code § 38-12]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age while in any premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages, to purchase, consume or have
served or delivered to him or her any alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-5.2. Purchase or Attempt to Purchase; Purchases by Another.
[Ord. #210; 1972 Code § 38-13]
It shall be unlawful for a person under the legal age to purchase, attempt to
purchase or have another purchase for him or her any alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-5.3. Misrepresentation of Age. [Ord. #210; Ord. #433; 1972
Code § 38-14]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to misrepresent or
misstate his or her age for the purpose of inducing any licensee or any
employee of any licensee, or any person acting in behalf of any licensee, to
sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverages to him or her.
§ 6-5.4. Inviting or Inducing Minor to be Served with or to Possess
Alcoholic Beverage. [Ord. #210; 1972 Code § 38-16]
No person shall invite or induce any person under the legal age to be served
with or have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverages on any public
street or in any public place in the Borough.
§ 6-4.8 BRIELLE CODE § 6-5.5
1:158
§ 6-5.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #210; Ord. #374; Ord. #433;
1972 Code § 38-17; New; Ord. #908]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100. In addition, the
court shall suspend the person's license to operate a motor vehicle for six
months or prohibit the person from obtaining a license to operate a motor
vehicle in this State for six months beginning on the date he becomes
eligible to obtain a license or on the date of conviction, whichever is later.
In addition to the general penalty prescribed for an offense, the court may
require any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages
who violates this act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment
program authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed
the maximum period of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for
which the individual has been convicted.
a. No person shall offer or serve alcoholic beverage to a person under
legal age in any public or quasi-public place within the Borough of
Brielle. No person who has ownership or control of any premises,
whether public or quasi-public, or supervision of any event, shall
permit, suffer or allow the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a
person under legal age in or upon any such premises or at any such
event within the Borough of Brielle.
b. The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage
person(s) on private property is hereby prohibited. It is hereby unlawful
for any person(s) under the legal age, without legal authority, to
knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage on
private property.
1. Exceptions. This subsection shall not prohibit an underage person
from consuming or possessing alcoholic beverage in connection
with a religious observance, ceremony or rite or consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained the
legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
2. This subsection shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic
beverages by any underage person while actively engaged in the
performance of employment by a person who has license under
Title 33 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts
or hotel management program at a County vocational or postsecondary
educational institute; however, this subsection shall not
be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under N.J.S.A.
33:1-81, or any other section of the law against a person who is
convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-5.5 GENERAL § 6-5.5
1:159
§ 6-6. INDECENT PERFORMANCES AND ATTIRE ON LICENSED
PREMISES.
§ 6-6.1. Dancing Exhibitions. [Ord. #371; 1972 Code § 32-21]
No licensee shall engage in or shall allow, permit or suffer any person
employed by such licensee to perform any dancing exhibition in or on any
part of the alcoholic beverage licensed premises.
§ 6-6.2. Exposure or Indecent Attire of Entertainers. [Ord. #371;
1972 Code § 32-22]
No licensee shall engage in or shall allow or permit any person to appear
on the premises of any establishment licensed for the sale and distribution
of alcoholic beverages, in any act, scene, sketch or other form of
entertainment, including dancing for the benefit of patrons, with breasts or
the lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly covered or draped so as
to appear uncovered.
§ 6-6.3. Exposure or Indecent Attire of Waitresses or Barmaids.
[Ord. #371; 1972 Code § 38-23]
No licensee shall employ, allow or permit any waitress, barmaid or any
other person who comes in contact with or is likely to come in contact with
the patrons of any establishment licensed for the sale and distribution of
alcoholic beverages, to appear in the presence of such patrons with breasts
or the lower part of the torso uncovered or so thinly covered or draped so
as to appear uncovered.
§ 6-6.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #371; Ord. #433; 1972 Code
§ 38-24]
A violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be liable, upon
conviction, to the penalty established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 6-7. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [Ord. #84; 1972 Code § 38-8;
New]
Any license issued under this Chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
3. Definitions. For the purpose of paragraphs a and b the following
definitions shall apply.
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian
of the underage person pursuant to a testamentary or court
appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underage person's grandparent, aunt
or uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
§ 6-5.5 BRIELLE CODE § 6-7
1:160
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this Chapter.
Chapter 7
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [Ord. #451; 1972 Code § 84-1; Ord.
#924]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words
and phrases used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [New; Ord. #924]
Whenever certain hours are named in this Chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [Ord.
#924]
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [Ord. #562; 1972 Code 84-12; Ord. #924]
a. The Chief of Police of this Municipality is hereby authorized to provide
by regulation for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor
vehicle traffic on any day or days whenever he finds that such closing is
necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and in accordance
with paragraph a above, shall provide for the posting of proper warning
signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during the time
the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 6-7 GENERAL § 7-3
1:161
§ 7-4. PENALTIES. [Ord. #451; 1972 Code § 84-25, § 84-27; Ord.
#924]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this Chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $200 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Brielle covered in this Traffic
Chapter are hereby repealed except that this repeal shall not affect or
prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or
committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking
effect of this Chapter.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [Ord. #924]
If any part or parts of this Chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
Chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [Ord. #924]
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Brielle are hereby repealed,
and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent
with the provisions of this Chapter are hereby repealed, except that this
repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any
person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby
repealed prior to the taking effect of this Chapter.
§ 7-7. TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET AND HIGHWAY
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS FOR
MUNICIPAL ROADS.
§ 7-7.1. Adoption of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways. [Ord. #924]
When the Borough of Brielle Governing Body finds and declares that
problems of traffic control occur when traffic must be moved through or
a. Any vehicle parked in violation of this Chapter shall be deemed a
nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and
any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall bear the reasonable costs of removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
b. Any person, whether or not the owner, who removes or attempts to
remove any vehicles so stored without authorization of the Brielle
Police Department shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine not to
exceed $500 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days or
both.
§ 7-3 BRIELLE CODE § 7-7.1
1:162
around street construction, maintenance operations and utility work, above
or below the ground which requires blocking the street and obstructing
the normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls
and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic
through and around construction and maintenance zones and to provide
safety for the work forces performing these operations.
The Borough of Brielle in the County of Monmouth, State of New Jersey
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Control Devices for
Streets and Highways hereafter known as the M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the normal
flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with the
provisions of the M.U.T.C.D. while performing such work is in violation of
this section.
§ 7-7.2. Pre-Construction Meetings. [Ord. #924]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, Section
16:25-9.2, wishing to conduct work on, under or above the street to contact
the Police Department of the Borough of Brielle in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction or work. Any person, contractor or
utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work,
or whose plans are not approved by the Police Department of the Borough
of Brielle is in violation of this section.
§ 7-7.3. Emergency Contact Telephone Numbers. [Ord. #924]
The person, contractor or utility shall provide at least two emergency
contact telephone numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at
the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If, for
any reason, emergency contact cannot be made, or if the emergency contact
person does not respond to a call from the Police Department to correct
such hazardous condition, the Borough of Brielle may respond to correct the
hazardous condition(s). The reasonable fees for such emergency services by
the Borough of Brielle shall be charged to the person, contractor, or utility
responsible for the condition.
§ 7-7.4. Hours. [Ord. #924]
There shall be no construction, maintenance, operations, or utility work
on any roadway in the Borough of Brielle before the hour of 9:00 a.m.
or after 4:00 p.m. The officer in charge of the Brielle Borough Police
Department may adjust this time limit to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m.
or after 4:00 p.m. If the officer in charge determines that the construction
or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would
§ 7-7.1 GENERAL § 7-7.4
1:163
substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall
then be permitted only before 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
§ 7-7.5. Road Closing. [Ord. #924]
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Borough of Brielle Police Department.
§ 7-7.6. Traffic Directors. [Ord. #924]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Borough of Brielle Police Department that same is
necessary to provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 7-7.7. Stop Work. [Ord. #924]
The Borough of Brielle Police Department shall have the authority to stop
work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material
within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations, and/or related
work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violations of this section.
§ 7-7.8. Site Preparation. [Ord. #924]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or equipment are
to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk or until all construction, signs, light
devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 7-7.9. Private Employment of Off-Duty Police Personnel.
[Company Ord. #924]
a. Members of the Police Department shall be permitted to accept
employment as safety or security personnel for private employers such
as contractors or public utility companies only during off-duty hours
and at such times as will not interfere with the efficient performance of
regularly scheduled or emergency duty of the Borough. Any person,
contractor or public utility wishing to employ off-duty police shall first
obtain the approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall be
granted if, in the opinion of the Chief, such employment would not be
inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good reputation of the
Police Department, and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten
the safety or health of the officer of officers who are to perform the
work.
b. Payment of Off-Duty Police Personnel. Private employers shall pay
directly to the Borough Clerk the PBA hourly rate per officer employed
by the private employer, $10 per hour of which is to be collected by the
Borough for administrative fees. The Chief of Police or his designee and
the contractor or public utility shall estimate the number of hours
anticipated to be worked, and the payment for said estimated work
shall be paid by the private employer to the Borough Clerk prior to the
§ 7-7.4 BRIELLE CODE § 7-7.9
1:164
§ 7-8. PARKING.
§ 7-8.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Ord. #451; 1972 Code § 84-2;
Ord. #924]
The provisions of this Chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-9. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY.
[Ord. #451; 1972 Code § 84-10; New; Ord. #924]
start of any work wherever feasible. If additional work time is required
due to unanticipated circumstances, and such work is approved by the
Chief of Police or his designee, the private employer shall be liable for
payment to the Borough for all such additional hours worked at the
specified rate. An invoice from the Borough for any balance due, if any,
shall be issued by the Borough Clerk. Balance of payments due from
private employers shall be made within 10 days of receipt of the invoice
from the Borough.
c. Written Agreement. An agreement form entitled "Agreement for Off-
Duty Police Assignment" shall be filed with the Borough of Brielle. This
agreement shall be entered into and filed by the Chief of Police or his
designee and the private employer hereinafter "Municipality" and
"Company" respectfully. The agreement shall consist of Company name,
description of work, number of officers required, dates, times, payment
and method of payment. It shall also include details on agreement
termination, liability and workers compensation insurance. This
agreement form shall be provided by the Borough of Brielle Police
Department and shall be filed at the pre-construction meeting. (Sample
Agreement attached)6
d. Violations and Penalties. Any person, contractor or utility who commits
a violation of this section shall, upon conviction thereof for a first
offense, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be
imprisoned in the County jail for a term not exceeding 90 days. For a
second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250
and/or be imprisoned in the County jail for a term not exceeding 90
days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which violation occurs or continues.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY-NO
6. Editor's Note: The sample agreement referred to herein is included as an attachment to
this Chapter.
§ 7-7.9 GENERAL § 7-9
1:165
§ 7-10. TEMPORARY PARKING PROHIBITION FOR SNOW
PLOWING AND REMOVAL. [New; Ord. #924]
§ 7-11. STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. #451; Ord. #609; 1972 Code
§ 84-7; Ord. #798; Ord. #876; Ord. #924]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified below
on (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described below.
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence,
the ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebration
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall be responsible for the reasonable costs
of removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets and highways, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall
be parked on the streets or highways or portions thereof indicated.
The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and
any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
Name of Street Sides Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-9 BRIELLE CODE § 7-11
1:166
Name of
Street Sides Hours Location
Ashley
Avenue
Both All times From the easterly curbline of Higgins
Avenue to a point 300 feet east therefrom
Ashley
Avenue
South All times From the westerly curbline of Higgins
Avenue to the westerly curbline of Brown
Street
Higgins
Avenue
North All times Beginning 120 feet east of the easterly
curbline of River-view Drive (County Road
No. 48) to a point 160 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Riverview Drive
(County Road No. 48)
Higgins
Avenue
South All times Beginning 100 feet west of the westerly
curbline of River-view Drive (County Road
No. 48) to a point 120 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Riverview Drive
(County Road No. 48)
Old Bridge
Road
East All times From Hollyhill Road to Union Lane
Old Bridge
Road
Both All times From Union Lane to Manasquan boundary
line
Riverview
Drive
(County
Road No.
48)
Both All times From Higgins Avenue to Route NJ 70
Union Lane East 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
From the northerly curbline of Route NJ
70 to a point distant northerly 770 feet
therefrom
§ 7-12. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord.
#451; 1972 Code § 84-8; Ord. #924]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit described at
any time between the hours listed of any day (except Sundays and public
holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described below.
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-13. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING. [New;
Ord. #924]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described below.
§ 7-11 GENERAL § 7-13
1:167
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-14. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [Ord. #451; Ord. #568; Ord. #418; Ord. #444; Ord. #493;
Ord. #520; Ord. #642; 1972 Code 84-3; Ord. #821; Ord. #924; Ord.
#936; Ord. #1036]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described below.
Name of
Street Sides Location
Ashley Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of Brown Street
to a point distant southerly 110 feet
therefrom
Bel Aire Road West and
turnaround
From Riverview Drive to the terminus of the
turnaround where same intersects the northeasterly
curbline of Bel Aire Court
Brainard Place Both From the southerly curb-line of Quail Place to
a point distant southwesterly 250 feet
therefrom
Cherokee Lane West From the northerly curbline of Riverview
Drive to a point distant northerly 150 feet
therefrom, and from its northerly deadend
boundary to a point distant southerly 70 feet
therefrom
Cherokee Lane West From a point beginning 100 feet northerly
from the northerly curbline of Riverview
Drive to a point distant northerly 558 feet
therefrom
Cherokee Lane East From a point beginning 100 feet northerly
from the northerly curbline of Riverview
Drive to a point distant northerly 558 feet
therefrom
Cherokee Lane Cul-desac
Within the circumference of the cul-de-sac
Cole Drive Both From the northeasterly curbline of Northeast
Drive to a point distant northeasterly 160
feet therefrom, and from the southwesterly
curbline of Southwest Drive to a point distant
southwesterly 125 feet therefrom
§ 7-13 BRIELLE CODE § 7-14
1:168
Name of
Street Sides Location
Crescent Drive West From 390 feet southeasterly of the easterly
curbline of Green Avenue at its northeasterly
intersection with same, to a point 130 feet
distant southerly therefrom
Donnelly Place Both Entire length
Evergreen
Avenue
West From the intersection of Ashley Avenue to
Highway No. 35
Fisk Avenue North Between Brielle Avenue and New Jersey
Route 71
Forrest Road Both From the southerly curbline of Quail Place to
a point distant southerly 225 feet therefrom
Green Avenue
[Added
7-9-2018 by
Ord. No. 1074]
East From Union Lane to the entrance to 622
Green Avenue
Green Avenue North From the northeast corner of Green Avenue
and Union Lane to a point distant
southeasterly 122 feet therefrom
Gull Lane Both Entire length
Higgins Avenue Both Between Ashley Avenue and Riverview Drive
Higgins Avenue West Beginning at the southerly curbline of Ashley
Avenue and extending 120 feet southerly
there-from
Homestead
Road
East From the intersection of Green Avenue to a
point 230 feet north thereof
Laurel Avenue Both From the bulkhead to a point distant
northwesterly 65 feet therefrom
Linden Lane Both Entire length
Locust Road East From its northerly dead-end boundary line to
a point distant southerly 70 feet therefrom
Longstreet
Avenue
Both From the southerly curbline of Union to a
point distant southerly 65 feet therefrom
Magnolia
Avenue
South Easterly curbline of Perry Place to its
easterly terminus
Ocean Avenue East From the southeasterly curbline of Green
Avenue to the bulkhead
Ocean Avenue West From the bulkhead to a point distant
northerly 92 feet therefrom
§ 7-14 GENERAL § 7-14
1:169
Name of
Street Sides Location
Ocean Avenue East From the northwesterly curbline of Green
Avenue to a point distant northerly 80 feet
therefrom
Oceanview
Road
South Entire length
Oceanview
Road
West Entire length
Osborn Avenue Both Entire length
Osprey Point
Drive
Both Entire length
Osprey Point
Lane [Added
6-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 1073]
Both
Perry Place East Magnolia Avenue to Debbie's Creek
Quail Place East Entire length
River Road Both Old Bridge Road to New Jersey State
Highway Route 70
Riverview Lane Both From Riverview Drive to the Manasquan
River
Riverview Lane West Entire length
Riverview Lane East From Linden Lane to the Manasquan River
Union Lane Both From points 200 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Union Avenue to points 100 feet
south of the southerly curbline of Union
Avenue
Union Lane West From the southeasterly curbline of Ashley
Avenue to the bulkhead
Wainwright
Place
Both Entire length
Woodland
Avenue
South Perry Place to Debbie's Creek
§ 7-15. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS OR
CERTAIN PERIODS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. #541; Ord. #447;
Ord. #589; 1972 Code 84-4; 84-5; 84-6; Ord. #740, 1; Ord. #784;
Ord. #794; Ord. #798; Ord. #924]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described below except for the pickup
and delivery of materials on such street.
§ 7-14 BRIELLE CODE § 7-15
1:170
a. Parking Prohibited Certain Hours. No person shall park a vehicle
between the hours and days specified on any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Days Location
Bradley
Avenue
Both 5:00 p.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
All From the exit of 601
Union Avenue to a
point distant 245
feet therefrom
Longstreet
Avenue
Both 9:00 p.m.
to 2:00
a.m.
Wednesday,
Friday and
Saturday
Between State
Highway 70 and
Cardeza Avenue
Union Lane East 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
a.m.
All days of
week
except
Saturday
and Sunday
From the northerly
curbline of Union
Avenue to a point
distant northerly
910 feet therefrom
Union Lane West 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.
All days of
week
except
Saturday
and Sunday
From a point distant
northerly 190 feet
from the northerly
curbline of Union
Avenue to a point
distant 580 feet
therefrom.
b. No Parking Certain Periods. No person shall park a vehicle at any time
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets during
the periods indicated:
Name of
Street Sides Period Location
Brielle Avenue West May 1 -
Nov. 14
From Fisk Avenue to Borrie
Avenue
Fisk Avenue North May 1 -
Nov.14
From the northerly curbline of
Perry Place to the Borough line at
Fisk Avenue Bridge
Homestead
Road
East May 15 -
Sept. 15
From the northeasterly corner of
Green Avenue and Homestead
Road to a point distant 85 feet
northerly therefrom
Perry Place West May 1 -
Nov. 14
Entire length
Union Lane [Repealed 6-11-2018 by Ord. No. 1073]
§ 7-15 GENERAL § 7-15
1:171
§ 7-16. PARKING BY PERMIT DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN DAYS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. #924; Ord. #972]
§ 7-17. PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED
DURING CERTAIN HOURS. [Ord. #577; 1972 Code § 84-15; Ord.
#924; Ord. No. 1063-2017]
§ 7-18. ANGLE PARKING. [New; Ord. #924]
No person shall park any vehicle upon any of the streets or parts of streets
in the Borough of Brielle on an angle but shall comply with provisions of
New Jersey Motor Vehicle Laws Title 39:4-135.
c. No Parking Certain Hours During Certain Periods on Borough Owned
Property. No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified
upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets during
the periods indicated:
Name of
Street Sides Hours Period Location
Magnolia
Avenue
Beach
— 6:00 p.m.
to 6:00
a.m.
May 1 -
Nov. 14
Borough-owned Beach
on Magnolia Avenue
a. No vehicle shall be parked on the streets or parts of streets designated
below during the hours specified.
Name of
Street Sides Times Location
Union Lane West Monday -
Friday
when
school is
in session
From a point 235 feet north of the
northerly curbline of the
southernmost Brielle Elementary
School driveway to a point 75 feet
northerly therefrom
a. There shall be no parking of any commercial vehicle having a gross
vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds or more or with greater than two axles
or any tractor, defined as a truck with a driver's cab and no body which
is used for hauling large trailers, on any public street in the Borough
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
b. The limitations herein shall not apply to the following:
1. Any recreational motor vehicle or camper.
c. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $100 for each violation.
d. No commercial vehicles, regardless of size or gross vehicle weight shall
be permitted to park in any municipal parking lot between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 7-15 BRIELLE CODE § 7-18
1:172
(Reserved)
§ 7-19. TRUCKS OVER FOUR TONS EXCLUDED CERTAIN STREETS.
[Ord. #311; 1972 Code § 84-14; Ord. #924]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
below are hereby designated as restricted for all trucks having a total
combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in excess of four tons.
Vehicles will be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pickup and
delivery of materials.
Name of Street Location
Ashley Avenue Higgins Avenue to Brown Street
Holly Hill Drive Entire length
Ocean View Road Entire length
Riverview Drive From State Highway Route 70 to Higgins
Avenue
School House Road Union Lane to Rankin Road
Union Lane From Route 71 to South Street
§ 7-20. ONE-WAY STREETS. [1972 Code § 84-16; Ord. #924]
The streets or parts of streets described below are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated.
Street Direction
Birch Drive East entrance from Riverview Drive to
Woodview Road - one-way west
Gull Lane (Entire length) Riverview Drive to Ashley
Avenue - one-way south
Homestead Road Bennett to Green Avenue - one-way south
Linden Lane (Entire length) Riverview Lane south to
Linden Lane east to Riverview Drive
Ocean Avenue Leslie Avenue south to Green Avenue -
one-way south
Riverview Lane Riverview Lane south to Linden Lane east
- one-way south
§ 7-21. THROUGH STREETS. [Ord. #198; Ord. #234; Ord. #444;
Ord. #493; 1972 Code § 84-17; Ord. #924; Ord. #936]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described below are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
§ 7-18 GENERAL § 7-21
1:173
Through Street except where Yield signs having sides 36 inches in length
are provided for in the designations.
Name of Street Location
Ashley Avenue From and including its intersection with Higgins
Avenue to its terminus
Birch Drive Entire length
Brielle Avenue Between Union Lane and Fisk Avenue
Cedar Lane-Shore
Drive
Between Riverview Drive and Riverview Drive
Cole Drive Entire length
Fisk Avenue Entire length
Green Avenue Entire length
Higgins Avenue From and including its intersection with Ashley
Avenue to and including its intersection with
Riverview Drive. Stop signs shall be erected at all
entrances to the through street except that a yield
right-of-way sign 36 inches by 36 inches shall be
erected on Ashley Avenue, facing westbound traffic
Lenape Trail Between the Township of Wall- Borough of Brielle
corporate line and the Borough of Manasquan-
Borough of Brielle Borough corporate line
Leslie Avenue Between the Railroad Crossing at Ocean Avenue and
Debbies Creek
Morgan Parkway-
Legg Place
Between Union Lane and Borrie Avenue
Rankin Road Between Riverview Drive and Rathjen Road
South Street Between Union Lane and Old Bridge Road (Monmouth
County Road No. 20)
Sunset Drive Between Shore Drive and its terminus at State
Highway 70
Tamarack Drive Between Aldrin Lane and Bayberry Lane
Union Lane Between Old Bridge Road to and including Ashley
Avenue, except at its intersection with State Highway
71
Valley Road Between Riverview Drive and Holly Hill Road
William Drive Between Rathjen Road and Rankin Road
§ 7-21 BRIELLE CODE § 7-22
1:174
§ 7-22. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. #198; Ord. #234; Ord. #444;
Ord. #493; 1972 Code § 84-14; Ord. #924]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:3-140, the intersections described
below are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign Installed On
Ashley Avenue and Evergreen
Avenue
Evergreen Avenue
Bennett Place and Cedarcrest Drive Cedarcrest Avenue
Borrie Avenue and Chester Avenue Chester Avenue
Borrie Avenue and Morgan Parkway Morgan Parkway
Brainard and Quail Place Quail Place
Cardeza Avenue and Longstreet
Avenue
Longstreet Avenue
Evergreen Avenue and Melrose
Avenue
Melrose Avenue
Forrest Drive and Quail Place Quail Place
Harris Avenue and River Place River Place
Higgins Avenue and Court Yard
Lane
Court Yard Lane
Homestead Road and Bennett Place Bennett Place
Lebanon Drive and Sherwood Lane Sherwood Lane
Longstreet Avenue and Center
Street
Center Street
Old Bridge Road and Capt. Baileys
Court
Capt. Baileys Court
Osprey Point Drive and Osprey Point
Lane
Osprey Point Lane
Perry Place and East Woodland
Avenue
East Woodland Avenue
Rathjen Road and Susan Lane Susan Lane
Sherwood Drive and Sequoia Court Sequoia Court
Teaberry Lane and Spruce Place Spruce Place
Valley Road/Hilltop Place and Valley
Road
Hilltop Road
Valley Road/Oakcrest Road and
Valley Road
Valley Road
§ 7-22 GENERAL § 7-23
1:175
§ 7-23. MULTI-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS. [New; Ord. #924]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Multi-Way Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided therein.
Intersection Stop Signs On
Higgins Avenue and Ashley Avenue Ashley Avenue (Both directions)
Higgins Avenue in the northerly
direction and Ashley Avenue
Higgins Avenue (Bogan's Basin)
§ 7-24. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. #198; Ord. #234; Ord. #444;
Ord. #493; 1972 Code § 84-19; Ord. #924]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
below are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs having sides
36 inches in length shall be installed as provided therein.
(Reserved)
§ 7-25. TURN PROHIBITIONS.
§ 7-25.1. Left Turn Prohibition. [Ord. #722; Ord. #924; Ord. #1038;
Ord. No. 1056-2016]
No person shall make a left turn at any location listed below.
Street Location
Bradley Avenue From Parking Lot 601 Union Avenue
Union Lane and Exit Driveway of
Brielle Elementary School
No Left Turn between the hours of
7:45 a.m. to 8:45 a.m. and the hours
of 2:45 p.m. to 3:45 p.m.
§ 7-25.2. U-Turn Prohibition. [New; Ord. #924]
No person shall make a U-Turn at any of the locations described below.
Street Location
Aldrin Lane Between Riverview Drive and South
Tammarack
Higgins Avenue Off ramp from Highway 35 south at the
entrance to Brandywyne East
Old Bridge Road At entrance to Greenwood Cemetery
Riverview Drive Between Highway 70 and Aldrin Lane
§ 7-25.3. No Right Turns. [New; Ord. #924]
No person shall make a right turn at any location described below.
§ 7-23 BRIELLE CODE § 7-25.3
1:176
Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-26. NO TURN ON RED. [Ord. #924]
No person shall make a turn on the red signal at any location described
below.
Intersection Direction of Travel
Prohibited Turn on
Red
(Reserved)
§ 7-27. LOADING ZONES. [1972 Code § 84-20; Ord. #803; Ord.
#924]
The locations described below are hereby designated as loading zones. No
operator of a vehicle shall stand or park the vehicle for a period of time
longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers or
materials or longer than is hereinafter provided. The loading or unloading
of passengers or unloading of passengers or materials shall not consume
more than 15 minutes in those loading zones so designated below.
Location Description
Ocean Avenue Beginning 220 feet southerly of the southerly curbline of
Green Avenue to the southerly terminus of Ocean Avenue
between the westerly curbline extended and the westerly
right-of-way line
§ 7-28. BUS STOPS. [Ord. #924]
The locations described below are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No
vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall
be permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-29. TAXI STANDS. [Ord. #924]
The locations described below are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No
vehicle other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations during
the times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 7-25.3 GENERAL § 7-30
1:177
§ 7-30. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [New; Ord. #924]
The lane locations described below are hereby designated as Lane Use
Reservations and traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection or Location Movement
Ashley Avenue westbound and
Higgins Avenue
Left lane must continue west on
Ashley
Right lane must turn right (north)
on Higgins
§ 7-31. SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. #641; 1972 Code 84-62A; Ord. #924]
§ 7-32. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS. [Ord. #924]
The following locations are hereby designated as Mid-Block Crosswalks.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below are hereby established at the rate of speed
indicated.
b. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
Street
Speed
Limit Location
Ashley Avenue 25 m.p.h. Entire length
Evergreen
Avenue
25 m.p.h. Entire length
Gull Lane 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Higgins Avenue 30 m.p.h. Entire length
Old Bridge Road
(County Road
No. 20)
30 m.p.h. Between Route NJ 35 (north) and
Borough of Manasquan-Borough of
Brielle corporate line
Old Bridge Road
(County Road
No. 20)
40 m.p.h. Between Route NJ 35 (south) and its
terminus at Hollyhill Road
Riverview Drive
(County Road
No. 48)
35 m.p.h. Entire length
§ 7-30 BRIELLE CODE § 7-33
1:178
§ 7-33. NO PASSING ZONES. [Ord. #920]
No Passing Zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof.
Name of Street
Sketch #: Sketch
Date Approval Date
(Reserved)
§ 7-34. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-34.1. Handicapped Parking an Streets. [Ord. #924]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following street
locations are designated as Handicapped Parking Spaces. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Street
Number of
Spaces Location
Union Lane 2 In front of main entrance to
Brielle Elementary School
between posted signs
§ 7-34.2. Handicapped Parking on Streets for Private Residences.
[Ord. #924]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following onstreet
locations are designated as Handicapped Parking Spaces in front of
private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such spaces are for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or plates
or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued
by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted in these spaces.
Street Location Permit Number
(Reserved)
§ 7-34.3. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and
Board of Education Property. [Ord. #924]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 the following offstreet
parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
Handicapped Parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards issued by the
Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
§ 7-33 GENERAL § 7-34.3
1:179
Property
No. of
Spaces Location
Brielle Borough Hall 1 Nearest the entrance to building on
Northwest side of lot
Brielle Elementary
School
(Reserved)
§ 7-34.4. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public and to Which the Public is Invited (Retail Business). [Ord.
#924]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking spaces are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
yards are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-34.5. Handicapped Parking an All Other Private Property. [Ord.
#924]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as Handicapped Parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-34.6. Handicapped Parking on Municipal Parks. [Ord. #924]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following
Municipal Park locations are designated as Handicapped Parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-34.3 BRIELLE CODE § 7-34.7
1:180
§ 7-34.7. Handicapped Parking on United States Post Office
Property. [Ord. #924]
Pursuant to 40 U.S.C. 318B and at the written request of the Postmaster, the
following property shall have parking regulations indicated and no person
shall park a vehicle in violation of this regulation.
UNITED STATES POST OFFICE
412 Higgins Avenue
Brielle, New Jersey
§ 7-34.8. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[Ord. #924]
The owners of the premises referred to in subsections 7-34.3 and 7-34.4
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the Borough of Brielle. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration of same.
§ 7-35. CONTROL FOR THE MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-35.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [Ord. #916;
Ord. #924]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education Property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
1. All vehicles shall park in the designated areas and within the painted
lines.
2. No person shall park in any space appropriately marked for vehicles for
the physically handicapped pursuant to P.L. 1989, c201(1) eff. 6-1-1990.
Such spaces are for the use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles
or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police.
Property No. of Spaces Location
US Post Office 412
Higgins Avenue
1 As per sketch in Borough
Clerk's Office
§ 7-34.7 GENERAL § 7-35.1
1:181
a. Borough of Brielle Town Hall Parking Lot 601 Union Lane Brielle, New
Jersey.
1. General parking.
(a) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
(b) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
Name
of
Street Side Hours Location
All
roads
and
aisles
Both All As indicated on site plan7
(c) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown
on the attached site plan8 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking Permits by the Division of Motor Vehicles
or a temporary placard by the Police Chief.
2. Reserved Parking. All vehicles that are granted special parking in
this section such as police vehicles, ambulances, teachers, etc.
must be properly identified and the reserved parking spaces must
be shown on the attached plan.9
(a) Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
(1) Road "B" Entire length
(2) Road "C" Entire length
3. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the following
direction:
7. Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
8. Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
9. Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 7-35.1 BRIELLE CODE § 7-35.1
1:182
Name of Street Direction Limits
(a) Road "A" North Entire length
4. Speed Limits.
(a) The speed limit for both directions on the following roadways
is:
Name of Roadway MPH Limits
(1) Road "B" 15 Entire length
(2) Road "C" 15 Entire length
(3) All Aisles 15 Entire length
(b) The speed limit for the one-way direction of travel is as follows:
Name of Roadway MPH Limits
(1) Road "A" 15 Entire length
(c) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
5. Authorized Vehicles Only. The following streets or parts of streets
shall be designated as use for authorized vehicles only. No vehicle
other than an authorized vehicle shall enter upon the below
roadway.
Name of Street Limits
Roadway "B" and the driveway
to school
Entire length
6. Tow-Away Zone. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
7. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New
Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
ordinance or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of
not more than $1,000 nor less than $100 or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 15 days or both.
b. Brielle Elementary School
605 Union Lane Brielle
New Jersey
(Reserved)
§ 7-35.1 GENERAL § 7-35.2
1:183
§ 7-35.2. Regulations for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic
on Private Property Open to the Public and to Which the Public is
Invited (Retail Business). [Ord. #924]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, on the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the regulations listed herein.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the following
regulations
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
§ 7-35.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
All Other Private Property. [Ord. #924]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
(Reserved)
§ 7-35.4. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[Ord. #924]
The owners of the premises referred to in subsections 7-35.2 and 7-35.3
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings as required, which
signage and markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. The cost for the procurement and installation of
signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the property. The owner shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition
at no cost or expense to the Borough of Brielle. The owner shall be
responsible for the repair and restoration or replacement of same.
§ 7-36. PEDESTRIAN CROSSINGS. [Ord. #1030]
a. This section authorizes the placement of in street pedestrian crossing
right-of-way signs as authorized by N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.d.
Signs shall be placed at the following locations:
Union Lane
South Street
Old Bridge Road
Higgins Avenue
b. The installation of the pedestrian signage shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the County of Monmouth and in accordance with
§ 7-35.2 BRIELLE CODE § 7-36
1:184
Chapter 8
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 8-1. PERSONNEL POLICIES HANDBOOK. [New]
The Personnel Policies Handbook, as amended and supplemented, is hereby
adopted by reference to establish certain personnel policies relating to all
present and future municipal employees of the Borough for the purposes
enumerated therein. The Personnel Policies Handbook of the Borough shall
not apply in the event that a negotiated collective bargaining agreement
exists between the Borough and the designated union of any respective
employee.
Chapter 9
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 9-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY.
§ 9-1.1. Established; Subcode Officials Designated. [Ord. #550;
1972 Code § 45-1]
guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation.
a. There is hereby established in the Borough a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Building
Department of Brielle," consisting of a Construction Official, Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode
officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter
adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction
Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing agency. The
Borough of Brielle shall have the power to provide by resolution for the
appointment and to delineate the functions, powers, duties and
responsibilities of all enforcing agency officials that are necessary and
proper for the operation of the Uniform Construction Code enforcing
agency.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
§ 7-36 GENERAL § 9-1.1
1:185
§ 9-1.2. Appeals.
The Borough of Brielle will not appoint a Board of Appeals but will leave
appeals to the jurisdiction of the County of Monmouth.
§ 9-1.3. Fees. [Ord. #550; Ord. #616; 1972 Code § 45-3; Ord. #725,
§ 1; Ord. #767; Ord. #775; Ord. #806; Ord. #829; Ord. #851; Ord.
#913; Ord. #917; Ord. #1020]
pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
a. General. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the
subcode fees listed in paragraphs a, 2(a) through 7 hereof and shall be
paid before the permit is issued. In all cases, all fees shall be rounded to
the next dollar.
1. Plan Review Fee: The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the
amount to be charged for a construction permit. The minimum fee
shall be $50.
2. Basic Construction Fee: The basic construction fee shall be the sum
of the parts computed on the basis of the volume or the cost of
construction, the number of plumbing fixtures and pieces of
equipment, the number of electric fixtures and devices and the
number of sprinklers, stand pipes and detectors (smoke and heat)
at the unit rates provided herein plus any special fees. The
minimum fee for a basic construction permit covering any or all of
building, plumbing, electric or fire protection work shall be $60,
except as herein provided.
(a) Building volume or cost: The fees for new construction or
alteration are as follows:
(1) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume
of the structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new construction cost shall be
in the amount of $0.027 per cubic foot of volume for
buildings and structures of all use groups and types of
construction. The minimum fee shall be $150.
(2) Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs shall be
based upon the estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be
in the amount of $ 24 per $1,000 or fraction thereof up to a
limit of $50,000. From $50,001 to and including $100,000,
the additional fee shall be in the amount of $18 per $1,000
of the estimated cost above $50,000. Above $100,000, the
§ 9-1.1 BRIELLE CODE § 9-1.3
1:186
additional fee shall be in the amount of $15 per $1,000 of
estimated cost above $100,000.
(3) Fees for additions shall be computed on the same basis for
new construction for the added portion. The minimum fee
shall be $100.
(4) Fees for combination renovation and additions shall be
computed separately in accordance with items (2) and (3)
above. The minimum fee shall be $100.
(5) The fee for each fireplace shall be $60.
(b) Plumbing fixtures and equipment: The fees shall be as follows:
(1) The fee shall be $20 per fixture connected to the plumbing
system for all fixtures and appliances except as listed
below.
(2) The fee shall be $65 per special device for the following:
grease traps, oil separators, air-conditioning units,
refrigeration units, water and sewer utility connections,
backflow preventers, gas service entrances, active solar
systems, sewer pumps, interceptors and fuel oil piping.
(3) The fee shall be $65 for the installation of the backflow
preventer for lawn sprinklers.
(4) The fee shall be $65 for the installation of a boiler (hot
water or steam).
(5) The fee shall be $65 for the installation of gas piping.
(c) Electric fixtures and devices: The fees shall be as follows:
(1) The fee for outlets (including lighting, wall switches,
fluorescent fixtures, convenience receptacles or similar
fixtures, and motors or devices of less than one
horsepower or one kilowatt) shall be as follows:
Outlets (1 to 25) $40
(26 to 50) $40
Each additional 25 devices $15
(2) The fees for service panels shall be as follows:
0 to 200 amps $50
201 to 1,000 amps $100
More than 1,000 amps $500
(3) The fees for transformers or generators shall be as follows:
§ 9-1.3 GENERAL § 9-1.3
1:187
1 kW to 10kW $10
11 kW to 45 kW $50
46 kW to 112.5 kW $100
More than 112.5 kW $500
(4) The fee for motors, except plug-in appliances shall be
counted, including control equipment, generators,
transformers and all heating, cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electric current shall be as
follows:
1hp to 10hp $10
11hp to 50 hp $50
51 hp to 100 hp $100
More than 100 hp $500
(5) The fee for air-conditioner feeders and disconnects shall
be $35.
(6) The fee for pools shall be as follows:
In-ground $150
Above ground $100
(7) The fee for annual electric inspection of all public
swimming pools shall be $50 for the first pool and $10 for
each additional pool, spa or hot tub.
(8) The fee for each of the following items shall be $20:
Electric heater
Electric dryer
Surface Units
Hot water heater
Dishwasher
Commercial exhaust fans
Heat pump
Range
Hot tubs/Jacuzzi
Oven
Gas/Oil heaters
(d) Fire Protection and other hazardous equipment: sprinklers,
standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), pre-engineered
§ 9-1.3 BRIELLE CODE § 9-1.3
1:188
suppression systems, gas and oil fired appliances, commercial
kitchen exhaust systems, fireplaces and flues:
(1) The fee for sprinkler heads or detectors shall be as follows:
1 to 10 devices $60
11 to 20 devices $100
21 to 100 devices $125
101 to 200 devices $250
Over 200 devices $750
In computing fees for heads and detectors, the number
of each shall be counted separately and two fees, one for
heads and one for detectors shall be charged.
(2) The fee for each standpipe shall be $250.
(3) The fee for each independent preengineered suppression
system shall be $125.
(4) The fee for each heating system (gas or oil), which may be
or may not be connected to the plumbing system shall be
$60.
(5) The fee for each commercial kitchen exhaust system shall
be $100.
(6) The fee shall be $65 for the installation of fuel tanks up to
600 gallons.
(7) The fee shall be $125 for the installation of fuel tanks over
600 gallons.
3. Elevators: The fee for a permit to install an elevator shall be $40
per unit, plus the costs charged by the Elevator Safety Unit of the
State of New Jersey.
4. Certificates and Other Permits:
(a) The fee for a demolition permit of a one or two family dwelling
shall be $75; for the demolition of a garage, shed or other
accessory use, the fee shall be $40; for the demolition of all
other structures, the fee shall be $125.
(b) The fee for the removal or abandonment of an (in-ground or
above-ground) fuel storage tank shall be $75.
(c) The fee for a permit to move a building or structure from one
lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $60
plus the cost of the new foundation and alterations to the
building or structure for the placement in a completed
§ 9-1.3 GENERAL § 9-1.3
1:189
condition shall be computed as required for renovations,
alterations and repairs in section 2.i (2).
(d) The fee for a permit to install a swimming pool shall be as
follows:
Above-ground
pool
$100
In-ground pool $150
(e) The fee to construct or install a sign greater than 25 square
feet in surface area (one side) and over six feet in mounted
height shall be $60.
(f) The fee to erect a fence over six feet in height or surrounding a
swimming pool shall be $60.
(g) The fee for an asbestos removal permit shall be $85; and the
fee for a certificate of occupancy after asbestos removal shall
be $20.
(h) The fee for a certificate of occupancy for new construction
shall be $65 per unit.
(i) The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a
change of use group shall be $65.
(j) The fee for a continued certificate of occupancy shall be $65.
(k) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $65. The fee for a resubmission of an
application for a variation shall be $35.
5. Periodic Inspections: Fees for the periodic reinspection of
equipment and facilities granted a certificate of approval for a
specified duration in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.23 shall be as
follows:
(a) For cross connections and backflow preventors that are subject
to testing requiring reinspection every 12 months, the fee shall
be $50 for each device plus costs charged by an on-site
inspection agency.
6. Lapsed Permits: The fee to reinstate a lapsed construction permit
shall be 20% of the cost of the original permit, but in no case less
than $55.
7. Surcharge: In order to provide training, certification and technical
support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act
and the Regulations, the Enforcing Agency shall collect in addition
to the fees, a surcharge of $0.00265 per cubic foot of volume of new
buildings and additions. Volume shall be computed in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The fee for all other construction shall be
§ 9-1.3 BRIELLE CODE § 9-1.3
1:190
§ 9-1.4. Fire Limits. [Ord. #550; 1972 Code § 45-4]
§ 9-1.5. Effective Date; Copy Sent to Department of Community
Affairs. [Ord. #550; 1972 Code § 45-6]
This section shall take effect on January 1, 1977, after publication according
to law, and a copy shall be forwarded to the Department of Community
Affairs.
§ 9-2. MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS AND
MULTIFAMILY DWELLINGS.
§ 9-2.1. General Provisions. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-1]
$1.35 per $1,000 of value of construction. Said surcharge shall
be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of
Community Affairs on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarters
ending March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31, and
not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due.
b. Annual Report Recommending a Fee Schedule: The Construction
Official shall, with the advice of the Subcode Officials, prepare and
submit to the Mayor and Council, biannually, a report recommending a
fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the agency and any
other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to the
enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
c. Waiver of Demolition Permit Fee: The owner(s) of any residential or
commercial structure, scheduled for demolition and in need of a
demolition permit, as per the requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code, may apply for a waiver of the permit fee, if said owner(s) agree to
permit any of the Borough's emergency and public safety services
(Police, Fire, First Aid) to utilize the structure to be demolished for any
training purposes germane to the provision of the public safety related
services.
a. The fire limits heretofore established by the applicable Borough
ordinances shall be considered to be the fire limits established as
required by N.J.A.C. 5:23.
b. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Governing
Body, biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire limits.
This report shall indicate the recommendations of the Construction
Official, the Building Subcode Official and the Fire Subcode Official
regarding those areas which should be designated as within fire limits,
with the reasons therefor.
a. Title. This section shall be known as the "Minimum Housing Standards
for Dwellings and Multifamily Dwellings" and is herein referred to as
the "Housing Ordinance" or "this code."
§ 9-1.3 GENERAL § 9-2.1
1:191
§ 9-2.2. Applicability. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-2]
b. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health,
safety and welfare in buildings rented, sold, transferred or leased for
dwelling purposes, as hereinafter provided, by:
1. Establishing minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities
for light, ventilation, space heating and sanitation for safety from
fire; for space, use and location, for safe and sanitary maintenance;
and for cooking equipment in all dwellings and multifamily
dwellings now in existence.
2. Fixing the responsibilities of owners of dwellings and their agents
and employees.
3. Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
c. Matters Covered. The provisions of this Housing Ordinance shall apply
to all dwelling units in the Borough which shall be rented, sold,
transferred or leased. It is the intent of the Governing Body that the
same shall not be permitted to become substandard with respect to
structure, protection against fire hazard; equipment or maintenance,
inadequate provisions for light and air, lack of proper heating,
unsanitary conditions and overcrowding, or otherwise be deemed to
constitute a menace to the safety, health and welfare of their occupants,
except as provided in subsection 9-2.2d. The existence of such
conditions, factors, or characteristics adversely affect public safety,
health and welfare and lead to the continuation, extension and
aggravation of urban blight. Adequate protection of the public,
therefore, requires the establishment and enforcement of these
minimum housing standards. For purposes of this provision, the date of
rental, sale, transfer or lease shall mean the date on which the tenant,
purchaser or transferee occupies the premises for dwelling purposes,
regardless of the date of any instrument evidencing intent to do so.
d. Travel trailers and Mobile Homes. All movable units used for human
habitation and the areas, grounds or parcels on which they are located,
insofar as they are applicable hereto and not in conflict herewith, shall
comply with the requirements of this Housing Ordinance.
a. Application of State Uniform Construction Code. Any alterations to
buildings, or changes of use therein, which may be caused directly or
indirectly by the enforcement of this section, shall be done in
accordance with the applicable sections of the State Uniform
Construction Code.
b. Application of Zoning Law. Nothing in this section shall permit the
establishment or conversion of a multifamily dwelling in any zone
except where permitted by the zoning law, nor the continuation of such
nonconforming use in any zone except as provided therein.
§ 9-2.1 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.2
1:192
§ 9-2.3. Enforcement and Authority. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-3]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Construction Code Official
or his authorized representative to enforce the provisions of the Housing
Ordinance as herein provided:
c. Conflict with other Ordinance. Except as provided in paragraph a of this
subsection, in any case where a provision of this section is found to be
in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health
ordinance or code of the Borough, the provisions of the section best
promoting the safety and health of the people shall prevail. In any case
where a provision of this section is found to be in conflict with a
provision of any other ordinance or code of the Borough which
establishes a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the
safety and health of the people, the provisions of this section shall
prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be
repealed to the extent that they may be found in conflict with this
section.
d. Existing Buildings. This section establishes minimum requirements for
the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used for human
habitation and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise
established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings,
equipment or facilities, except as provided in this section.
e. Existing Remedies. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to abolish or
impair existing remedies of the Borough or its officers or agencies
relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed
to be dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary, in accordance with Section 9-3 of
this Chapter.
a. Procedures and Regulations. The Construction Code Official shall have
the power to establish procedures and regulations in order to carry out,
in a practical manner, the terms and provisions of this Housing
Ordinance, provided that the spirit and purposes of this section shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The
particulars of such procedures and regulations, and the decisions of the
Construction Code Official thereon, shall be entered upon the records
and a signed copy shall be furnished upon request.
b. Coordination of Enforcement. Inspection of premises and issuing of
orders in connection therewith under the provisions of this section shall
be the exclusive responsibilities of the Construction Code Official of the
Borough. Whenever, in the opinion of the Construction Code Official, it
is necessary or desirable, he shall arrange for this to be done in such
manner that the owners or occupants of buildings shall not be subjected
to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple or conflicting orders.
No orders for correction of any violation under this section shall be
issued without the approval of the Construction Code Official, and it
shall be the responsibility of that official before issuing any such order
to determine that it has the concurrence of any other department or
§ 9-2.2 GENERAL § 9-2.3
1:193
officer of the government concerned with any matter involved on the
case in question.
c. Administrative Liability. Except as may otherwise be provided by
statute or local law or ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the
Borough charged with the enforcement of the Housing Ordinance shall
render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his duties under this section. No person who institutes or
assists in the prosecution of criminal proceedings under this section
shall be liable to damages hereunder unless he acted with actual malice
and without reasonable grounds for believing that the person accused
or prosecuted was guilty of an unlawful act or omission. Any suit
brought against any officer, agent or employee of the Borough of
Brielle, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this section, shall be defended by the legal
representatives of the Borough until the final determination of the
proceedings therein.
d. Inspections.
1. The Construction Code Official shall make or cause to be made
inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings and dwelling
units to be rented, sold, transferred or leased, in order to safeguard
the safety, morals and welfare of the public under the provisions of
this section. The Construction Code Official is authorized to enter
any dwelling, dwelling unit, multifamily dwelling, rooming house or
premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of performing his
duties under this ordinance. The owner, operator or occupant of
every dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or
the person in charge thereof shall give the Construction Code
Official free access thereto and to all parts thereof and to the
premises on which it is located at all reasonable times for the
purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance to or to
impede an inspector or officer authorized under this ordinance in
the performance of his duties, and every such inspector or officer
shall have the right to enter, examine or survey all premises,
grounds, structures, dwellings or rooming houses and every part
thereof at all reasonable times upon display of proper
identification.
3. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling,
dwelling unit or rooming unit, or a multifamily or rooming house,
subject to the provisions of this ordinance refuses, impedes,
inhibits, interferes with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access
to every part of the structure or premises where inspection
authorized by this ordinance is sought, the administrative authority
may seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such
§ 9-2.3 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.3
1:194
§ 9-2.4. Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-4;
New; Ord. #792; Ord. #919; Ord. #956]
§ 9-2.5. Violations. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-5]
owner, occupant or other person in charge cease and desist with
such interference.
e. Access by Owner or Operator. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit shall give the owner or operator thereof, or his agent or
employee, access to any part of such dwelling unit, rooming unit or its
premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such
inspections, maintenance, repairs or alterations as shall be necessary to
comply with the provisions of this section.
f. Time of Inspections. To the fullest practicable extent, consistent with
the meaning and purpose of this section, all inspections shall be made
at times mutually convenient to the person making such inspection and
the owner and/or occupant of the premises which are the subject of the
inspection.
a. Responsibility. No owner, agent or employee of any owner, real estate
agent or broker, firm, company, partnership, corporation or other
person shall sell, rent, transfer, grant, lease, let, mortgage with right of
occupancy or otherwise dispose of the ownership or occupancy thereof
(whether or not for a consideration and whether such disposal or
ownership or occupancy be temporary or permanent) any dwelling unit,
hotel, motel, rooming house, rooming unit, boarding house or premises
on which a building is located and is used for human occupancy, unless
a certificate of occupancy certifying that the building and premises are
in compliance with all applicable ordinances of the Borough shall first
be obtained from the Borough. Such a certificate of occupancy shall be
granted or denied within 10 days from the date of the application for
the same.
b. Forms. The Borough shall cause to be prepared appropriate application
forms for such certificate of occupancy, which forms shall be available
at the office of the Borough Clerk, and the Borough shall cause to be
prepared appropriate forms of such certificate of occupancy.
c. Fee. A charge of $100 to cover the cost of inspection in connection with
such application shall be paid to the Borough at the time the application
is filed and shall not be refundable.
d. Reinspection Fee. A charge of $50 to cover the cost of a reinspection in
connection with such application shall be paid to the Borough at the
time the reinspection is applied for and shall not be refundable. Each
request for a reinspection shall constitute a separate request and entail
a separate fee.
§ 9-2.3 GENERAL § 9-2.5
1:195
a. Notice. Notice of violations shall be served upon the owner of record by
one of the following methods:
1. By delivery to the owner personally, or by leaving the notice at the
usual place of abode of the owner with a person of suitable age and
discretion.
2. By certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at his last
known address with postage prepaid thereon.
3. By posting and keeping posted on the premises for 24 hours a copy
of the notice.
b. Prosecution. In case any violation order is not promptly complied with,
the Construction Code Official may request the legal representative of
the Borough to institute an appropriate action or proceeding at law or
in equity against the person responsible for the violations, ordering
him:
1. To prevent the occupation or use of the dwelling or part thereof in
violation of or not in compliance with the provisions of this section.
2. To enforce the penalty provisions of this section.
c. Summary Abatement Under Certain Conditions.
1. Where the violations or conditions existing on the premises under
any section of this section or other ordinance of the Borough are of
such a nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life, health,
safety and the well-being of residents of the Borough unless abated
without delay, the Construction Code Official may either abate the
violation or condition immediately or order the owner, operator or
occupant to correct the violation or condition within a period of
time not to exceed three days, and upon the failure of such owner,
operator or occupant to do so, the Construction Code Official shall
abate the condition immediately thereafter.
2. The Construction Code Official shall submit to the Borough Council
a report of the work done and expenses incurred to abate said
condition, and the governing body may thereupon by resolution
approve the expenses and costs therefor, whereupon the same shall
become a lien against the premises, collectible as provided by law.
A copy of the resolution shall be certified by the Borough Clerk and
filed with the Collector of Taxes of the Borough, who shall be
responsible for the collection thereof, and a copy of the report and
resolution shall be served upon the owner of the premises in the
manner set forth in subsection 9-2.5.
d. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty stated.
§ 9-2.5 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.6
1:196
§ 9-2.6. Effect of Notice; Hearing. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-6]
a. Any notice served pursuant to subsection 9-2.5b shall automatically
become an order, if a written petition for a hearing is not filed as
provided herein.
b. Any persons affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provisions of this section, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall, upon written request, be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Construction Code Official,
provided that such written request shall include a brief statement of the
grounds therefor, and shall be filed in the Borough offices within 10
days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition
the Construction Code Official shall set a time and place for such
hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such
hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and
show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing
shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on which the
petition was filed, provided that upon application of the petitioner the
Construction Code Official may postpone the date of the hearing for a
reasonable time beyond such ten-day period if in his judgment the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement.
c. After such hearing the Construction Code Official shall sustain, modify
or withdraw the notice, depending upon his findings as to whether the
provisions of this Housing Ordinance and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Construction
Code Official sustains or modifies such notice, the same shall be
deemed to be an order. After a hearing in the case of any notice
suspending any permit required by this section or by any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice has been
sustained by the Construction Code Official, the permit shall be deemed
to have been revoked. Any such permit which has been suspended by a
notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a written petition
for a hearing is not filed as provided herein.
d. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decisions
of the Construction Code Official, shall be summarized, reduced to
writing and entered as a matter of public record in the borough offices.
Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in
connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Construction Code Official may seek relief therefrom in any court of
competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of New Jersey.
e. Whenever the Construction Code Official finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this section, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
§ 9-2.6 GENERAL § 9-2.6
1:197
§ 9-2.7. Construction of Terms. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-8]
§ 9-2.8. Definitions. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-9; Ord. No. 1017]
As used in this section:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure, the use of which is
incidental to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or
located on the same premises.
APPROVED — As applied to a material, device or method of construction,
shall mean approved by the Construction Code Official under the provisions
of this section or approved by other authority designated by law to give
approval in the matter in question.
BASEMENT — Shall mean a portion of the building partly underground,
but having less than 1/2 its clear height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground. See "cellar."
BOARDINGHOUSE, LODGING HOUSE, TOURIST HOUSE — Shall mean
a building arranged for use for lodging with or without meals, for
compensation, for more than three and not more than 20 individuals. 10
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but
upon written petition to the Construction Code Official, shall be
afforded a hearing within 48 hours.
f. After such hearing, depending upon his findings as to whether the
provisions of this section and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Construction Code
Official shall continue such order in effect, modify it or revoke it. The
said findings shall be recorded as set forth in subsection 9-2.6.
a. Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the future;
words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; and the
singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
b. Terms Defined in the State Uniform Construction Code. Where terms
are not defined in this section and are defined in the State Uniform
Construction Code, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in
the State Uniform Construction Code.
c. Terms not Defined. Where terms are not defined under the provisions of
this section or under the provisions of the State Uniform Construction
Code, they shall have ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted
meanings or such as the context herein may imply.
10.Whenever the words “dwelling,” “multifamily dwelling,” “residence building,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “premises” or any words connoting the same are
used in this section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”
§ 9-2.6 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.8
1:198
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure or part thereof used for
human habitation, use or occupancy, and including any accessory buildings
and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
CELLAR — Shall mean the portion of the building partly underground,
having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of its clear height below the average grade of
the adjoining ground.
DORMITORY — Shall mean a building arranged or used for lodging three
but not more than 20 individuals and having common toilet and bathroom
facilities. 11
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean any room or group of rooms located within
a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used
or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 12
DWELLING — Shall mean any building, including a so-called motel type
of operation which has facilities as described in the following definition of
dwelling unit, which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for
living or sleeping by human occupants; provided, however, that temporary
housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 13
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — Shall mean the open space on the
premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or
operators of such premises.
EXTERMINATION — Shall mean the control and elimination of insects,
rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing,
or making inaccessible, materials that may serve as their food; by poison,
spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by other approved pest elimination
methods.
FAMILY — Shall mean one or more persons living together as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit which exhibits the kind of stability,
permanency and functional life-style and relationships which is equivalent
to that of the traditional family unit, as distinguished from individuals or
groups occupying a hotel, club, group home, boarding house or similar
arrangement. The foregoing shall not be construed to permit an owner
of property in a single-family district to solicit the public at large to rent
rooms.
GARBAGE — Shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
11.Whenever the words “dwelling,” “multifamily dwelling,” “residence building,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “premises” or any words connoting the same are
used in this section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”
12.Whenever the words “dwelling,” “multifamily dwelling,” “residence building,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “premises” or any words connoting the same are
used in this section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”
13.Whenever the words “dwelling,” “multifamily dwelling,” “residence building,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “premises” or any words connoting the same are
used in this section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”
§ 9-2.8 GENERAL § 9-2.8
1:199
GROSS FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the total of all habitable space in a
building or structure.
HABITABLE ROOM — Shall mean a room or enclosed floor space arranged
for living, eating and sleeping purposes, including kitchen, kitchenette,
living room, dining room and bedroom (but excluding bathroom, water
closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and other
necessary floor space).
HOTEL — Shall mean a building arranged or used for sheltering, sleeping
or feeding more than 20 individuals for compensation. 14
INFESTATION — Shall mean the presence, within or contiguous to a
multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house, rooming unit or
premises, of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
MOTEL — Defined the same as a hotel.
MULTIFAMILY (MULTIPLE) DWELLING — Shall mean any dwelling
containing more than two dwelling units.
MULTIFAMILY APARTMENT HOUSE — Shall mean a building containing
more than two dwelling units. 15
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person over one year of age (including the
owner or occupant) living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual
possession of the dwelling or rooming unit.
OPENABLE AREA — Shall mean that part of a window or door which
is available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a
multifamily dwelling or rooming house in which dwelling units or rooming
units are let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others:
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof.
a.
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit,
as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor or as executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be
bound to comply with the provisions of this section and the rules and
b.
14.Whenever the words “dwelling,” “multifamily dwelling,” “residence building,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “premises” or any words connoting the same are
used in this section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”
15.Whenever the words “dwelling,” “multifamily dwelling,” “residence building,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “premises” or any words connoting the same are
used in this section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”
§ 9-2.8 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.8
1:200
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PLUMBING OR PLUMBING FIXTURES — Shall mean water heating
facilities, water pipes, gas pipes, garbage and disposal units, waste
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines or
other similar equipment, catch basins, drains, vents or other similarly
supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, gas, sewer or vent
lines.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including the building
or structure thereon. 16
RESIDENCE BUILDING — Shall mean a building in which sleeping
accommodations or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as a
unit are provided, except when classified as an institution under the
Building Code. 17
ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean any dwelling, including a so-called motel
type of operation used for sleeping and living but not for dwelling,
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner
or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or
daughter, mother or father, sister or brother of the owner or operator. 18
ROOMING UNIT — Shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not
for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean combustible and noncombustible waste materials,
except garbage, including the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and other similar materials.
SUPPLIED — Shall mean installed, furnished or provided by the owner or
operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Shall mean any tent, trailer or other structure
used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is
not attached to the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he were
the owner.
16.Whenever the words “dwelling,” “multifamily dwelling,” “residence building,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “premises” or any words connoting the same are
used in this section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”
17.Whenever the words “dwelling,” “multifamily dwelling,” “residence building,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “premises” or any words connoting the same are
used in this section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”
18.Whenever the words “dwelling,” “multifamily dwelling,” “residence building,” “dwelling
unit,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “premises” or any words connoting the same are
used in this section, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words
“or any part thereof.”
§ 9-2.8 GENERAL § 9-2.8
1:201
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean a building containing two units
with not more than three lodgers or boarders per family, but not more than
a total of 20 individuals per building.
VENTILATION — Shall mean the process of supplying and removing air by
natural or mechanical means to or from any space.
WORKMANLIKE — Whenever the words "workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair" are used in this section, they shall mean that such
maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
YARD — Shall mean an open unoccupied space on the same lot with a
building extending along the entire length of a street, or rear or interior lot
line.
§ 9-2.9. Environmental Requirements. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code
§ 60A-10]
a. Scope. The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
conditions of property and buildings to be used for human occupancy.
Every building or structure occupied by humans (except as exempted
by subsection 9-2.2d hereof), and the premises on which it stands, shall
comply with conditions herein prescribed, as they shall apply thereto.
b. Exterior Property Areas. No person shall rent, sell, transfer or lease to
another for occupancy any dwelling unit for the purpose of living
therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
1. Sanitation. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish
and garbage.
2. Refuse Containers. Refuse containers shall be so constructed as to
hold their contents without leakage and shall be provided with a
tight-fitting cover and not exceed 70 pounds in weight when
loaded. No container shall be larger than 30 gallons in size.
3. Noxious Weeds. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from
species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental
to the public health.
4. Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded and
maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any building or structure located thereon.
5. Insect and Rodent Harborage. Every owner of a dwelling shall be
responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests in all exterior areas of the premises.
§ 9-2.8 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.10
1:202
§ 9-2.10. Exterior of Structure. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-11]
No person shall rent, sell, transfer or lease to another for occupancy any
dwelling or portion thereof which does not comply with the following
requirements:
a. Foundations, Walls, and Roof. Every foundation, exterior wall and all
other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to
exclude rodents.
b. Foundations. The foundation elements shall adequately support the
building at all points.
c. Exterior Walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose
or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which may admit
rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied
spaces of the building, and all exposed surfaces thereof subject to
deterioration shall be protected by a protective coating appropriate for
the particular material involved.
d. Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and have no defects
which may admit water, and roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
rainwater from causing dampness in the walls or interior portion of the
building.
e. Drainage. Leaders and drain pipes shall be securely fastened to the
building and maintained in good condition, free of leaks, kept clean and
free of obstructions, and shall direct stormwaters into drainage systems
and away from foundation walls of the structure.
f. Stairs, Porches and Railings. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be
adequate for safety, as provided in the State Uniform Construction
Code, and shall comply with paragraph g and h of this subsection.
g. Structural Safety. Every outside stair, every porch and every
appurtenance attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to
use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected as
required by the State Uniform Construction Code, and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
h. Handrails. When the Construction Code Official deems it necessary for
safety, every flight of stairs which is more than two risers high shall
have handrails which shall be located as required by the State Uniform
Construction Code, and every porch which is more than two risers high
shall have handrails so located and of such design as required by the
State Uniform Construction Code. Every handrail and balustrade shall
be firmly fastened and shall be maintained in good condition.
i. Windows, Doors and Hatchways. Every window, exterior door and
basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in
sound condition and repair.
§ 9-2.10 GENERAL § 9-2.10
1:203
§ 9-2.11. Interior of Structure. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-12]
No person shall rent, sell, transfer or lease to another for occupancy any
dwelling or portion thereof which does not comply with the following
requirements:
j. Windows to be Glazed. Every window sash shall be fully supplied with
glass window panes or an approved substitute which are without open
cracks or holes.
k. Windows to be Tight. Every window sash shall be in good condition and
fit reasonably tight within its frame.
l. Windows to be Openable. Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be held in position by window hardware.
m. Door Hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be
maintained in good condition.
n. Doors to Fit in Frame. Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit
reasonably well within its frame.
o. Window and Door Frames to Fit Wall. Every window, door and frame
shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to adjacent wall
construction so as to exclude water and substantially to exclude wind
from entering the building.
p. Basement Hatchways. Every basement window hatchway shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents, rain
and surface drainage water into the building.
q. Exit Doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being
opened from the inside easily and without the use of a key.
r. Screening. Guards and screens shall be supplied for protection against
rodents and insects in accordance with the provisions of paragraphs s
and t of this subsection.
s. Guards for Basement Windows. Every basement or cellar window,
including any storm window, which is openable shall be supplied with
corrosion-resistant rodentproof shields or wire mesh screens, or with
other materials affording equivalent protection against entry of
rodents.
t. Insect screens. From May 1 through October 31 of each year, every
door opening directly from any dwelling or multifamily dwelling to the
outdoors, and every window or other outside opening used for
ventilation purposes, shall be supplied with a screen, and every
swinging screen door shall have a self-closing device in good working
condition, except that no such screen shall be required for a dwelling
unit on a floor above the fifth floor.
§ 9-2.10 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.11
1:204
a. Absence of Dampness. Cellars, basements and crawl spaces shall be
maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions
conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure as required by the
State Uniform Construction Code.
b. Structural Members. The supporting structural members shall be
maintained structurally sound showing no evidence of deterioration
which would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads in
accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code.
c. Interior Stairs and Railings. Stairs shall be provided inside every
structure as required by the State Uniform Construction Code.
d. Maintenance of Interior Stairs. The interior stairs of every structure
shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing
treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken, warped
or loose. All interior stairs shall be so constructed and maintained as to
be safe to use and capable of supporting a load as required by the
provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code.
e. Handrails. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more than
two risers high shall have handrails or railings located in accordance
with the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code. Every
handrail shall be firmly fastened and shall be maintained in good
condition. Properly balustraded railings, capable of bearing normally
imposed loads as required by the State Uniform Construction Code,
shall be placed on the open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and
stairwells.
f. Floors; Doors. Interior floors and doors shall be kept in good repair and
capable of the use intended by their design. Every toilet and bathroom
floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be
easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
g. Sanitation. The interior shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Rubbish,
garbage and other refuse shall be properly kept inside temporary
storage facilities as set forth in subsection 9-2.12h and i.
h. Insect and Rodent Harborage. Buildings shall be kept free from insect
and rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents are found they
shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which are not
injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
i. Extermination from Buildings. Every owner shall be responsible for the
extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units or in the shared or
public parts of the structure.
§ 9-2.11 GENERAL § 9-2.11
1:205
§ 9-2.12. Space and Occupancy Requirements. [Ord. #484; 1972
Code § 60A-13]
j. Maintenance of Interior Dwelling Units. Interior walls, ceilings and
other exposed surfaces shall be kept smooth, clean, free of flaking,
loose or peeling paint, plaster or paper and capable of being maintained
free of visible foreign matter and vermin, and in a sanitary condition.
Where necessary to accomplish the foregoing or any part thereof, by
reason of the nature of the surface material, such interior walls shall be
painted, papered, plastered or otherwise provided with a protective
coating.
a. Basic Facilities. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to
another for occupancy, any dwelling unit, for the purpose of living,
sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the
requirements of this subsection.
b. Sanitary Facilities. The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be
supplied and maintained in sanitary safe working condition:
1. Water closet. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a
room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy
and which is equipped with a water closet.
2. Lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory which, when
a water closet is required, shall be in the same room.
3. Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its
walls a room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords
privacy and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower.
c. Kitchen Sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart
from the lavatory required under paragraph b,2 hereof.
d. Water and Sewer System. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or
shower and water closet required under the provisions hereof shall be
properly connected to either a public water and sewer system or to an
approved private water and sewer system. All sinks, lavatories,
bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and cold running
water.
e. Water Heating Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
water-heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner and
are properly connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required to
be supplied with hot water pursuant to paragraph d hereof. Waterheating
facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a
temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at
every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and
laundry facility or other similar units, at a temperature of not less than
120° F. at any time.
§ 9-2.11 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.12
1:206
§ 9-2.13. Installation and Maintenance Standards. [Ord. #484; 1972
Code § 60A-14]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit for the purpose of living,
sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply with the
following requirements:
f. Heating Facilities. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition
and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to a
temperature of at least 70° F. at a distance of three feet above floor
level under ordinary winter conditions.
g. Operation of Heating Facilities and Incinerators. Every heating or
water-heating facility and incinerator shall be installed and shall
operate in accordance with the requirements of the State Uniform
Construction Code or New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
h. Rubbish Storage Facilities. Every dwelling, multifamily dwelling and
dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for
storage of rubbish, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such
dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of such rubbish.
i. Garbage Storage or Disposal Facilities. Every dwelling or multifamily
dwelling and every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage storage
facilities or garbage storage containers.
a. Facilities and Equipment.
1. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is
required under this section shall be so constructed or installed that
it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in
satisfactory working condition.
2. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this ordinance, to be
removed from, shut off from or discontinued for any occupied
dwelling unit, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or
during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service
shall be approved by the Construction Code Official.
b. Cleanliness and Sanitation. All housing facilities shall be maintained in
a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as not to breed
insects and rodents to produce dangerous or offensive gases or odors.
c. Plumbing Facilities. In buildings and structures used for human
habitation, water lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and drains shall be
properly installed, connected and maintained in working order, shall be
kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and shall be capable of
§ 9-2.12 GENERAL § 9-2.13
1:207
§ 9-2.14. Occupancy Requirements. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code
§ 60A-15]
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit
for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following
requirements:
performing the function for which designed. All repairs and
installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the
State Uniform Construction Code.
d. Plumbing Systems. In buildings and structures used for human
habitation, every plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be so
installed and maintained as to function properly and shall be kept free
from obstructions, leaks and defects to prevent structural deterioration
or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code.
e. Heating Equipment. Every space-heating, cooking and water heating
device located in a dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be properly
installed, connected and maintained, and shall be capable of
performing the function for which it was designed in accordance with
the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code and State
Uniform Fire Code.
f. Electrical Outlets and Fixtures. Every electrical outlet and fixture, as
required by subsection 9-2.15, shall be installed, maintained and
connected to the source of electrical power in accordance with the
provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code and Electrical Code
of the Borough.
g. Correction of Defective System. Where it is found by the Public Officer
that the electrical system in a building constitutes a hazard to the
occupants of the building by reason of inadequate service, improper
fusing, insufficient outlets, improper wiring or installation,
deterioration or damage, or for similar reasons, such defects shall be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.
h. Unobstructed Means of Egress. Every dwelling unit shall have safe
unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground
level, as required by the laws of New Jersey and the ordinances of the
Borough.
a. Minimum Ceiling Heights. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the
floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than
five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing
the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the
maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
b. Required Space in Dwelling Units. Every dwelling unit shall contain a
minimum gross floor area of not less than 200 square feet for the first
§ 9-2.13 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.14
1:208
§ 9-2.15. Light and Ventilation. [Ord. #484; 1972 Code § 60A-16]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy,
any dwelling unit or rooming unit for the purpose of living therein which
does not comply with the following requirements:
occupant and 100 square feet for each additional occupant. The floor
area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable
rooms in accordance with paragraph a hereof.
c. Required Space in Sleeping Rooms.
1. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by two occupants shall contain at least 100
square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than two occupants shall contain at least 70
square feet of floor space for each additional occupant thereof
calculated in accordance with paragraph a hereof.
2. Each room occupied for sleeping purposes shall be separated from
all other rooms by doors that afford privacy.
d. Access Limitation of Dwelling Unit to Nonresidential Uses. No
habitable room, bathroom or water closet compartment which is
accessory to a dwelling unit shall open directly into, or shall be used in
conjunction with, a food store, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or
dentist's examination or treatment room or similar room used for
nonresidential purposes.
e. Occupancy of Dwelling Units Below Grade. No cellar space shall be
used as a habitable room or dwelling unit. No basement space shall be
used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
1. Floors and walls are weathertight.
2. Total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are in
accordance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance.
3. Required window area of every habitable room is entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
a. Natural Light in Habitable Rooms. Every habitable room shall have at
least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a
court. The minimum total window area for every habitable room shall
be 10% of the floor area of such room, except in kitchens when artificial
light may be provided in accordance with the provisions of the State
Uniform Construction Code. Whenever walls or other portions of a
structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located
less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of
the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face
directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as
contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room.
§ 9-2.14 GENERAL § 9-2.15
1:209
§ 9-2.16. Minimum Requirements for Safety From Fire. [Ord. #484;
1972 Code § 60A-17]
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or shall let to another for
occupancy, any dwelling, multifamily dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
house, rooming unit, lodging house or lodging unit which does not comply
with the applicable provisions of the State Uniform Fire Code and the
following requirements:
b. Light in a Nonhabitable Work Space. Every laundry room, furnace room
and all similar nonhabitable work space located in a dwelling or
multifamily dwelling shall have at least one electric light fixture
available at all times.
c. Light in Common Halls and Stairways. Every common hall and inside
stairway in every dwelling, other than a one family dwelling, shall be
adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least five
lumens per square foot in the darkest portion of the normally traveled
stairs and passageways.
d. Electrical Outlets Required.
1. Every habitable room of every dwelling shall contain at least two
separate floor or wall electrical convenience outlets, or one such
convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric light
fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly in stalled,
shall be maintained in good and safeworking condition and shall be
connected to the source of electrical power in a safe manner.
2. Artificial lighting in every bathroom and water closet shall be
controlled by a wall switch so located as to avoid danger of
electrical hazards. The use of pullchain switches in bathrooms and
water closets is prohibited.
e. Adequate Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one
window which can be easily opened or such other device as will
adequately ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window
area size required by paragraph a hereof, except where mechanical
ventilation is provided in accordance with the provisions of the State
Uniform Construction Code or State Uniform Fire Code.
f. Ventilation and Light in Bathroom and Water Closet. Every bathroom
and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and
ventilation requirements of this ordinance for habitable rooms, except
that no window shall be required in bathrooms or water closet
compartments equipped with an approved ventilation system.
g. Improvements to Electrical System. The electrical system in any
existing structure shall be brought up to standards whenever
alterations to the structure are being made.
§ 9-2.15 BRIELLE CODE § 9-2.16
1:210
§ 9-2.17. Smoke Detectors. [Ord. #633; 1972 Code § 60A-17.1; Ord.
#815]
§ 9-3. BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN OCCUPANCY.
§ 9-3.1. Enforcement Officer. [Ord. #376; 1972 Code § 44-1; New]
The Construction Code Official shall exercise the powers described by this
section. The Borough Council shall establish the salary to be paid to the
Public Officer in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 9-3.2. Conditions Constituting Unfit Dwellings. [Ord. #376; 1972
Code § 44-2]
For the purpose of the within section, the Construction Code Official may
determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he finds that
a. Storage of Flammable Liquids Prohibited. No dwelling, multifamily
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be located within a
building containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing
flammable liquids with a flash point of 110° F. or lower.
b. Cooking and Heating Equipment. All cooking and heating equipment
components, and accessories in every heating, cooking and waterheating
device, shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions
and functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health and accident
hazards. All installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of the State Uniform Construction Code and other
ordinances of the Borough of Brielle. Portable cooking equipment
employing flame is prohibited. The installation or use of space heaters
is prohibited.
a. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare of people residing in the Borough by establishing the
requirement for residential dwellings and all other living units designed
for human habitation to be equipped with fire protection and detection
devices prior to sale, lease, rent or transfer and establishing a penalty
for violation. [Amended 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1090]
b. No person shall sell, purchase, rent, transfer or lease any residential
dwelling unit, residential condominium or cooperative dwelling unit,
motel room, hotel room or apartment unit, unless such structure shall
be provided with fire detection and protection devices installed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19, regarding smoke alarms for oneand
two-family dwellings; carbon monoxide alarms; and portable fire
extinguishers. [Amended 2-20-2020 by Ord. No. 1090]
c. Any person, firm, association or corporation convicted of violating any
provision of this section, or any amendment or supplement thereto,
shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty as stated in Chapter 1,
§ 1-5.
§ 9-2.16 GENERAL § 9-3.2
1:211
conditions exist in such dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the
health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling, the occupants of
neighboring dwellings or other residents of the Borough; such conditions
may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing):
defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities;
lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation;
disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness.
§ 9-3.3. State Housing Code Accepted; Copies on File. [Ord. #376;
1972 Code § 44-3]
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21, P.L. 1946 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1),
the "New Jersey State Housing Code" as approved by the Departments
of Health and Conservation and Economic Development and filed in the
Secretary of State's office is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a
standard to be used as a guide in determining the fitness of a building for
human habitation or occupancy or use. Three copies of the New Jersey State
Housing Code have been placed on file in the office of the Borough Clerk
and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 9-3.4. Petition Charging Dwellings as Unfit; Issuance of
Complaints. [Ord. #376; 1972 Code § 44-4]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Construction Code Official by a public
authority as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least five residents of the
municipality, charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, as
herein defined, or whenever it appears to the Construction Code Official (on
his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, as herein
defined, he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in such dwelling a complaint stating the charges in that respect
and containing a notice that hearing will be held before the Construction
Code Official (or his designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not less than
10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the
owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at
the time and place fixed in the complaints; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Construction Code Official.
§ 9-3.5. Report of Findings; Contents of Order Upon Owners. [Ord.
#376; 1972 Code § 44-5]
If after such notice and hearing the Construction Code Official determines
that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, as
herein defined, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order requiring:
§ 9-3.2 BRIELLE CODE § 9-3.5
1:212
a. The repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be made by the
owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or to have the building
vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
b. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, that the owner remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
c. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building,
the Construction Code Official may cause such building to be repaired,
altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed; that the Construction
Code Official may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any
building so closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of
this building is prohibited and unlawful."
d. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the Construction Code Official may cause such building to
be removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or
demolition thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
e. That the amount of:
1. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search
fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this section determined in favor of the
Borough, and
2. Such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such building or
from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a
municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the
Construction Code Official, he shall sell the materials of such
building. There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or
demolition thereof, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or
any sum derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of
the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such
costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the
aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the
Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax
liens and a copy thereof shall be forth with forwarded to the owner
by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Construction Code Official, shall be secured in such manner as may
§ 9-3.5 GENERAL § 9-3.5
1:213
§ 9-3.6. Service of Orders or Complaints. [Ord. #376; 1972 Code
§ 44-6]
Complaints or orders issued by the Construction Code Official pursuant to
this section shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Construction Code Official in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, and the Construction Code Official shall make an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the county
and circulating in the Borough. A copy of such complaint or order shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint
or order, and a copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or
lodged for record with the Monmouth County Recording Officer.
§ 9-3.7. Powers of Construction Code Official. [Ord. #376; 1972
Code § 44-7]
The Construction Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this section, including the
following in addition to others herein granted:
be directed by such Court, and shall be disbursed according to
the order or judgment of the Court to the persons found to be
entitled thereto by final order or judgment of such Court; provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the municipality to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by
summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest
may, within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate,
proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth
in the municipal lien certificate.
a. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the Borough in order to
determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation;
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section; and
e. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 9-3.5 BRIELLE CODE § 9-3.8
1:214
§ 9-3.8. Nonapplicability of Section 8 of State Housing Code. [Ord.
#376; 1972 Code § 44-8]
Section 8 of the New Jersey State Housing Code, which pertains to heating
equipment, shall not apply to buildings that are used only for occupancy
during the summer months.
§ 9-3.9. Interpretation and Applicability. [Ord. #376; 1972 Code
§ 44-9]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the Borough or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
charter or its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof, and the powers conferred by this ordinance shall be in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred upon the Borough by any other law
or ordinance.
§ 9-4. RENTAL OF PROPERTY.
§ 9-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. #483; 1972 Code § 70-1]
As used in this section:
DWELLING UNIT — Defined in the Zoning Chapter of this Code.
FAMILY — Defined in the Zoning Chapter of this Code.
GROUP — Shall mean any collective body of persons not constituting a
family.
§ 9-4.2. Use or Rental by Group Prohibited. [Ord. #483; 1972 Code
§ 70-2]
No dwelling unit within the Borough shall be used, or be permitted to be
used, or be rented or leased for use and occupancy by any group, as defined
in this section.
§ 9-4.3. Procedure Prior to Occupancy. [Ord. #483; 1972 Code
§ 70-3]
Before permitting occupancy of a dwelling unit pursuant to a rent or lease
agreement, the owner of such dwelling unit, or his agent or broker, shall file
with the Borough Clerk a statement, signed and sworn to by both the owner,
agent or broker, as the case may be, and the tenant or lessee, indicating the
location of the dwelling unit, the name of the owner, the name of the tenant
or lessee, dates of beginning and termination of occupancy, date of rental
or lease agreement and a statement of the signatories that they are familiar
with the terms of this section and that the rental or lease agreement and the
occupancy pursuant thereto are not, and are not intended to be, in violation
of this section.
§ 9-3.8 GENERAL § 9-4.4
1:215
§ 9-4.4. Subletting. [Ord. #483; 1972 Code § 70-4]
Any tenant or lessee who sublets a dwelling unit shall be conclusively
deemed to be an agent of the owner of such dwelling unit for the purposes
of this section.
§ 9-4.5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person occupying a dwelling unit in violation of the provisions of this
section, and any person, firm or corporation who or which causes, allows
or permits such occupancy, shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty
established in Chapter 1, Section 1-51.
§ 9-5. HOUSE NUMBERING.
§ 9-5.1. System Established; Conformance with System. [Ord. #215;
1972 Code § 60-1; New]
§ 9-5.2. Application for Number. [Ord. #215; 1972 Code § 60-2]
In all cases where any owner or owners shall hereafter construct or place
upon any premises in the Borough a dwelling or other structure for business
or industry, it shall be the duty of the owner or owners thereof to apply to
the Borough Clerk for the correct number of the house or place of business
or industry, as the same is indicated on the map and the supplements
thereto, and, upon being furnished the correct number of such property,
within 30 days after the completion of the building, place or affix to the front
of the house or place of business or industry the number in conformity with
the number designated on the map by the Borough Engineer.
§ 9-5.3. Numbers to Correspond to Designated Number on Official
Map. [Ord. #215; 1972 Code § 60-3; New]
In all cases where numbers shall hereafter be placed on the map by the
Borough Engineer and the correct number has not been affixed to the
a. There is hereby established a numbering system for buildings in the
Borough, in accordance with a map entitled "Official House Numbering
Map," dated December 1956, prepared by Claude W. Birdsall, Borough
Engineer, and on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
b. The numbers of all houses, places of business and industry in the
Borough of Brielle shall correspond with the numbers on the aforesaid
map, and it shall be the duty of all property owners to have their houses
and places of business and industry numbered in conformity with the
numbers designated on this map and any supplements thereto.
c. It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house, place of
business and industry in the Borough to have placed thereon, in a place
visible from the street, figures showing the number of the house, place
of business or industry, as the case may be.
§ 9-4.4 BRIELLE CODE § 9-5.3
1:216
house, place of business or industry by the owner, it shall be the duty of each
owner or owners to apply to the Borough Clerk for the correct number of
the house or place of business or industry, as the same is designated on the
map and the supplements thereto, and upon application, the Borough Clerk
shall furnish to the applicant the correct number of applicant's property,
and the property owner shall, within 30 days thereafter, place or affix
to the front of the house or place of business or industry the number
thereof in conformity with the number as designated on the map by the
Borough Engineer. The use of undesignated or inconsistent numbers is
hereby declared unlawful.
§ 9-5.4. Choice of Numbers: Decision of Council. [Ord. #215; 1972
Code § 60-6]
In case any building is located or constructed in such manner as would
permit the use of a choice of numbers or more than one number, then such
number or numbers shall be determined by the Governing Body, and its
decision shall be final. Any question relating to the proper number to be
used shall be so determined by the Governing Body.
§ 9-5.5. Size, Placement and Location of Number. [Ord. #215; 1972
Code § 60-7]
The size, manner of placement and location of all numbers shall be such as
will permit them to be clearly visible from the street.
§ 9-5.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #215; 1972 Code § 60-8]
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty as established
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 10
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 10-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #243; 1972 Code § 77-1]
As used in this Chapter:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS — Shall mean and include artificially
constructed swimming pools or tanks, plastic or otherwise, established or
maintained upon any premises by an individual for his own or his family's
use or the use of guests of his household.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE-CLUB SWIMMING POOLS — Shall mean and include
either outdoor or indoor pools which are artificially constructed to provide
recreation facilities for swimming, bathing or wading. It shall not include
private swimming or wading pools, as hereinafter defined, or bathing
facilities installed as an integral part of a dwelling.
§ 9-5.3 GENERAL § 10-2
1:217
§ 10-2. PERMITS REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION; FEES. [Ord.
#243; Ord. #276; 1972 Code § 77-2; Ord. No. 1012]
§ 10-3. LOCATION OF POOLS. [Ord. #243; 1972 Code § 77-3]
No swimming pool shall be constructed or installed nearer than 10 feet
to any side or rear lot line, nor nearer to the street line or lines than the
setback required and/or established for such premises.
§ 10-4. REQUIRED CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. [Ord. #243; 1972
Code § 77-4]
All materials used in the construction of a swimming pool shall be
waterproof and easily cleaned.
§ 10-5. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #243; Ord. #276; 1972
Code § 77-5]
a. No swimming pool shall be constructed within the Borough unless the
owner or the person in possession of the lands on which the swimming
pool is to be constructed shall first obtain from the Construction Official
of the Borough, prior to the commencement of construction, a building
permit therefor.
b. The application for approval shall be submitted in writing to the
Construction Official, together with a plan, and shall be accompanied
by a filing fee of $5 plus a fee of $2 for each $1,000 of construction cost.
c. The plan submitted with each application must contain the following:
1. Size of the pool.
2. Position of the pool showing clearly and accurately its relation to
property lines and building lines.
3. The material to be used in construction.
4. Plumbing features.
5. Safety features (for public pools, lifeguards, etc.) for all pools, full
details as to fence, wall or enclosure to be erected, as hereinafter
provided under Section 10-6a.
6. Type of pool (general public, club or private).
7. Waste disposal facilities.
8. Pool water treatment facilities and capacities.
9. Specifications showing all detailed plans.
d. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved)
§ 10-2 BRIELLE CODE § 10-5
1:218
§ 10-6. SAFETY REGULATIONS. [Ord. #243; 1972 Code § 77-6]
§ 10-7. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. [Ord. #243; 1972 Code
§ 77-7]
a. There shall be no physical connection between a potable public or
private water supply system and pool at a point below the maximum
flow line of the pool or to a recirculating or heating system of the pool
unless such physical connection is so installed and operated that no
pool water can be discharged or siphoned into potable water supply
system.
b. Every swimming pool shall have a complete recirculating purifying
system which shall have sufficient capacity to recirculate the contents
of the pool within eight hours or less, except that if scum gutter water
recirculation is proposed, the recirculating units shall be capable of
recirculating the entire contents of the pool in six hours or less. During
each period of maximum use or whenever maximum use may be
indicated, the content of every swimming pool shall be recirculated not
less than once every eight hours, except if scum gutter water
recirculation is employed, then not less than once every six hours.
c. Physical, chemical and bacterial qualities of water shall comply at all
times with the latest recommendations made by the American Public
Health Association and by the New Jersey State Department of Health.
d. The construction, maintenance and operation of all public or privateclub
pools shall be in accordance with Sections III to XVI inclusive of
the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1955), and said sections are
hereby adopted. A copy of said sections is annexed hereto and made a
part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof. Three copies of said
Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey (1955) have been placed on file in
the office of the Borough Clerk for use and examination of the public.
e. The disposal or discharge of water from any swimming pool shall be
accomplished without causing a health hazard and/or a nuisance.
a. Every swimming pool shall be enclosed by a substantial fence or wall, or
an enclosure comparable to such fence or wall, of not less than four feet
in height and so constructed as to prevent, within reason, any person
from gaining access through or beneath the fence, wall or enclosure,
and shall have similarly substantial gate or gates of the same height
which must be bolted at its maximum height when the swimming pool is
not in use. The dwelling house or accessory building may be used as
part of the enclosure.
b. All swimming pools must have at least one staircase or rigid ladder to
permit easy exit from the pool.
c. No aluminum paint shall be used in or around any swimming pool.
§ 10-5 GENERAL § 10-7
1:219
§ 10-8. ANNUAL LICENSE FEE. [Ord. #243; 1972 Code § 77-8; Ord.
#825]
No license fees shall be paid for private swimming pools. An owner or
person in possession of a public or private-club swimming pool shall pay a
license fee of $100 annually, which license shall expire on December 31,
and application for renewal thereof shall be submitted, together with the
required fee, prior to May 1 of each year.
§ 10-9. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. #243; 1972 Code
§ 77-4]
Any person who violates, causes, or permits the violation of any provision
of this Chapter shall upon conviction be liable to the penalty established in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 11
TRAILERS AND TRAILER COURTS
§ 11-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code § 82-1]
As used in this Chapter:
PERSON — Shall mean any person, persons, partnership, firm, corporation
or association.
TRAILER — Shall mean any vehicle used or constructed to be used as a
conveyance upon public streets, whether self-propelled or otherwise, and
so designed as to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping
place for one or more persons, or as living and business quarters combined,
and having no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged
as to be integral with or portable by such "trailer," and non-self-propelled
vehicles of any kind or character constructed and intended to be moved
under fuel power.
a. All areas surrounding a swimming pool shall be made and kept neat and
attractive so as to be in conformity with surrounding property. No
rubbish, debris or litter shall be permitted to remain or accumulate in
or about the pool.
b. Lights used to illuminate a swimming pool shall be so arranged and
shaded as to reflect light away from any and all adjoining premises.
c. Each swimming pool shall be maintained and operated so it does not
cause noise, nuisance or annoyance to neighboring property owners or
citizens and residents of the Borough.
d. An owner or person in possession of a swimming pool shall allow the
Health Inspector or Construction Official access to the premises to
inspect said pool and appurtenances to ascertain compliance with this
ordinance, at any time it may be deemed necessary and/or required.
§ 10-7 BRIELLE CODE § 11-1
1:220
TRAILER COURT — Shall mean any lot or parcel of land and premises
where a trailer may be parked for more than three hours.
TRAILER SPACE — Shall mean a plot of ground within a trailer court for the
accommodation of one trailer.
§ 11-2. LICENSE REQUIRED TO CONDUCT TRAILER COURT. [Ord.
#325; 1972 Code § 82-2]
a. No person shall conduct or carry on the business of the operation of a
trailer court, or work in, occupy, directly or indirectly, in any manner
whatsoever, or utilize any place or premises in which is conducted or
carried on a trailer court, unless and until there shall be granted by the
Governing Body in accordance with the terms of this Chapter, and shall
be in full force and effect, a regular or special license to conduct a
trailer court for the place and premises at which the same shall be
carried on.
b. A regular or special license to operate a trailer park shall be obtained
from the Borough Clerk on or before January 1 annually. No regular
license shall be issued until the Construction Official and the Health
Officer shall have certified that they know of no violation of any law,
regulation or ordinance applicable to trailer courts.
c. A special license shall be issued when the Construction Official and/or
the Health Officer have certified in writing to the Borough Clerk that
there are violations of the law, regulations or ordinance applicable to
trailer courts in the Borough. Any and all restrictions placed upon the
licensee under the terms of the special license shall appear on the
special license.
d. A special license shall have attached and made a part thereof a list of all
violations as certified to by the Construction Official and/or the Health
Officer.
e. A special license shall have the same force and effect as a regular
license during the first calendar year in which it is issued. Violations
attached and made a part of a special license as set forth in this section
shall be corrected by the trailer court owner prior to January 1 of the
next succeeding year.
f. Upon certification in handwriting to the Borough Clerk by the
Construction Official and/or the Health Officer that there are violations
as listed and attached to the special license and any additional
violations as found by the Construction Official and/or the Health
Officer as set forth in this section which have not been corrected by the
trailer court owner prior to January 1 of the next succeeding year, a
renewal of the special license shall be issued; however no new tenants
or trailers shall be allowed to occupy any trailer space until such time
as all violations have been corrected.
§ 11-1 GENERAL § 11-3
1:221
§ 11-3. LICENSE APPLICATION; ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS;
DEPOSIT. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code § 82-3]
§ 11-4. SPACE REGULATIONS. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code § 82-4]
Trailers shall be parked on each space so that there will be at least 15 feet
side-to-side spacing between trailers; 10 feet end-to-end spacing between
trailers; 20 feet between any trailer and the adjoining property line; 25 feet
from the side lines of any public street or highway right-of-way; and 15 feet
from any building or structure.
§ 11-5. LICENSE FEES. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code § 82-5; New]
The license fee for a trailer camp shall be $200 per annum and the sum
of $10 per month, per trailer. The license shall expire on December 31
annually. The sum of $100 shall be payable in advance, on or before January
1 of each year.
§ 11-6. RECORDS TO BE KEPT BY LICENSEE. [Ord. #325; 1972
Code § 82-6]
Each licensee shall maintain and keep a trailer register containing a record
of all trailer owners and occupants located in the park. The record shall
contain the following information:
a. The license shall be applied for by written application filed with the
Borough Clerk. The application shall set forth the full name or names
and address of the applicant, the particular kind or character of the
business to be carried on, the number of vehicles to be parked thereon,
the location or place of the premises in or at which the same is to be
carried on, the total area of the ground space thereof, a map drawn to
scale, setting forth the trailer spaces, the location and size of the utility
building and the size and location of the septic tank or tanks or
connected to municipal sewerage facilities. The map shall be
accompanied by a deed or deeds showing title in the name of the
applicant, together with any lease agreements should the applicant be
someone other than the record owner of the land, same to be returned
to the applicant upon issuance of the license.
b. The application shall also be accompanied by a deposit in the sum of
$100 to cover license fee for the year.
a. Name and address of each occupant.
b. The make, model and owner of all trailers and automobiles, including
the trailer license number of the trailer, as well as the license
registration data of the automobile by which it is towed.
c. The date of arrival and departure of each trailer.
d. The trailer space assigned to each trailer.
§ 11-3 BRIELLE CODE § 11-7
1:222
§ 11-7. TRANSFER OF LICENSE. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code § 82-7]
No trailer camp license shall be transferred without the express approval of
the Governing Body.
§ 11-8. QUARTERLY REPORTS OF LICENSEES; FEES FOR
OCCUPIED TRAILER SPACES. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code § 82-8; New]
Each licensee, on or before the 10th day of January, April, July and October
of each year, shall file in triplicate with the Borough Clerk, on a form
furnished by the Clerk, a return under oath stating the number of trailer
spaces occupied by the trailers in the trailer park during each of the three
preceding calendar months, the state or territory which issued the license
plates for each trailer coach and accompanying motor vehicle and the
license number thereof, and the name and address of each trailer owner. At
the time of filing of the return, the licensee shall pay to the Borough Clerk
$10 for each month for each trailer space which is shown by said report
as occupied by a trailer. Failure to make payment for the three months of
any calendar year or to make the payment required on or before January 10
shall constitute a violation of the then existing license the same as though
the license fee so required to be paid were a part of the year for which the
license is issued.
§ 11-9. DRINKING WATER; SANITARY FACILITIES. [Ord. #325;
1972 Code § 82-9]
The licensee shall provide an adequate supply of pure drinking water,
adequate sanitary facilities and garbage disposal receptacles. Such
receptacles shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all
times. It shall be unlawful to permit any waste matter or matter from sinks,
baths or other plumbing fixtures or means of disposal in a trailer to be
deposited on the surface of the ground, and all such fixtures and devices,
when in use, must be connected to the septic tank system in a manner
satisfactory to the Board of Health of the Borough.
§ 11-10. PROHIBITED USES OF PREMISES. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code
§ 82-10]
No person shall permit any such licensed premises to be used for immoral
purposes or suffer the violation thereon or therein of any penal law or of any
ordinance of the Borough.
§ 11-11. COMPLIANCE WITH POLICE, HEALTH, FIRE
REGULATIONS: INSPECTIONS. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code § 82-11]
Such licensed place or premises shall at all times comply with all proper
police, health and fire regulations imposed by the Governing Body or Board
of Health of the Borough. The business and the place and premises where
conducted shall be subject to examination and inspection by day or night
by the Governing Body or a committee thereof, and by the fire, police and
health authorities of the Borough.
§ 11-7 GENERAL § 11-12
1:223
§ 11-12. REFUSAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; NOTICE AND
HEARING. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code § 82-12]
In the case of failure or refusal to comply with any of the terms or provisions
of this Chapter, the Borough may, on notice and hearing, refuse or revoke
any license applied for or granted hereunder.
§ 11-13. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. #325; 1972 Code
§ 82-13]
§ 11-14. TRAILER PROHIBITED IN AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD. [Ord. #657; 1972 Code § 82-17]
No trailer shall be permitted in any area of special flood hazard identified
by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering
report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the Borough of Brielle, Dated
March 1983, With Accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map as Revised
September 30, 1983."
Chapter 12
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 12-1. BOCA NATIONAL EXISTING STRUCTURES CODE.
§ 12-1.1. Adoption by Reference. [Ord. #730, § 1]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Borough Clerk, being marked and designated as the BOCA National
Existing Structures Code/1987: as published by the Building Officials &
Code Administrators International, Inc. (BOCA) is hereby adopted as the
property maintenance code of the Borough of Brielle, for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations of the BOCA National Existing Structures Code/1987 are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter.
a. In case of failure or refusal to correct the outstanding violations of this
Chapter, as set forth or attached to the special license granted under
Section 11-2, and after the expiration of the second renewal of the
special license, the Borough Council shall, upon notice and hearing,
refuse or revoke any license applied for or granted hereunder, order the
trailer court closed or order any other restrictions as may be deemed
appropriate after a public hearing, during which all relevant evidence
shall be presented and the holder of the license is given the opportunity
to be represented and to present evidence. The trailer court owner shall
receive at least 10 days' written notice of any public hearing.
b. Violators of any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty as established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 11-12 BRIELLE CODE § 12-1.2
1:224
§ 12-1.2. Modifications to Code. [Ord. #730, § 1]
To the extent any section or sections of the said BOCA National Existing
Structures Code/1987 are hereinafter deleted, modified, amended or
supplemental, the deletions, modifications, amendments or supplements
shall take precedence over the provisions of the BOCA National Existing
Structures Code/1987.
§ 12-1.3. Legal Rights Not Affected. [Ord. #730, § 1]
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
court, or any rights acquitted, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as
cited in the foregoing section of this section; nor shall any just or legal right
or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this section.
§ 12-2. COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
§ 12-2.1. Findings and Declaration of Policy. [Ord. #578; § 44A-1]
It is hereby found and declared that there may exist in the Borough
structures used for non-residential purposes which are, or may become
in the future, substandard with respect to structure, equipment or
maintenance; or further that such conditions including but not limited to
structural deterioration, lack of maintenance and appearance of exterior
of premises, infestation, lack of essential heating, plumbing, storage or
refrigeration equipment, lack of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities
and facilities, inadequate provisions for light and air, unsanitary conditions
and overcrowding, constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare
and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the Borough.
§ 12-2.2. Purpose. [Ord. #578; § 44A-2]
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, morals and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of non-residential premises; to
establish minimum standards governing utilities, facilities and other
physical components and conditions essential to make the aforesaid
facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and use; to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators, and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants; to authorize and
establish procedures for the inspection of premises; to fix penalties for
the violations of this section; and to provide for the repair, demolition or
vacation of premises unfit for occupancy or use. This section is hereby
declared to be remedial and essential for the public's interest and it is
intended that this section be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes
as stated herein.
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL § 12-2.3
1:225
§ 12-2.3. Definitions. [Ord. #578; § 44A-3]
As used in this section:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure the use of which is
incidental to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or
located on the same premises.
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — Shall mean a building or buildings or any part
thereof, and the lot or tract of land upon which the building or buildings
are situated where commercial activity of any kind takes place. Commercial
activity shall include but is not limited to, gasoline service stations; stores
for retail sales; liquor stores, taverns and inns; restaurants, including but
not limited to drive-in restaurants, snack bars, hot dog, hamburger or ice
cream stands; professional activities, including but not limited to, medical,
dental, legal, architectural, accounting; personal services, including but not
limited to, real estate, insurance, barber shops, hair dressers, repair shops
of all kinds; and amusements, including but not limited to, movies, skating
rinks, bowling alleys; whether part of a shopping area or not. Commercial
activity shall not include sale of agricultural products produced on the
premises.
DETERIORATION — Shall mean the condition of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting,
or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or
excessive use.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Shall mean those portions of a building
which are exposed to public view and the open space of any premises
outside of any building erected thereon.
HARBORAGE — Shall mean any condition man-made or natural which
affords a breeding place or hiding place for rodents, insects or other pests.
INFESTATION — Shall mean the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard.
NUISANCE — Shall mean any common law nuisance or as provided by the
laws of the State of New Jersey of the Ordinance of the Borough.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or safety
of children whether in a building or upon a lot. This includes but is not
limited to, any structurally unsound fences or structure, lumber, trash,
fences, debris or vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak or poison sumac,
which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
Abandoned vehicles, trailers, carts, wagons, vessels or other things. Any
vehicle, trailer, cart, wagon, vessel or other thing which is inoperable,
physically or by operation of law, or which remains outside in an unfenced
area of premises which are not used or maintained for the sale of motor
vehicles, trailers, campers or boats.
Any physical condition dangerous to human life or detrimental to the health
of persons on or near the premises where the condition exists. This includes,
but is not limited to; harborage as defined above, existence or presence
of any water or other liquid in which mosquito larvas breed or exist,
§ 12-2.3 BRIELLE CODE § 12-2.3
1:226
any deposit or accumulation of trash, litter, garbage, refuse, debris, or
any organic or inorganic matter which may attract flies and to which
flies may have access or in which fly larvae or pulpae breed or exist, the
existence, presence or maintenance of any brush, weeds, dead and dying
trees, stumps, roots, limbs, obnoxious growth, filth, garbage, trash, refuse,
and debris which is or may become a fire hazard or otherwise detrimental
to the health, safety and welfare of persons, the existence or presence
of any ragweed, poison ivy, poison sumac or other noxious growth of any
kind, the presence, existence or maintenance of any holes, excavations,
breaks, projections, obstructions, accumulations of ice, snow or water, and
excretion of pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots
and other parts of the exterior of the premises which are intended for use
by persons or which are accessible to and likely to be used by such persons.
The escape into open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any other
entrance to the open air of such quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes,
vapors, mists or gases which endanger or interfere with the health, safety
and general welfare of persons, or the creation of excessive and noxious
amounts of dust.
Any act or maintenance of any condition which causes or threatens
pollution, as defined by the laws of the State of New Jersey, of any waters in
this Borough in such a manner as to endanger the health, safety or general
welfare of persons upon any premises within this borough.
Unsanitary conditions of anything unreasonably offensive to the senses or
dangerous to health, in violation of this code.
Whatever renders air, water, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to
the health of human beings.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person having actual possession of the
premises or any part thereof.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a
premises, or any part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or
control of any premises as owner or agent of the owner, or as fiduciary,
including but not limited to, executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, receiver, or guardian of the estate, or as mortgagee
in possession regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person
who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part or all of any premises
shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint
responsibility over the portion of the premises subject or assigned by said
lessee.
PLUMBING — Shall mean all of the following supplies, facilities and
equipment; gas pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, gas-burning
equipment, water pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines,
catch basins, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
§ 12-2.3 GENERAL § 12-2.3
1:227
connections to water, sewer and gas lines and water pipes and lines utilized
in conjunction with air-conditioning equipment.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings
or structures thereon.
REST ROOM — Shall mean an enclosed space containing one or more toilets
and one or more lavatories or fixture serving similar purposes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean all combustible and non-combustible waste
materials, except garbage; and the term shall include, but not be limited
to, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible
material, paper, rags, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery,
abandoned automobiles and dust.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any combination of any materials, whether fixed
or portable, forming a construction, including buildings.
VENTILATION — Shall mean supply and removal of air to and from any
space by natural or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Shall mean ventilation by power-driven
devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Shall mean ventilation by opening to outer air
through windows, skylights, doors, louvers, or stacks with or without winddriven
devices.
§ 12-2.4. Scope and Application. [Ord. #578; § 44A-4]
Every building and the premises on which it is situated shall comply with
the provisions of this section, whether or not such building shall have
been constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of
this section, and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have
been issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises for the
construction or repair of the building, or for the installation or repair
of equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this section. This
subsection establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued
occupancy and use of all such buildings, and does not replace or modify
standards, otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or
use of the building, equipment or facilities contained therein, except as
provided in subsection 12-2.5.
§ 12-2.5. Higher Standard to Prevail in Case of Conflict with Other
Ordinances or Laws. [Ord. #578; § 44A-5]
In any case where the provisions of this section impose a higher standard
than that set forth in any other ordinance or law, then the standards as
set forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this section impose a
lower standard than any other ordinance or law, then the higher standard
contained in such other ordinance or law, shall prevail.
§ 12-2.3 BRIELLE CODE § 12-2.6
1:228
§ 12-2.6. Enforcement of and Compliance with Other Ordinances.
[Ord. #578; § 44A-6]
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this section
shall constitute a defense to any violation of any other ordinance of the
borough applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision
herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any
such other provision, nor any official of the Borough from enforcing any
such other provision.
§ 12-2.7. Responsibilities of Owner, Operator and Occupant
Independent of Each Other. [Ord. #578; 1972 Code § 44A-7]
§ 12-2.8. Duties and Responsibilities of Owner and Operator. [Ord.
#578; 1972 Code § 44A-8]
The following duties and responsibilities are hereby imposed upon every
owner and operator of any building covered by the provisions of this
section:
a. Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in subsection 12-2.8 and the regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any
such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any
charge of violation thereof by reasons of the fact that the occupant is
also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
b. Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
subsection 12-2.9 and all the regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, and the occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and
responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation
thereof by reason of the fact that the owner is also responsible therefor
and in violation thereof.
c. Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this section, the respective
obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one hand,
and the occupant on the other, shall not be altered or affected by any
agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between
them and other parties.
a. The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept
free of all nuisances, and any hazards to the safety of occupants,
pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises, and free of
unsanitary conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly
removed and abated by the owner or operator. The items prohibited
hereby shall include but not be limited to: brush, weeds, broken glass,
stump roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, refuse, debris,
dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth, loose and
overhanging objects, and ground surface hazards.
§ 12-2.6 GENERAL § 12-2.8
1:229
b. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and
damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
c. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained
structurally sound, free from defects and so maintained as to capably
perform at all times the functions for which they were designed.
Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft producing equipment shall
provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected
equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable, smoke-tight, and capable
of withstanding the action of flue gases.
d. Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, and fire escapes shall be
provided with bannisters or railings properly designed and maintained
to minimize the hazard of fallings, and the same shall be kept
structurally sound, in good repair, and free from defects.
e. The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures
shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all
buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with
the standard of the borough.
f. Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and bushes shall
be kept trimmed, and properly maintained.
g. All display windows or store fronts constructed of plate glass shall be
kept clean and free of cracks, and no storage shall be permitted therein.
Broken or cracked windows must be replaced within five days unless
broken glass constitutes a safety hazard.
h. All store fronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required,
and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the event
repairs to a store front become necessary, such repairs shall be made
with the same or similar materials used in the construction of the store
front in a manner to maintain the appearance in accordance with the
standards of the borough.
i. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view, permitted by
reason of other ordinances or as a lawful nonconforming use, shall be
maintained in good repair. Any signs which have excessively weathered
or faded or those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or
cracked shall, with their supporting members, be removed forth with or
put into a good state of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical
signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith.
j. Any awnings or marquees and its accompanying structural members
which extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises
shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or
a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not
maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall together with
their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event the
awnings, or marquees are made of cloth, plastic, or of similar materials,
§ 12-2.8 BRIELLE CODE § 12-2.8
1:230
§ 12-2.9. Duties of Occupant. [Ord. #578; 1972 Code § 44A-9]
The following duties and responsibilities are hereby imposed upon every
occupant of any building covered by the provisions of this section:
this cloth or plastic where exposed to public view shall be maintained
in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive weathering,
discoloration, ripping, tearing, or other holes. Nothing herein shall
be construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks, or
other parts of the public domain.
k. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure shall be kept in
good repair and kept painted where necessary for purposes of
preservation and appearance. All surfaces shall be maintained free of
broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, peeling paint or
other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance.
l. Restrooms shall be surfaced with waterproof floors and shall be kept
dry, clean and sanitary at all times. Sufficient restrooms shall be
installed and maintained commensurate with the use of the premises.
Every restroom shall be provided with a permanently installed artificial
lighting fixture, and wall switch in accordance with the National
Electric Code of 1970.
m. All premises shall be properly connected to and provided with electric
power. All such connections and electrical equipment shall be installed
and maintained in conformity with the provisions of the National
Electrical Code of 1970 and other applicable ordinances.
n. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted
conspicuously, and no fuse shall be installed in a fuse box in excess of
the stated maximum except that owners and operators shall not be
responsible for violation in fuse installations without their knowledge
where the correct maximum is stated and the fuse box is located within
any part of the premises which is in the exclusive possession of
occupants other than the owner, in which case such occupant shall be
responsible for such violations.
a. Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition of the premises which
constitutes a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the occupant
shall report the same to the Code Enforcement Officer.
b. All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
c. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for the accumulation of
garbage or refuse.
d. Every occupant shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation in
and on the premises subject to his control.
§ 12-2.8 GENERAL § 12-2.9
1:231
§ 12-2.10. Filing of Complaints of Unfit Structures. [Ord. #338;
1972 Code § 44-15]
Whenever a complaint or petition is filed with the Code Enforcement Officer
by the Borough Council or by at least 10 residents of the Borough that any
nonresidential structure is unfit for occupancy or use, as herein defined,
he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges,
issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest
in such structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and
containing a notice that hearing will be held before the Code Enforcement
Officer (or his designated agent) at a place therein fixed, not less than
10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of complaint; that the
owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to
the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at
the time and place fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 12-2.11. Report of Findings; Contents of Order Upon Owners.
[Ord. #388; 1972 Code § 44-16]
If after such notice and hearing the Code Enforcement Officer determines
that the structure under consideration is unfit, as herein defined, he shall
state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in
interest in an order requiring:
e. No occupant shall install electrical fuses in a fuse box in excess of the
posted limit.
f. Each occupant shall be responsible for the elimination and removal of
trash and garbage from premises under his control.
a. The repair, alteration or improvement of the structure to be made by
the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or to have said structure
vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
b. If the structure is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve the said structure within the time specified in
the order, that the owner remove or demolish the structure within a
reasonable time as specified in the said order of removal.
c. That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the
structure, the Code Enforcement Officer may cause such structure to
be repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed; that the
Code Enforcement Officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance
of any structure so closed, a placard with the following words: "This
§ 12-2.9 BRIELLE CODE § 12-2.11
1:232
§ 12-2.12. Service of Orders or Complaints. [Ord. #388; 1972 Code
§ 44-17]
Complaints or orders issued by the Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to
this section shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered
structure is unfit for occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
structure is prohibited and unlawful."
d. That, if the owner fails to comply with in order to remove or demolish
the structure, the Code Enforcement Officer may cause such structure
to be removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or
demolition thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
e. That the amount of:
1. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees, search
fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this section determined in favor of the
municipality, and
2. Such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from such structure or
from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a
municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. If the structure is removed or demolished by the Code
Enforcement Officer, he shall sell the materials of such structure.
There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or
demolition thereof, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or
any sum derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of
the structure. If there are no such credits or if the sum total of such
costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed statement of the
aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed with the Tax
Assessor or other custodian of the records of tax liens and a copy
thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered
mail. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Code
Enforcement Officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be
directed by such Court, and shall be disbursed according to the
order or judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or judgment of such Court; provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or
omit in any way the power of the municipality to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary
proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may,
within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate,
proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the
reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth
in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 12-2.11 GENERAL § 12-2.12
1:233
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Code Enforcement Officer in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, and the Code Enforcement Officer shall make an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the county
and circulating in the Borough. A copy of such complaint or order shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint
or order, and a copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or
lodged for record with the Monmouth County Recording Officer.
§ 12-2.13. Powers of Code Enforcement Officer. [Ord. #388; 1972
Code § 44-18]
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purpose and provisions of this section, including the following
in addition to others herein granted:
§ 12-2.14. Interpretation and Applicability. [Ord. #388; 1972 Code
§ 44-19]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power
of the Borough or any officer or department to enforce any provisions of its
charter or its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations
thereof and the powers conferred by this section shall be in addition and
supplemental to the powers conferred upon the Borough by any other law
or ordinance.
§ 12-2.15. Penalty. [Ord. #578; 1972 Code § 44A-11]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall further, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 13
a. To investigate the conditions pertaining to nonresidential structures to
determine which structures therein are unfit, as herein defined;
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
d. To appoint and fix the duties of the officers, agents and employees as he
deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section; and
e. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 12-2.12 BRIELLE CODE § 12-2.15
1:234
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
§ 13-1. PARKS.
§ 13-1.1. Operation and Maintenance Under Public Works
Committee. [Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 66-1]
All parks in the borough shall be operated and maintained under the
supervision of the Public Works Committee of the Borough Council. Such
Committee shall direct the ornamenting, adorning, laying out and
improving of the grounds of said parks. For that purpose, the committee
may employ such workmen and purchase or contract for such material as
the Committee deems necessary, subject, however, to the ultimate control
of the Governing Body.
§ 13-1.2. Board of Recreational Commissioners to Supervise
Facilities. [Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 66-2]
It shall be the responsibility of the Board of Recreational Commissioners
to supervise and regulate all recreational activities in the borough parks,
and for that purpose develop rules and regulations pertaining to the use
of recreational facilities in such parks. The Board may employ custodians
and recreational directors for the park and define their duties. The number
of custodians and recreational directors that may be appointed and the
salaries for such positions shall be set by the Governing Body.
§ 13-1.3. Admission and Usage Fees. [Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 66-3;
Ord. #1021]
Fees to be charged for the use of park facilities shall be set by the Governing
Body but collection of such fees shall be the responsibility of the Board
of Recreation Commissioners. Such fees shall be placed in a recreation
fund to be expended for the improvement of recreational facilities and
for the purchasing of equipment and supplies used in connection with the
recreational facilities.
a. Fees:
Type Amount
Sports Camp/Instructional Clinic $10/Child
Adult/Child Competitive Recreational
League
$25/Game
Trainers/Lessons $75/Annual permit fee
b. Definitions:
ADULT/CHILD COMPETITIVE RECREATIONAL LEAGUE — Shall mean
a team or teams, whether child or adult, intramural or travel team(s)
that competitively play in league officiated games.
§ 12-2.15 GENERAL § 13-1.3
1:235
§ 13-1.4. Amusement for Gain Restricted. [Ord. #433; 1972 Code
§ 66-4]
No amusement for gain or for which a charge is made shall be conducted
in a park without the consent of the Governing Body, and such amusement
must be conducted in accordance with any ordinance pertaining thereto.
§ 13-1.5. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 66-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person in any park to:
SPORTS CAMP/INSTRUCTIONAL CLINIC — Shall mean any camp or
clinic that involves three or more participants and profits from such
participants and offers instruction in athletics or any other event.
TRAINERS/LESSONS — Shall mean individual training for up to two
participants that involve instructional lessons for the participants.
a. Disturb the peace, or use any profane, obscene or blasphemous
language.
b. Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act.
c. Permit any assault, battery or engage in fighting.
d. Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic liquor in any park.
e. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving or painting material, water lines or other public utilities or parts
or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary
markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
f. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition.
g. Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters
of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
h. Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles or broken
glass, ashes, paper boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse
or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in
or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but
shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided;
where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall
be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 13-1.3 BRIELLE CODE § 13-1.5
1:236
§ 13-1.6. Other Regulations. [Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 66-6; Ord
#964]
i. Prevent any person from using any park or any of its facilities or
interfere with such use in compliance with this Chapter and the rules
applicable to such use.
j. Violate any rule or regulation for the use of the park made or approved
by Board of Recreation Commissioners.
a. It shall be unlawful to engage in special activities including flying model
airplanes, golf practicing, ice skating, games and picnics, except at
locations specifically designated for such activities by the Board of
Recreation Commissioners. Areas for such activities may be reserved
by groups for use at specified times.
b. It shall be unlawful to drive or park any automobile except on a street,
driveway or parking lot in any park, or leave any such vehicle in any
place other than one established for public parking.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in any
area in the park in excess of 20 miles an hour.
d. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any park, and it
shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is
on a leash not more than eight feet long.
e. It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle or motor bike in the park
unless the operator holds a license from the State, and unless such
vehicle or bike is licensed by the State.
f. It shall be unlawful to skateboard on the tennis courts, bocce courts or
the shuffleboard courts.
g. Parking and use by groups. [Amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 1079]
1. Buses, trucks, cargo vans, and shuttle buses with seats for more
than 15 people may not park at any Borough-owned or -controlled
park, playground or playing field without having obtained a permit
from the Brielle Parks and Recreation Department unless such bus
is related to a scheduled game with a team or organization having a
lease or permit from the Borough. Applications must be completed
and submitted with the proper fee of $125. Applications for a bus
permit must be submitted at least 10 days in advance to allow the
Borough time to process the application. If an application form is
not received within 10 days prior to arrival, there will be a late fee
of $10. Only persons who have secured advance bus permits may
park, load or unload buses within the Borough-owned or -controlled
park, playground or playing field parking lot or adjacent areas.
Permits shall be limited so that no more than two buses are
scheduled to park at the Borough-controlled park, playground or
playing field parking lot on any given day. Permits must be
§ 13-1.5 GENERAL § 13-1.6
1:237
§ 13-1.7. Enforcement. [Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 66-7]
The park custodians and the members of the Brielle Police Department shall
enforce the provisions of this Chapter and any other ordinance or regulation
relating to the use of the park.
§ 13-1.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #433; 1972 Code § 66-8]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Chapter shall,
upon conviction, be liable to the penalty as established in Chapter 1 Section
1-5.
§ 13-2. TENNIS FACILITIES: FEES.
§ 13-2.1. Charge for Use by Families. [Ord. #452; Ord. #532; 1972
Code § 34-1]
A uniform charge per family per year may be charged to any family desiring
to use the tennis facilities, for which a permit shall be issued in accordance
with regulations duly adopted by the Recreation Commission.
§ 13-2.2. Instruction Charge for Children. [Ord. #452; Ord. #532;
1972 Code § 34-2]
A uniform charge shall be made to each child desiring to avail himself or
herself of tennis instructions at the park facilities and shall be in accordance
with regulations duly adopted by the Recreation Committee.
displayed in the windshield of the bus while the bus is within the
Borough-controlled park, playground or playing field parking lot.
2. Persons who park, load or unload buses within the Borough-owned
or -controlled park, playground or playing field parking lot or
adjacent areas without first obtaining a permit shall, upon
conviction before the Municipal Judge duly authorized to entertain
and hear such complaints, be subject to the penalties as provided in
Chapter 1, § 1-5, General Penalty, at the discretion of said Judge.
3. Any group or entity, including corporate and nonprofit groups,
desiring to use, visit or hold an event at any Borough-owned or -
controlled park, playground or playing field, shall first obtain a
permit from the Borough for such use, visit or event, unless such
use, visit or event is related to a scheduled game with a team or
organization having a lease or permit from the Borough. For
purposes of this section, any group of more than 15 people shall be
deemed a "group or entity" subject to the permit requirements set
forth herein.
§ 13-1.6 BRIELLE CODE § 13-2.3
1:238
§ 13-2.3. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. #452; Ord. #532;
1972 Code § 34-3]
Borough personnel shall administer and enforce the fees and charges in
accordance with the rules and regulations, practices and policies
promulgated and adopted by the Recreation Commission.
§ 13-3. CURTIS HOUSE.
§ 13-3.1. Fees for Use Established. [Ord. #630; 1972 Code § 46-A-1;
New]
The annual fee for use of the main meeting room and kitchen area by
scheduled bona fide organizations meeting more than six times a year shall
be $150.
The fee for a one time use of the main meeting room and kitchen area by a
bona fide organization shall be $50.
§ 13-3.2. Application Forms. [Ord. #630; 1972 Code § 46A-2]
Every organization requesting the use of the Curtis House will complete an
application form and return it to Borough Hall prior to using Curtis House.
Application forms are to be made out, in duplicate, and can be obtained at
the Borough Clerk's Office in Borough Hall.
§ 13-3.3. Certificate of Liability Insurance Required. [Ord. #630;
1972 Code § 46A-3; New]
All bona fide organizations shall submit to the Borough Clerk a Certificate of
Liability Insurance in a form and amount to be approved by the Governing
Body.
§ 13-4. NIENSTEDT ISLAND.
§ 13-4.1. Purpose of the Ordinance. [Ord. #658; 1972 Code § 64-1]
§ 13-4.2. Renaming of the Island. [Ord. #658; 1972 Code § 64-2]
a. To carry out the provisions set forth in the deed between Katherine
Nienstedt and Margaret N. Pangerl (grantors) and the Borough of
Brielle (grantee).
b. To regulate the use of the island and limit indiscriminate recreational
activities for the benefit of the Borough of Brielle and its citizenry.
c. To protect and preserve the natural state of the terrain and vegetation
of the island while allowing for the enjoyment of those surroundings by
the general public.
a. Henceforth the island in Block 112, Lot 1 formerly known as Osborn
Island shall be proclaimed Nienstedt Island which includes the lands
§ 13-2.3 GENERAL § 13-4.2
1:239
§ 13-4.3. Maintenance of Monument. [Ord. #658; 1972 Code § 64-3]
The Borough of Brielle shall be responsible for the preservation and
maintenance of the monument situated on the island and shall use all
reasonable means to insure its existence.
§ 13-4.4. Restrictions of Use of Island. [Ord. #658; 1972 Code
§ 64-4; Ord. #894]
and premises conveyed to the Borough of Brielle by the deed found in
book 4167 pages 896 to 900, County of Monmouth.
b. The Borough of Brielle shall honor, protect and preserve a monument in
favor of the individual owner-grantors and shall protect, preserve and
defend the designation "Nienstedt Island" now and forever.
a. There shall be no promotion or pursuit of any and all forms of economic
or commercial development or gain on the island.
b. There shall be no building or other structure, permanent or temporary,
erected on the island except as is reasonably necessary for the
preservation and control of the island.
c. The lands and premises hereafter known as Nienstedt Island shall
remain in their natural state with no disturbance of the natural terrain
or vegetation thereon except as is provided herein.
d. No overnight camping or other use of the island shall be permitted after
sundown without the use of a permit as provided herein.
e. No radios, stereos or other sound producing equipment shall be
operational between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
f. No person on said island shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove
any tree or plant or injure the bark or pick flowers or seed of any tree or
plant, dig or otherwise disturb any vegetation or in any other way injure
the natural terrain, with the exception of the cutting and hauling away
of dead trees where such trees have been identified and marked for
removal and with such removal to be done by personnel designated by
the Governing Body.
g. Any person violating amendment 7:255.24 to N.J.S.A. 13:1B30 of the
Game Code declaring the Brielle shores of the Manasquan River to be a
waterfowl sanctuary shall also be in violation of this section.
h. No person shall deposit, leave, throw, cast, lay, drop, or discharge into
or on said island any waste material. All such rubbish or waste shall be
carried away from the island by the person(s) responsible for its
presence, and properly disposed of elsewhere.
i. No person shall bring alcoholic beverages or drink or use same at any
time while on the island.
§ 13-4.2 BRIELLE CODE § 13-4.4
1:240
§ 13-4.5. Unauthorized Use of Island. [Ord. #658; 1972 Code § 64-5;
Ord. #774; Ord. No. 1062-2017]
§ 13-4.6. (Reserved)19
§ 13-4.7. Enforcement. [Ord. #658; 1972 Code § 64-7]
Any peace officer, whether local, County, State or Federal or any person so
designated by the Governing Body shall diligently enforce the provisions of
this section and shall have the authority to eject from the island any person
or persons acting in violation thereof.
The persons shall further have the authority to seize and confiscate any
property, thing or device on the island so used in violation of this section.
§ 13-4.8. Restrictive Signs. [Ord. #658; 1972 Code § 64-8]
The Borough shall maintain restrictive signs on the perimeter of the island.
§ 13-4.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #658; 1972 Code § 64-9]
Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty as established in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
j. No person shall kindle, build, maintain or use a fire except under the
following conditions:
1. Said person must have a permit issued by the Borough Fire Official.
2. Fires may be built along the beaches only and never in the wooded
or grassy areas.
3. Fires shall be built on only those beach areas designated by the
Governing Body and as set forth in the Rules and Regulations.
k. There shall be no smoking of cigars or cigarettes and no lighting of
matches in the grassy or wooded areas of the island.
l. All statutes, regulations, ordinances and other applicable rules and
regulations regarding disorderly persons shall apply herein and shall be
enforced as part of the terms and conditions of this ordinance, and any
person in violation thereof shall be subject to punishment as provided
by law.
a. No individual or group of individuals shall be permitted on the island
between sunset and sunrise due to the environmentally sensitive nature
of the island.
b. No dogs or any other domestic animal shall be permitted on the Island
due to the environmentally sensitive nature of the area.
19.Editor's Note: Subsection 13-4.6, "Permits," previously contained herein, has been
repealed in entirety by Ordinance No. 774.
§ 13-4.4 GENERAL § 13-5
1:241
§ 13-5. MUNICIPAL EASEMENTS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY.
§ 13-5.1. Leash Required. [Ord. No. 1062-2017]
It shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be on any municipal easement or
right-of-way unless said dog is on a leash not more than eight feet long.
§ 13-5.2. Picnicking Prohibited. [Ord. No. 1062-2017]
It shall be unlawful for any individual or group to picnic, or congregate on
any municipal easement or right-of-way.
§ 13-5.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1062-2017]
Given the environmentally sensitive nature of the municipal easements
designated as "water access points" by the Borough of Brielle
Environmental Commission, the minimum fine for violation of subsection
5-2.4 Soiling by pets; Removal of feces Required and Section 3-3 Anti-
Dumping Regulations shall be $500.
§ 13-5.4. Water Access Point Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. 1062-2017]
It shall be unlawful to swim or enter the water at any water access point
except to launch a small non-motorized watercraft.
Chapter 14
FIRE PREVENTION AND SAFETY
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1972
Code §§ 52-1, 52-1.1, 52-4, 67A-1-67A-3 and Ordinance Nos. 354,
433, 445, 485, 679, 684, 742 and 785.
§ 14-1. TITLE. [Ord. #990, § 14-1]
This chapter shall be known as the "Fire Prevention Code of Brielle
Borough."
§ 14-2. ADOPTION OF UNIFORM FIRE CODE. [Ord. #990, § 14-2]
The New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:7, 5:71, 5:72, 5:73 and
5:75 et seq., and all amendments and supplements thereto, is thereby
adopted by Brielle Borough for the purpose of establishing a system for
the enforcement of minimum fire safety standards throughout the Borough
as mandated by the State of New Jersey, so as to improve the safety of
the public by promoting the control of fire hazards. The standards, rules
and regulations set forth in the Code shall be and the same are hereby
incorporated in this Chapter, three copies of which have been and are now
on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
The Borough shall recognize and hereby adopt the standards of the National
Fire Protection Association Code and supplements and amendments
§ 13-5 BRIELLE CODE § 14-2
1:242
thereto, which the Bureau of Fire Prevention may refer to in the
enforcement of this Chapter. The above-referenced codes are incorporated
herein as if set forth in length.
§ 14-3. ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF BUREAU OF FIRE
PREVENTION. [Ord. #990, § 14-3; amended 2-11-2019 by Ord. No.
1082]
Pursuant to Section 203 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983. c. 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-203), this chapter shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention of the Borough of Sea Girt in accordance with the terms of a
Shared Service Agreement dated December 17, 2018, with an effective date
of January 1, 2019.
A Bureau of Fire Prevention shall herein be established within the Board to
enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the codes and regulations adopted
under it in all buildings, structures and premises within the Borough of
Brielle, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Code. In
addition, the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be charged with the duties
and enforcement of such other ordinances and rules and regulations that
pertain to fire prevention and control. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall
carry out periodic inspections of life-hazard uses required by the Uniform
Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs. Said Bureau
shall be under the supervision and control of the Fire Official or such other
officers as may be designated by the Governing Body. Funds that may be
necessary to support the operation of the Bureau, shall be raised by the
Borough of Brielle in the manner prescribed by law. Pursuant to the Uniform
Fire Code, the Bureau shall be operated by a fire official herein known as
the "Fire Official" and enforcement and support personnel under his/her
supervision having the minimum qualifications and certifications set forth
under the Uniform Fire Code. The salary of the Fire Official, Fire Prevention
Specialists and other personnel employed by the Bureau shall be to the
extent permitted by law, established by the Borough of Brielle. The annual
budget for the operation of the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be established
by the Borough. The Governing Body of the Borough of Brielle shall have the
authority to appoint, promote and terminate personnel within the Bureau
but each person so terminated, shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard
by the Mayor and Council, consistent with recognized standards of due
process.
§ 14-4. PERMITS REQUIRED. [Ord. #990, § 14-4]
It shall be unlawful to engage in any business activity involving the
handling, storage or use of hazardous substances, materials or devices;
or to maintain, store or handle materials; to conduct processes which
produce conditions hazardous to life or property; to install equipment used
in connection with such activities; or to establish a place of assembly
without first obtaining a permit from the Fire Official. Permits shall be
obtained from the Bureau of Fire Prevention for any of those activities listed
§ 14-2 GENERAL § 14-4
1:243
in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.27 and any amendments or supplements thereto. The
fee paid for said permits shall be established in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.9(c) and any amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 14-5. ADDITIONAL REQUIRED INSPECTIONS. [Ord. #990, § 14-5]
§ 14-6. SITE PLANS. [Ord. #990, § 14-6]
a. In addition to the inspections and fee required pursuant to the Uniform
Fire Safety Act and the regulations of the Department of Community
Affairs, the following registration, inspection and fees shall be required.
All required fees shall be paid by the business owner.
b. (Reserved)20
c. (Reserved)21
d. (Reserved)22
e. All multiple family dwellings where as herein defined shall be classified
as Type 8 use and shall be subject to registration and fees as set forth
herein with the exception that the full fee shall be paid for only one
structure, with the remaining structures subject to a fee of 1/2 of that
set forth for other Type 8 uses. Inspections of multiple family dwellings
shall include, but not limited to, common areas, basements, laundry
rooms, corridors, vestibules which are accessible to occupants, with the
exclusion of the dwelling units therein. The building's owner shall be
responsible for payment of all fees.
f. All uses as set forth under this section shall be inspected annually and
subject to the registration and fees set forth herein.
a. The Bureau shall review any site or subdivision plan for the purpose of
fire prevention, as to the location and size of fire lanes, zones and areas,
water mains, drafting locations, fire hydrants, and any other such
information as the Brielle Fire Company #1 and or their designated
agents may deem necessary or be required. Said submission of plans to
the Bureau shall include any plans submitted to the Planning Board for
the development, construction or improvement of properties in the
Borough of Brielle. Said reviews shall include, but not be limited to, any
construction or improvement of any use group, as defined in Article 3 of
the latest edition of the BOCA National Building Code adopted by the
20.Editor's Note: Former Subsection b, regarding required fees, was repealed 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 1082. This ordinance also provided that the required fees would henceforth be as
promulgated by the Borough of Sea Girt Bureau of Fire Prevention.
21.Editor's Note: Former Subsection c, regarding fees for certain business uses, was repealed
2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 1082. This ordinance also provided that the required fees would
henceforth be as promulgated by the Borough of Sea Girt Bureau of Fire Prevention.
22.Editor's Note: Former Subsection d, regarding fees for two or more uses sharing a
building or premises, was repealed 2-11-2019 by Ord. No. 1082. This ordinance also
provided that the required fees would henceforth be as promulgated by the Borough of
Sea Girt Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 14-4 BRIELLE CODE § 14-6
1:244
§ 14-7. FIRE ZONES AND FIRE LANES. [Ord. #990, § 14-7]
State of New Jersey, as amended. Prior to the issuance of any building
permit, the above projects must receive Bureau approval.
b. (Repealed)23
a. Whenever it is deemed necessary for public safety, the Bureau and or
their designated agents may require the owners or operators of any
uses in Sections 14-5 and 14-6, all life-hazard uses or other similar uses,
to designate fire zones at entrances, loading doors or access ways to
said premises and fire lanes in driveways leading from the street to the
fire zones, as well as drafting locations. The size of the fire zone, fire
lanes and or drafting locations shall set at the discretion of the Bureau
and or its designated agents based upon the size of property and other
such facts as the Bureau deems necessary. A diagram demonstrating
the proper manner of painting and lettering of fire zones and fire lanes
shall be made available by the Bureau or its designated agents.
All line striping and lettering shall be legible at all times. A metal fire
zone or fire lane sign shall be provided, erected, and maintained by the
owner or operator of the property and shall be placed and directed by
the Bureau and or its designated agents. A diagram of a fire zone or
fire lane shall be made available by the Bureau and or its designated
agents.
b. No person shall, at any time, park a motor vehicle, locate a garbage
dumpster or in any other manner obstruct a fire zone or fire lane,
drafting locations of fire area or park within 10 feet of a fire hydrant,
whether or not that motor vehicle is occupied or the motor running. If
at any time, due to weather conditions, vandalism or any extenuating
circumstances, one of the following fire zone or fire lane signs or fire
zone or fire lane surface markings are not visible, the remaining
markings or signs visible shall be deemed sufficient to provide notice of
the existence of such fire zone or fire lane. If the Bureau determines
that existing fire zone, fire lane and or drafting locations signs have not
been properly marked or delineated and or proper documentation of
said markings is not on file, new markings as outlined in this subsection
may be required. All drafting locations as required hereunder shall be
constructed, designated and maintained as per the diagram available
from the Bureau.
c. The Bureau of Fire Prevention and or its designated agents are
authorized to tow motor vehicles and remove all obstructions from any
fire zone, fire lane, fire area or drafting locations. The Bureau and or its
designated agents are also authorized to tow motor vehicles and
remove obstructions parked or standing within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
23.Editor's Note: Former Subsection b, regarding required fees, was repealed 2-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 1082. This ordinance also provided that the required fees would henceforth be as
promulgated by the Borough of Sea Girt Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 14-6 GENERAL § 14-7
1:245
§ 14-8. AMENDMENTS TO STATE FIRE PREVENTION CODE
PURSUANT TO N.J.A.C. 5:71-28. [Ord. #990, § 14-8]
All motor vehicles and other obstructions which are removed pursuant
to this section may be stored in a storage area approved by the Bureau,
its designated agents or the Brielle Police Department. The cost of
removal and storage shall be charged to the owner of the vehicle or
other obstruction, and the charge shall be paid prior to release of said
vehicle or obstruction. The Bureau and or its designated agents shall
give notice to the owner of the motor vehicle or obstruction, if the
owner can be identified within 24 hours after removal of the vehicle or
obstruction.
d. The Fire Prevention Bureau Fire Official, Fire Prevention Specialists
and the Brielle Police Department shall have concurrent jurisdiction to
enforce the provisions of this section of this chapter. For any summons
issued by the Bureau of Fire Prevention, said fines shall be dedicated to
the Bureau of Fire Prevention via interlocal service agreement for the
enforcement of the Code, and court costs associated and dedicated to
the Brielle Borough Municipal Court. Said fees are to be reimbursed to
the Bureau on a quarterly basis.
e. In the event that said designated fire lane, fire zone or fire area has
been previously approved and marked accordingly and properly
documented as existing, said area shall be deemed as having met the
intent of the Code and shall be subject to the penalties section of this
Chapter, if otherwise not maintained or obstructed.
a. Rapid Entry System Required. The Fire Official shall require a key box
to be installed in an accessible location where immediate access is
necessary to verify the existence of a fire or other emergency in
buildings equipped with or required to be equipped with fire detection
and or fire suppression systems or elevator equipment. The building's
owner shall be responsible for compliance. The key box will be of a U.L.
type and shall contain keys necessary to access areas and shall be
installed in a manner approved by the Brielle Fire Prevention Bureau's
Fire Official. Compliance shall be required within 60 days of written
notice of violation. Control of the master key for the key boxes shall be
placed in the control of the Brielle Police Department. The
requirements of this section shall not be applied to any Municipal or
Board of Education Building that is utilized for a public purpose.
[Amended 3-11-2019 by Ord. No. 1083]
b. False Alarms.
1. (F-504.1). Any property containing a fire sprinkler alarm or a fire
alarm system shall not have activated more than three false fire
alarms in any one calendar year. Any activations of four or more
false alarms in said calendar year shall be deemed to have violated
this section and shall be subject to penalties and additional action
as required.
§ 14-7 BRIELLE CODE § 14-8
1:246
§ 14-9. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. #990, § 14-9]
§ 14-10. APPEALS. [Ord. #990, § 14-10]
Any owner or operator of a building or property affected by the provisions
issued pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code, who shall disagree with the
determination of the Fire Prevention Bureau and or its designated agents
shall have the right of appeal in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.19 entitled
"Appeals."
Chapter 15
SEWER AND WATER
§ 15-1. WATER-SEWER UTILITY DEPARTMENT.
§ 15-1.1. Creation; Supervision. [Ord. #573; 1972 Code § 88-1]
There is hereby created a Water-Sewer Utility Department of the Borough
which shall be under the general control and supervision of the Borough
2. False fire alarms; definition (F-502.1). An alarm which results in
notification to the Fire Department for causes other than those for
which the system was designated or intended to react. The alarm
shall not be considered to be false if caused by a power or
telephone line interruption.
a. Anyone who obstructs a fire zone, fire lane, fire area, drafting or
pumping station or fire hydrant with a motor vehicle in violation of this
section of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50 for
each offense.
b. The owner of a garbage dumpster or other obstruction located in a
designated fire zone, fire lane, fire area, or drafting/pumping locations
within 10 feet of a fire hydrant, in violation of Section 14-7a, b, and c of
this Chapter, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 per day.
c. Any person or corporation violating any other provision of this Chapter,
failing to comply with any order made pursuant to this Chapter or
building in violation of plans and specifications submitted to the Fire
Prevention Bureau and or its designated agents and approved pursuant
to the terms of this Chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 per day.
d. Any penalties under the Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:57-1) shall be
adopted for the purpose of enforcement against any person or persons,
firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions of the
Code other than the violation of fire zone, fire lane, and fire area
regulations as herein set forth except the sanctions specified in
paragraph c above.
§ 14-8 GENERAL § 15-1.1
1:247
Council and of such Superintendent or employees as may be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council.
§ 15-1.2. Duties of Superintendent. [Ord. #573; 1972 Code § 88-2]
Any Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility Department, hereinafter
referred to as the "Department," pursuant to this section shall:
§ 15-1.3. Authority of Department Employees. [Ord. #573; 1972
Code § 88-10]
No agent or employee of the Water-Sewer Utility Department shall have
the authority to bind the Department or the Borough by any promise,
agreement or representation not provided by this section unless such
authority is given in writing and approved by a resolution of the Governing
Body of the Borough.
§ 15-1.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #573; 1972 Code § 88-11]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
section shall be liable, upon convictions, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
a. Exercise general supervision of the operation and maintenance of the
water-sewer system, including any and all lines now or hereafter
installed, any and all machinery, equipment, mains, pumps, pipes,
meters and all other mechanical features pertaining thereto.
b. Execute all orders of the Governing Body pertaining to his duties and to
the general management of the Sewer Department.
c. Report all work done in the Department, including all materials
purchased and sold, all sewer service, collection lines installed,
laterals, manholes, meters and connections made and other pertinent
data and keep a complete record thereof.
d. Be responsible for making analysis reports when required under the
rules of the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection
and of any and all state agencies having jurisdiction over water and
sewer matters, and shall file such reports with such state agencies as
shall be required.
e. Be responsible for and supervise all extensions, repairs or additions.
f. Have the power to issue requisitions for the purchase of materials and
supplies in accordance with instructions from the Council and
ordinances of the Borough.
g. Keep a permanent record of the location of all mains, collection lines
and every other thing pertaining to the water and sewer collection
system.
§ 15-1.1 BRIELLE CODE § 15-2
1:248
§ 15-2. SEWERS.
§ 15-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #573; 1972 Code § 88-6; New]
§ 15-2.2. Mandatory Connection to Sewerage System Required;
Connection Fee. [Ord. #573; 1972 Code §§ 88-6, 88-7; New; Ord.
#797]
a. As used in this Chapter and unless a different meaning appears from
the context, the following words shall have the following meanings:
AUTHORITY — Shall mean the South Monmouth Regional Sewerage
Authority.
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Brielle in the County of
Monmouth, New Jersey.
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure heretofore or
hereafter constructed and designed or used for dwelling or other use or
occupancy by persons, either temporary or permanent.
COLLECTOR — Shall mean the water/sewer rent collector of the
Borough of Brielle.
CONNECTION DATE — Shall mean the day following the service of a
notice from the Borough that a sewer is available to serve a building,
except that in the case of a building completed subsequent to the
availability of a sewer to the premises on which a building is located,
"connection date" shall mean the date of the initial occupancy of said
building or the date of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
therefor, whichever of said dates shall be the earlier.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Water-Sewer Utility Department. Any
sewer or main designed or used for the collection or disposal of sanitary
sewage with the Borough.
SEWER — Shall mean any sewer or main designed or used for the
collection or disposal of sanitary sewage within the Borough.
SUPERINTENDENT — Shall mean the Superintendent of the Water-
Sewer Utility Department.
UNIT OR USER — Shall mean that combination of elements whereby
sewage flow generated therefrom is equal in strength, volume and
delivery flow rate characteristics as would be received from a singlefamily
residence.
a. The owner of each building located on property which now or hereafter
fronts upon a sewer or is located upon any street in the Borough in
which a sewer is now or hereafter constructed shall connect such
building and property with the sewer prior to the connection date for
the purpose of delivering sewage from each building into the sewer.
§ 15-2 GENERAL § 15-2.2
1:249
§ 15-2.3. Rules and Regulations. [New]
b. Where a building is constructed after the date of the commencement of
operations of a public sanitary sewerage system, the building must
connect prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
c. Whenever a sewer main is installed in a public street, roadway, highway
or easement all properties lying adjacent to the public street, roadway,
highway or easement at a point where the main exists are hereby
compelled to connect to the sewer lateral within 90 days of availability
and notice of sewer service.
d. Should any property owner fail or neglect to connect the sewer from the
building to the public street, roadway, highway or easement, sewer
lateral, pursuant to subsections a, b and c hereinabove, the owner shall
be given notice by a proper officer of the Borough Health Department
and sewer connection must be made within 30 days after the date of
receipt of the notice. The notice shall be served upon the owner
personally or by mailing the notice certified mail to the owner's last
known post office address as shown on the tax records of the Borough
of Brielle.
e. Any property owner who shall violate this section by failing to comply
with any of its provisions within 30 days after service of final notice of
availability of such public sewer service may be subject to a fine of $25
for the first day of non-compliance and a fine of $10 per day for each
day of non-compliance thereafter. Each day after the expiration of the
30 days, in which the provisions of this Chapter are not complied with
shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
f. Subsequent to the connection to the public sewer system by the
property owner, the property owner or any successor in title to the
property shall be responsible for the payment of the quarterly sewer
charges.
g. Connection Fee.
1. A sewer connection fee of $500 shall be paid by each user or unit as
defined herein.
2. An additional sewer connection fee shall be charged by the
Borough acting as the agent for the South Monmouth Regional
Sewerage Authority in compliance with the terms of the Interlocal
Agreement between the Borough and the Authority.
The amount of the fee to be charged shall be determined by the
South Monmouth Regional Sewerage Authority on an annual basis
and this amount shall be added to the connection fee charged by
the Borough of Brielle in accordance with paragraph g, 1.
a. For the purposes of this Chapter, a property shall be deemed to front on
the system if any of its boundaries abut a street or easement at a point
§ 15-2.2 BRIELLE CODE § 15-2.3
1:250
opposite a sewer in such street or easement, which is part of a sewer
of the Borough, or if a building is located upon a street or easement in
which a sewer is now or hereafter constituted.
b. Every connection required by this Chapter shall be made in a manner to
discharge into the sewer all waste and sanitary sewage originating in
the building in accordance with and subject to the rules and regulations
as well as sewer system standards heretofore or hereafter adopted by
the Borough, which connection shall be subject to the right of
inspection and approval by the Borough. All connection charges,
service charges and inspection fees imposed by the Borough shall be
paid when due.
c. Each consumer must have installed at his own expense a stop and waste
valve on the service pipe inside the building. The valve is to be installed
within one foot of where the service pipe enters the building and must
be so located and arranged that the water supply may be shut off
without difficulty.
d. All water and sewer service connections from the curb to and in the
building and land surrounding the same must be made by a plumber
registered and licensed under and in accordance with the ordinances of
the Borough of Brielle heretofore adopted or by the division of health of
the Borough and shall be inspected as hereinafter provided.
e. Where several premises or several houses, buildings, stores, apartment
units, persons or consumers in the same premises are supplied by the
same service pipe, each one shall be responsible for all the others
connected to the service pipe.
f. Under no circumstances shall curb stops be opened or closed by any
person not an authorized employee of the Water-Sewer Utility
Department, except that a licensed plumber may open or close a curb
stop to test his work or to make necessary repairs. In all cases where a
licensed plumber tests his work or makes repairs in unoccupied
premises, he shall, upon completion of his work, leave the curb stop
closed, and, upon failure or neglect so to do, he shall be liable for such
fine or penalty as may be imposed for violations of this Chapter. Any
unauthorized person who shall turn on water at the curb or building, or
for any other purpose, shall be liable for such fine or penalty as is
determined for violation of this Chapter and as otherwise provided by
law.
g. No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, meter, line, sewer, appurtenance or any equipment which
is part of the municipal system of the water works and the sewer works
and plants of the Borough of Brielle.
h. In case of the violation of any provision of this section, or any
amendments thereof or supplements thereto, the Water-Sewer Utility
Department may shut off the water supply to the premises and the same
shall not be again supplied until such violation or violations have been
§ 15-2.3 GENERAL § 15-2.3
1:251
§ 15-2.4. Fees; Rates; Charges; Payment of Bills. [Ord. 573; Ord.
#595; Ord. #613; Ord. #632; Ord. #644; Ord. #681; Ord. #690;
1972 Code § 88-7; New]
removed and/or corrected. This section shall be in addition to the
penalties provided for any other violation of this Chapter.
i. As to any commercial or industrial use, the owner shall install such
additional facilities as may be necessary to accept and dispose of
industrial wastes emanating herefrom and shall connect such facilities
with the sewerage system, pursuant to the rules and regulations
adopted or to be adopted by the governing body or such other agency of
municipal government as the governing body shall designate. The rules
and regulations shall be on file in the offices of the Borough Clerk or
such other location or locations as the governing body shall designate.
j. All sewerage connections, repairs and taps shall be made and all such
work done at the expense of the applicant who shall also furnish
materials necessary for such work.
k. Applications for such connections shall be made to the water/sewer
rent collector and a permit shall be issued after any fees due have been
paid and approval in writing from the Superintendent has been
received.
l. Excavations shall be made in compliance with the ordinance provisions
relating to making excavations in streets.
m. Premises not served by sewage system, houses, buildings, stores,
premises and apartment units being served only by the water supply
system and having no connection to the sewer system shall pay only the
water service fee.
n. Any terms or conditions of existing or future agreements or contracts
between the Borough of Brielle and users of the sanitary sewer system
facilities which contain or address reservation of capacity of charges to
be collected which are inconsistent with Federal regulations which
relate to user charge systems are null and void.
a. There is hereby imposed an annual rental charge for the use,
occupation, maintenance and construction of the sewers and sewerage
system and disposal facilities in the Borough of Brielle, upon the owners
of the properties served thereby at the rates hereinafter set forth. An
annual minimum charge of $296 shall be made for each unit, which
minimum charge will pay for all sewerage based on water consumed, as
measured by the water meter, as set forth herein. The sum of $74 will
be billed quarterly allowing the consumer 38,000 gallons of water for
the quarter; any excess thereafter at $1.50 per 1,000 gallons, to be
billed each quarter.
b. If any sewer bill or any bill for the meter service charge remains unpaid
for 30 days after the bill is sent out, the water service may be shut off
§ 15-2.3 BRIELLE CODE § 15-2.4
1:252
§ 15-2.5. Inspections; Meters; Readings. [Ord. 573; Ord. #595; Ord.
#613; Ord. #632; Ord. #644; Ord. #667; Ord. #681; Ord. #690;
1972 Code § 88-7; § 88-8; New; Ord. #873]
without further notice. A charge of $25 shall be made for the sending
of any notice by reason of any delinquency. [Amended 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 1089]
c. A charge of $50 shall be made for any turn-off or turn-on based on
delinquency in payment, and water service shall not be restored until
this charge and payment of delinquency is made.
d. No second notices shall be issued and water service may be
discontinued after sewer accounts are 30 days or more in arrears.
e. Charges for sewer shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by New
Jersey Statute. Whenever a bill for sewer remains unpaid 60 days after
it has been rendered, the tax collector may file with the Recorder of
Monmouth County, a statement of lien claim.
f. Interest shall accrue and be due to the Borough on the unpaid balance
at the rate of 1 1/2% per month until such service charge, connection
fees or any other payments, and the interest thereon, shall be fully paid
to the Borough.
a. Entry. The Superintendent or any authorized employee of the Water-
Sewer Utility Department or any person or persons designated by the
Council of the Borough of Brielle for that purpose may at all reasonable
hours enter the premises of any water service consumer or any sewer
service user for the purpose of inspecting any water or sewer
connection or service equipment.
b. Pipes, Fixtures and Meters. The Superintendent or an authorized
employee of the Water-Sewer Utility Department is authorized to enter
any premises as hereinabove provided to examine the meter, read the
meter, make all necessary tests and repairs, remove and replace any
meter when deemed necessary, examine all pipes and fixtures for
conformity with the provisions of this Chapter and check the number of
fixtures connected to the sewer or water service.
c. Water and Sewer Service Connections. The Plumbing Inspector shall
examine all water and sewer service connections from the curb to and
in the building and land surrounding the same for conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter and shall properly report his findings to the
Water-Sewer Utility Department as provided by Borough ordinances
and regulations of the Borough's Board of Health.
d. Changes of Services, Connections or Fixtures. All changes of water or
sewer services, connections or fixtures must also be inspected by the
Plumbing Inspector of the Borough of Brielle and reported to the Water-
Sewer Utility Department.
§ 15-2.4 GENERAL § 15-2.5
1:253
§ 15-2.6. Prohibited Discharges and Connections. [Ord. #573; 1972
Code § 88-9; New; Ord. #819; Ord. No. 1013]
e. Installation of Meters. The meters installed hereafter shall be paid for
in full and shall include the actual cost of the entire installation of the
meter. All costs of operation and maintenance for all flow not directly
attributable to identifiable users such as flow infiltration and/or inflow
will be distributed based on the individual users proportionate
contribution to the total waste water leading from all uses.
f. Testing of Meters. In the event that the individual responsible for the
payment of a water bill is of the opinion that the water meter has given
an inaccurate reading, that individual may request that the water meter
be tested for accuracy.
Said test shall be performed by the Water Department using a testing
device certified by the State of New Jersey Department of Weights and
Measures.
The individual requesting the meter test must fill out a form, said form
being available at the Water Collector's Office in the Borough Hall, and
post a fee of $75 by cash or certified check. If the meter is found to
be defective in any way, said fee shall be refunded to the individual
who filed the form. In the event the meter is found to be accurate,
said fee shall be retained by the Water Utility to offset a portion of the
testing cost. Because the cost of meter testing is subject to increase by
the provider, the governing body reserves the right to amend the cost
of meter testing by resolution. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
1089]
a. Prohibited Sewer Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes in any
portion of the sewer system of the Borough of Brielle:
1. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
2. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per
million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
(a) Oils, fats, or grease except as may result from household use.
The owners of any installation, except private dwellings, from
which oils, fats or grease are liable to be discharged into the
sanitary sewers, shall at their own expense, install and
properly maintain a grease trap of a type approved by the
Borough Engineer or Plumbing Inspector for the Borough of
Brielle. Specifications for grease traps set forth in the National
Standard Plumbing Code of 1996, as adopted and amended by
the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code shall generally
apply to all grease traps installed and maintained.
(1) Maintenance/records. Commercial food establishments
shall establish a grease trap maintenance schedule based
§ 15-2.5 BRIELLE CODE § 15-2.6
1:254
upon the size and nature of the individual operation as
determined by the municipal Plumbing Inspector. That
schedule shall be of sufficient frequency to prevent the
trap from becoming overloaded with grease and solids
and shall prevent the discharge of grease and solids into
the downstream piping and municipal sewer system. Such
food establishments shall clean their grease trap(s) and
properly dispose of any grease removed there from at least
once every three calendar months or as often as needed.
Commercial food establishments shall maintain records of
said actions for a period of at least three years for the
purpose of inspection thereof by the Borough.
(2) Annual inspection/report. On or before April 1 of each
calendar year, a commercial food establishment shall
employ a licensed plumber, at its own expense, to conduct
an annual inspection of its grease trap(s) and connecting
wastewater lines to ensure that grease is being adequately
removed from the wastewater being discharged into the
sewer system. The licensed plumber shall provide a formal
inspection report to both the food establishment, the
Plumbing Inspector, and the Board of Health within three
weeks of said inspection. This report shall contain the
licensed plumber's observations with regard to the
efficiency of the grease trap, the amount of grease found in
the connecting wastewater lines, and the maintenance and
efficiency of the grease trap (with particular attention
given to whether the trap needs replacement or increased
capacity.)
(3) Penalties.
[a] Violation discovered. If, during an inspection, the
Borough discovers a violation of this paragraph (a),
the Borough shall notify the owner and/or operator of
the nature of said violation as soon as reasonably
possible and, in its discretion, issue (1) a summons in
accordance with the penalty provision set forth herein
or (2) a notice to the owner and/or operator for the
correction of said violation within seven days thereof.
If said violation is not corrected within such time, the
Borough shall issue a summons in accordance with
said penalty provision.
(4) Cost of repair or loss. Any commercial food establishment
that violates any of the provisions of this paragraph (a),
shall become liable to the Borough for any expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the Borough by reason of such
violation, including the cost of repairing or restoring any
sanitary sewer damaged by such violation, including
§ 15-2.6 GENERAL § 15-2.6
1:255
reasonable attorney fees charged to the Borough in
seeking to enforce this section.
(5) Enforcement. Except as where otherwise provided, the
Department of Public Works or persons so designated by
the Governing Body of the Borough shall have the
authority to enforce the terms of this paragraph (a).
3. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
4. Any garbage or trash.
5. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the
sewage works.
6. Any waters or waste having a pH lower than 5.3 or higher than 9.0
or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage
or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage
works; "ph" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight
of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.
7. Any waters or waste containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewer treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create any
hazard in receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
8. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such
character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is
required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
9. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
b. Prohibited Sewer Connections. No cellar drains, no area drains, no roof
leaders, no sump pumps, no down spouts shall be connected to the
sewer system.
1. In making such connections, repairs or in the usual and normal use
of the sewer system, any surface area water run-off is prohibited.
c. Every building or premises used or occupied by a sewer user where any
commercial or industrial operations are conducted or permitted which
result in the discharge into the sanitary sewer system of the city of any
of the products, waste products, or other substances in the manner and
to the extent prohibited in this Chapter, shall be equipped with an
adequate and suitable catch basin, grease trap, filter or other
interceptor, installed in such a manner that the products, waste
products or other substances herein set forth will not flow into or be
discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
§ 15-2.6 BRIELLE CODE § 15-2.6
1:256
§ 15-2.7. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. #498; 1972 Code § 72-4;
New]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
section shall forfeit and pay, upon conviction, a fine not to exceed the sum of
$1,000 for each and every offense or shall be imprisoned in the county jail
for not more than 90 days, or both, or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. Each day
that this section shall or may be violated shall constitute a separate violation
under the terms of this section.
§ 15-2.8. Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed. [New]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
section shall be and are hereby repealed, and any subsequent charges or
services under prior ordinances are hereby cancelled.
§ 15-2.9. When Effective. [New]
This section and Code herein shall take effect after final passage and
publication according to law.
§ 15-3. WATER.
§ 15-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. #573; 1972 Code § 88-6; New]
d. Procedure for Violations. Upon any violation of any provisions of this
section, the superintendent may take any or all of the following actions:
1. Discontinue sewer service and water service to the offending
premises.
2. Apply for appropriate court action, with the assistance of the
Borough attorney.
3. Require pretreatment facilities or other action to end the violation
forthwith.
4. Require the user to pay a surcharge equal to the cost to the
Borough of dealing with the offending matter.
5. Apply to the court for the levy of a fine for violation of this section.
a. As used in this Chapter and unless a different meaning appears from
the context, the following words shall have the following meanings:
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Brielle in the County of
Monmouth, State of New Jersey.
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure heretofore or
hereafter constructed and designed or used for dwelling or other use or
occupancy by persons, either temporary or permanent.
§ 15-2.6 GENERAL § 15-3.1
1:257
§ 15-3.2. Application for Water Service; Permits Required. [Ord.
#284; Ord. #496; 1972 Code § 87-1; New]
CLERK — Shall the Borough Clerk of Brielle.
COLLECTOR — Shall mean the water/sewer rent collector of the
Borough of Brielle.
CONNECTION DATE — Shall mean the date following the service of
a notice from the Borough that a water main is available to serve a
building.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Water-Sewer Utility Department of
the Borough of Brielle.
SUPERINTENDENT — Shall mean the Superintendent of the Water-
Sewer Utility Department of the Borough of Brielle.
a. No person shall make any water connection to any portion of the water
supply, or any extension of any water system in the Borough, except
upon proper permit issued by the Clerk after proper application has
been made, necessary permit and tapping fees and service charges
have been paid, as set forth in this Chapter and approval has been
secured in writing from the superintendent.
b. New consumers applying for water service shall also pay in advance the
minimum semi-annual rate from the date of application to the next July
1 or January 1, whichever is earlier.
c. The permit shall not be valid unless it shall bear on its face the receipt
of the collector indicating full payment of all the foregoing charges and
deposit.
d. All applications for water service and/or connections shall be made to
the Department.
e. All applications for water service shall continue in force from year to
year unless 30 days' notice in writing is given to the Department of a
desire to terminate the service.
f. The provisions of this section shall also apply to applications for the
extension of water distribution systems; provided, however, that such
applications may be made only where sufficient demand for service
warrants. The Borough shall determine the terms and conditions upon
which such applications or petitions may be granted. Extension of the
main lines in general will be made as local improvements, the benefits
of which are assessable to owners of abutting property in accordance
with the statutes made and provided.
g. Application for permits for any air-conditioning system; refrigeration
equipment, air-conditioning equipment or refrigeration and airconditioning
equipment requiring the use of water shall be made on
forms provided by the department accompanied by the necessary fees
§ 15-3.1 BRIELLE CODE § 15-3.2
1:258
§ 15-3.3. Tapping Restrictions; Tapping Charges. [Ord. #284; Ord.
#496; 1972 Code § 87-2; New]
§ 15-3.4. Excavation Requirements; Chapter 16 Shall Apply. [Ord.
#284; Ord. #496; 1972 Code § 87-3; New]
§ 15-3.5. Pipe Specifications; Inspections. [Ord. #284; Ord. #496;
1972 Code § 87-4; New; Ord. No. 1066-2018]
and three copies of complete plans and specifications and shall specify
the information requested.
a. No person other than the authorized tapper of the Borough or the
Department shall tap any distributing pipe or distributing main.
Following execution by the owner or his agent; as hereinafter set forth,
and upon presentation to the authorized tapper of the permit described
in subsection 15-3.2, the authorized tapper shall make the appropriate
tap or taps.
b. For all taps on new installations from main to curb stop, the owner shall
be charged the following amounts, the following to be paid to the Clerk
before issuance of the permit: 3/4 inch tap, $500; one inch tap, $600;
1 1/2 inch tap, $900; two inch tap, $1,200.
c. For any renewal of water taps between main and curb box, the owner
shall be charged the same amounts as set forth in paragraph b above
and in accordance with the rest of this Chapter.
a. All excavation and/or street opening by the owner or his agent shall be
in strict compliance with the ordinance provisions relating to making
excavations in street (Chapter 16 of the Code of the Borough of Brielle).
a. The Department shall supply the corporation and curb stops, curb box
and K copper tubing from the main to the curb box. If a tap of two
inches or larger is required the homeowner or contractor shall provide
K copper pipe. For any renewal of service, the Borough shall furnish
whatever supply is deemed necessary. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 1089]
b. The pipe from the curb stop to the inside of the building shall be K
copper of suitable size to supply a sufficient amount of water to the
number of fixtures in the building. It shall be placed below the frost line
and at a minimum depth of 3 1/2 inches.
c. The installation of pipes, stops and other fixtures between the main and
the hard stop (inside house connection) shall be subject to inspection
and approval of the Public Works Superintendent.
d. For all new construction and house upgrades, the water lines from the
main to the curb box shall be the same diameter as the water line
running from the curb box to the house.
§ 15-3.2 GENERAL § 15-3.5
1:259
§ 15-3.6. Owner Responsibility for Pipes and Fixtures; Repairs.
[Ord. #284; Ord. #496; 1972 Code § 87-5; New; Ord. #811; Ord. No.
1068-2018]
Any meter over one inch in size must be purchased by the home or
business owner through the Borough of Brielle Department of Water/
Sewer.
Any new construction where the plumbing inspector requires a larger
size line, such as a one inch, 1 1/2 or two inch line, said line must be the
same size from the house to the water main, including the curb stop.
The owner shall be required to upgrade the line from the house to the
curb stop and from the curb stop to the water main.
The line being replaced or upgraded is to be disconnected from the
house to the water main and this work shall be inspected by the Brielle
Water Department or its agents.
Any house where a meter pit is removed or any house where the
plumbing inspector has required that a larger water line be run to the
curb box, shall be the owner's responsibility to run the same diameter
pipe to the water main. In the event that any pit meter(s) are removed
it shall be the owner's responsibility to run the same diameter pipe to
the water main.
The purpose of this requirement is to ensure that all water lines that
provide water service to a specific location are of the same size and
diameter.
a. It is expressly understood that the property owner shall be responsible
for the maintenance of all pipes, stops, boxes and fixtures from the
point of the curb stop to and including the interior of the building. If the
owner shall fail to repair any break or leakage in the water service pipe,
or any fixture inside his building, the Borough reserves the right to
terminate the water supply to such building until appropriate repairs
have been made. If such repairs shall require a street opening, the
procedures and charges described in this Chapter for renewals shall be
applicable, except as modified by the following paragraph b.
b. In the case of an emergent situation, the owner may obtain verbal
approval of the Department of Public Works for a street opening. All
such work shall be in accordance with the standards of this Chapter,
and the appropriate procedures shall be followed as to the application
on the first business day following such verbal approval. If the owner or
his agent shall fail to comply with such procedures, the Borough may
complete the work at the cost and expense of the owner, the same to
become a lien on the property.
c. The homeowner shall be responsible to ensure that the contractor shall
furnish and install a coated, solid copper tracer wire #12 on all nonconductive
water/sewer service lines in the trench along the piping
§ 15-3.5 BRIELLE CODE § 15-3.6
1:260
§ 15-3.7. Opening or Closing of Curb Stops or Fire Hydrants
Restricted. [Ord. #284; 1972 Code § 87-6; New]
§ 15-3.8. Mandatory Connection to Water Distribution System. [Ord.
#284; Ord. #517; 1972 Code § 87-7; New; Ord. #844, § 1]
from the clean out to the water meter. A C-4 box shall be installed over
the water box at ground level.
The sewer pipe will have tracer wire attached from the curb clean out
to the house clean out. The street side sewer clean out shall be covered
by a C-4 box at ground level. This will apply to all new or upgraded
water or sewer lines in the Borough of Brielle and shall include any
unit, residential or commercial that is connected to either the water or
sewer system of the Borough of Brielle.
No polyurethane pipe is permitted in the municipal roadways. All water
lines are to be copper.
a. Except in case of an emergency, no person except the authorized tapper
of the Department, members of the Fire Department acting in their
capacity as firemen, or other persons duly authorized by the Borough
shall open or close any corporation or curb stops or fire hydrant or any
valve on any public or private main connected to the Borough water
system, unless such person shall first pay for the privilege and receive
the usual permit from the Department.
a. The owner of every existing residential, commercial or industrial
structure and the owner of every residential, commercial or industrial
structure hereafter to be constructed or acquired, which structure is or
may be occupied or used by human beings and which structure is
located on a street along the line of a water main which is a portion of
the water distribution system of the Borough of Brielle, shall connect
and hookup the service pipes of such structure directly to the
watermain. An indirect hookup, through the connection to another
structure, shall not be deemed to be in compliance herewith.
b. Where a building is constructed after the date of the commencement of
the operations of the water distribution system, the building must
connect prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
c. Whenever a water main is installed in any public street, roadway,
highway or easement, all properties lying adjacent to the public street,
roadway, highway or easement at a point where the main exists are
hereby compelled to connect to the water lateral within 90 days of
availability and notice of water services.
d. Should any property owner fail or neglect to connect the water lines
from the building to the public street, roadway, highway or easement
water main, pursuant to paragraphs a, b and c hereinabove, the owner
shall be given notice by a proper officer of the Borough Health
§ 15-3.6 GENERAL § 15-3.8
1:261
§ 15-3.9. Water Rates. [Ord. #284; Ord. #353; Ord. #414; Ord.
#526; 1972 Code § 87-8; New; Ord. #1037; Ord. No. 1066-2018]
Department. The water connection must be made within 30 days after
the date of receipt of the notice. The notice shall be served upon the
owner personally or by mailing such notice by certified mail to the
owner's last known post office address as shown on the tax records of
the Borough.
e. Any property owner who shall violate this section by failing to comply
with any of its provisions within 30 days after service of final notice of
availability of such public water service, may be subject to a fine of $25
for the first day of noncompliance, and fine of $10 per day for each day
of noncompliance thereafter. Each day after the expiration of the 30
days in which the provisions of this Chapter are not complied with shall
be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
f. Subsequent to the connection to the public water system by the
property owner, the property owner or any successor in title to the
property shall be responsible for the payment of the quarterly water
charges.
g. 1. The owner(s) of two or more heretofore existing residential
structures, which legally exist on one residential lot are hereby
exempt from the mandatory direct hookup provisions of paragraphs
a and c above. For residential structures which meet the criteria set
forth herein and have been satisfactorily inspected and approved
by the Department, an indirect hookup, through connection to
another residential structure or water main heretofore existing on
the property, shall be deemed to be in compliance with this
subsection.
2. Nothing provided herein shall exempt the owner(s) of each of the
individual residential structure(s) meeting the criteria of this
paragraph, from paying the annual minimum charge for water
service provided for in subsection 15-3.9 for each such structure(s)
existing on the lot.
3. This paragraph shall only apply to residential structures legally
existing on one residential lot as of the adoption date of this
paragraph. All residential structures hereafter constructed shall
comply with the provisions of paragraphs a and c above.
a. Rates for Water.
1. There shall be an annual minimum charge of $180 per year for
20,000 gallons of water. This rate shall be in effect on January 1st,
2015.
2. There shall be an annual minimum charge of $280 per year for
20,000 gallons of water. This rate shall be in effect on January 1st,
2017]
§ 15-3.8 BRIELLE CODE § 15-3.9
1:262
§ 15-3.10. Manasquan River Reservoir Treatment and Transmission
Charge. [Ord. #749; New; Ord. #939]
§ 15-3.11. Payment of Bills; Delinquent Payment; Liens; Restoration
of Water Service. [Ord. #284; Ord. #433; Ord. #547; 1972 Code
§ 87-9; New]
§ 15-3.12. Meters; Readings. [Ord. #284; Ord. #573; 1972 Code
§§ 87-10, 88-5; New]
Water Sewer rents shall be payable in four installments; March
15, June 15, September 15 and December 15 of each year, and
unless paid on or before these dates, the installments shall become
delinquent and shall be subject to a penalty in the amount of 8%
per annum.
a. Effective July 1, 2004 the Manasquan River Reservoir Treatment and
Transmission Charge (MRRTT) shall be $110 per quarter.
b. The funds raised by the addition of this surcharge shall be placed in a
dedicated account to be utilized to defray the cost of debt service
incurred by the Borough of Brielle as a result of the Borough's
participation in the Manasquan River Reservoir System.
a. All bills for water service delivered to the consumer shall be payable in
advance on March 1, June 1, September 1 and December 1 of each year
at the office of the Clerk. If any water bill or any bill for the meter
service charge remains unpaid for 30 days after the bill is sent out, the
water may be shut off without further notice. A charge of $5 shall be
made for the sending of any notices by reason of any delinquency.
b. A charge of $250 shall be made for any turn-off or turn-on based on
delinquency in payment and water service shall not be restored until
this charge and payment of delinquency is made by cash or certified
check. [Amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 1089]
c. No second notices shall be issued and water service may be
discontinued after water accounts are 30 days or more in arrears.
d. Charges for water shall be lien upon the premises as provided by New
Jersey statute. Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid 60
days after it has been rendered, the Tax Collector may file with the
Recorder of Monmouth County, a statement of lien claim.
e. Interest shall accrue and be due to the Borough on the unpaid balance
at the rate of 1 1/2% per month until such service charge, connection
fees or any other payments, and the interest thereon, shall be fully paid
to the Borough.
a. A water meter shall be attached to all water services. All meters shall
be furnished and installed by the Department at the consumer's
§ 15-3.9 GENERAL § 15-3.12
1:263
expense and, after installation, shall remain the property of the
Borough.
b. Each house, dwelling unit, building, trailer and each store and each
department unit in a house or building on a property requiring or using
water or sewer services shall be separately metered.
c. All meters shall be placed inside the building, in such a location as will
be readily accessible at all times to an authorized representative of the
Department, unless the Borough in its discretion deems it necessary to
place the meter underground in a prefabricated meter pit.
Notwithstanding the location of any water meter in a prefabricated
meter pit, presently or so installed in the future, the Borough reserves
the right to remove such meter from the pit and install the meter inside
the building.
d. The prefabricated meter box or pit shall be supplied by the Borough to
the owner of the property at the expense of the Borough. Said
prefabricated meter pit shall be installed by the owner of the property
at his expense under the supervision of the authorized representative of
the Department. Should any meter and/or prefabricated meter box or
pit be broken or damaged by natural causes or by the persons having
the use of same, the meter and/or prefabricated meter box or pit shall
be repaired or replaced, as the case may be, at the expense of the
owner of the premises, and such work shall be done by or under the
immediate supervision of the authorized representative of the
Department. No by pass around the meter shall be permitted.
e. If a yard hydrant, fountain or any hose connection is to be used outside,
the service pipe supplying it must be attached on the house side of the
meter so that all the water used will be registered.
f. No person except employees of the Utility Department shall set or
remove meters or attempt any repairs on the same. Plumbers, however,
may lawfully set or remove meters upon first obtaining written
permission from the Superintendent.
g. Readings.
1. Where water is furnished by meter measurement, the quantity
recorded by the meter shall be conclusive, except where the meter
has been found to be registering incorrectly or has ceased to
register. In such case or cases, the quantity may be determined by
the average registration of another meter for a period of 30 days
after it has been repaired and tested, during a similar use period,
or the quantity used during a previous corresponding period.
2. However, any interim readings, between annual and supplemental
billings, made at the request of an interested party, such as the
owner, tenant, buyer, attorney for any of the same, title company,
etc., shall be a a cost of $65 for each reading and the same must
§ 15-3.12 BRIELLE CODE § 15-3.12
1:264
§ 15-3.13. Free Access for Inspections and Examinations. [Ord.
#284; 1972 Code § 87-11; Ord. #855]
In order to facilitate the meter reading process, all premises to which
water is supplied shall be required to have an outside reader installed by
December 31st, 1999.
The cost of the reader and the installation thereof shall be borne by the
Borough. The Water Department shall be responsible for the coordination of
this action and shall be authorized to take whatever steps are necessary to
ensure compliance.
During the interim period, from the time of the passage of this subsection
and the final completion of the installation, premises that do not now
have an outside reader will remain responsible for the provision of meter
readings to the Water Department, either by providing access to the interior
meter, or by returning the meter card left at their location when entry could
not be secured. Failure to return a meter card will result in an automatic
water excess charge of $50 and said charge shall remain in effect until an
accurate meter reading is obtained. In the event the $50 charge is found to
be in excess of the amount of water actually used, a credit shall be given to
the account. No refunds will be given.
§ 15-3.14. Vacating Premises: Notification to Water/Sewer Collector.
[Ord. #284; 1972 Code § 87-12; New; Ord. #855]
When a property is vacated between the first day of October of any year
and the first day of April in the following year and the property cannot
be occupied during that period due to zoning restrictions, the owner of
said property can make application to the Zoning Officer of the Borough
of Brielle for a waiver for the annual minimum charges. Said waiver shall
be submitted to the Water Sewer Collector for his/her review and, if it
is found that the property cannot be legally occupied during the quarters
in question, there shall be no minimum water/sewer charges for these
quarters, providing that the waiver is obtained from the Zoning Officer and
the water meter is removed from the premises.
§ 15-3.15. Right and Power of Council to Change Rules, Control and
Limit Use of Water. [Ord. #284; Ord. #567; 1972 Code § 87-13; New]
accompany the request for a reading. [Amended 12-16-2019 by
Ord. No. 1089]
a. The right is reserved to the Governing Body to change the rules and
regulations for the use of water from time to time, to shut off the water
for alterations, inspections, repairs and nonpayment of charges and to
restrict the supply of water whenever it may become necessary, and all
permits shall be granted upon the express condition that if, from cause,
the supply of water should fail, the Borough of Brielle shall not be held
liable for any damage which may arise in consequence thereof.
§ 15-3.12 GENERAL § 15-3.15
1:265
§ 15-3.16. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #284; Ord. #433; 1972
Code § 87-14; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall forfeit and pay, upon conviction, a fine not to exceed $1,000 for
each and every offense, or be imprisoned in the county jail for not more than
b. The right is also reserved to the Governing Body to restrict the use of
garden hoses, sprinkler devices and any other use of water on the
exterior of any building, either exclusively or during restricted hours, in
the event of emergent situations or periods when the supply of water is
determined to be below a safe minimum.
c. Rights During Water Shortage.
1. The right is reserved to the Governing Body, in the event of a
shortage of water or for any emergent reason, by adoption of a
resolution or the issuance of a proclamation by the Mayor in the
case of any emergency, to restrict or prohibit the use of water for:
(a) The sprinkling, watering or irrigation of shrubbery, trees,
lawns, grass, ground, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens,
vegetables, flowers or any other vegetation.
(b) The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailerhouses,
railroad cars, buses or any other type of mobile equipment.
(c) The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons,
porches and other outdoor surfaces.
(d) The washing of the outside of dwellings and the washing of the
inside and outside of office buildings and business
establishments of any type.
(e) The washing and cleaning of any business or industrial
equipment and machinery.
(f) The operation of any ornamental fountain or other structure
making a similar use of water.
(g) Swimming and wading pools and bathhouses and bathing
establishments of any nature whatsoever.
(h) The use of water by any business or industrial establishments
whose business or work is not essential to the health, welfare
and safety of the residents of the Borough of Brielle.
2. The restrictions set forth herein shall not apply when the use of
water is secured from a private well. The owners or user shall
prominently display an official numbered sign with the words
"private well" after it has been inspected by a duly designated
representative. Application for such inspection and sign shall be
made to the water/sewer rent collector.
§ 15-3.15 BRIELLE CODE § 15-3.16
1:266
90 days, or both or ninety-day community service in the discretion of the
Judge before whom such conviction shall be had, and each day this section
is violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 15-3.17. Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed. [Ord. #284; 1972
Code § 87-15]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this
Chapter shall be and are hereby repealed, and any subsequent charges for
on-off services under prior ordinances are hereby cancelled.
§ 15-3.18. Effective Date. [New]
This section and Code herein shall take effect after final passage and
publication according to law.
§ 15-4. JOINT MUNICIPAL WATER AUTHORITY.
§ 15-4.1. Establishment and Composition. [Ord. #989, § 3]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-5. there is hereby established a joint municipal
water authority to be known as the Southeast Monmouth Utility Authority
("Authority") consisting of one member from the Township of Wall; one
member from the Borough of Brielle; one member from the Borough of
Spring Lake; one member from the Borough of Spring Lake Heights and one
member from the Borough of Sea Girt.
§ 15-4.2. Powers. [Ord. #989, § 4]
The Authority shall possess such powers as authorized by law and approved
by the Local Finance Board.
§ 15-4.3. Membership. [Ord. #989, § 5]
Upon creation of the Authority in accordance with applicable law, the
Governing Body shall appoint by resolution one individual to serve as a
member of the Authority.
§ 15-4.4. Governance. [Ord. #989, § 6]
The Authority shall be governed by the bylaws established by the Authority.
Chapter 16
STREETS AND SANITATION
§ 16-1. SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 15-3.16 GENERAL § 16-1.1
1:267
§ 16-1.1. Office Created. [Ord. #298, 1972 Code § 29-1]
There is hereby created the office of Superintendent of Public Works in the
Borough of Brielle.
§ 16-1.2. Duties of Superintendent. [Ord. #298; 1972 Code § 29-2]
The person appointed to the office of Superintendent of Public Works in the
Borough shall lay out daily the work of the Road Department, the Water
Department and the Building and Grounds Department and the work of
each employee thereof; he shall supervise all the work of the Departments
and see that the work is properly performed; he shall make out requisitions
for all materials for the Departments, which requisitions shall be submitted
for approval before any purchase is made. He shall receive and adjust
complaints of these Departments. In addition to the duties herein set forth,
he shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him from time to
time by the Governing Body and shall be subject to all rules and regulations
of the Governing Body now or hereafter adopted.
§ 16-1.3. Part-Time Basis; Salary. [Ord. #298; 1972 Code § 29-3]
The office of Superintendent of Public Works herein created shall be on a
part-time basis, and the annual salary shall be in such sum as from time to
time may be fixed by the Governing Body.
§ 16-1.4. Office of Assistant Superintendent of Public Works
Created. [Ord. #637; 1972 Code § 29-5]
There is hereby created the position of Assistant Superintendent of Public
Works in the Borough.
§ 16-1.5. Duties of Assistant Superintendent. [Ord. #637; 1972
Code § 29-6]
The duties of the person appointed to the office of Assistant Superintendent
of Public Works shall be the same as the Superintendent of Public Works as
prescribed in subsection 16- 1.2 of this section, in his absence, and also to
assist the Superintendent in performing these duties.
§ 16-1.6. Part-Time Basis; Salary. [Ord. #637; 1972 Code § 29-7]
The position of Assistant Superintendent of Public Works herein created
shall be on a part-time basis and the annual salary shall be in such sum, as
from time to time may be fixed by the Governing Body.
§ 16-1.7. Powers of the Superintendent. [Ord. #963]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the power and authority to
fix the time and date for the collection of brush and leaves on the streets of
the Borough of Brielle.
§ 16-1.1 BRIELLE CODE § 16-1.7
1:268
The Superintendent shall have the power to enforce this collection schedule
and violators shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 1, Section
1-5 of the Code of the Borough of Brielle entitled "General Penalty".
§ 16-2. EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS.
§ 16-2.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #29; 1972 Code § 50-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or corporation to dig or excavate
any street or avenue or any part thereof within the corporate limits of the
Borough for the purpose of laying or connecting new pipe or conduit with
any water, gas, sewer, electric or other main, or for any other purpose
whatsoever, without first obtaining a permit from the Borough Clerk for that
purpose; provided, however, any person maintaining pipes, lines or other
underground facilities in or under the surface of any street may proceed
with an opening without a permit when emergency circumstances demand
the work to be done immediately, provided permit could not reasonably
and practically have been obtained beforehand. The person shall thereafter
apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the office of
the Borough Clerk is open for business. The permit shall be retroactive to
the date when the work was begun.
§ 16-2.2. Application Requirements. [Ord. #29; 1972 Code § 50-2;
New; Ord. #867]
a. Any person, persons or corporation applying for such permit shall
deposit with the Borough Clerk the sum of $1,000 for any excavation to
be opened. This deposit shall serve as a guarantee that the street or
area will be replaced in as good condition as found.
1. In lieu of the deposit above specified, the Governing Body may, at
its option accept in lieu thereof, a permanent cash bond in amount,
form and substance satisfactory to the Borough Engineer (or
Superintendent of the Water-Sewer Utility Department).
2. Upon completion of the backfill and compaction, the owner or his
agent shall notify the Department of Public Works which shall
inspect the work. If the work shall be found satisfactory and in
accordance with the specifications herein, the inspector shall, in
writing, authorize the Clerk to return to the owner or his agent the
sum of $800. If the inspector shall determine that the work has not
been done pursuant to the specifications herein, he may require the
work to be redone or may, at the expense of the owner, cause the
Department of Public Works to perform the work at the cost and
expense of the owner. The deposit hereinbefore mentioned shall be
applied to defray the costs and expense of the Borough of Brielle.
3. The applicant shall agree:
(a) To save the Borough, its officers, employees and agents
harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which
§ 16-1.7 GENERAL § 16-2.2
1:269
§ 16-2.3. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #29; 1972 Code § 50-3]
may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work
performed under the permit. The acceptance of any permit
under this section shall constitute such an agreement by the
applicant, whether the same is expressed or not.
(b) To pay a fee of $15 a square yard to cover estimated cost of
maintenance for one year following completion of work.
(c) To guard each such excavation and/or opening in accordance
with considerations for safety and traffic flow, and to make the
same appropriately and not to allow any excavation in any
Borough street to remain open for more than 24 hours.
(d) To furnish a certificate of insurance as required by subsection
16-2.4 of this section.
(e) To restore opening within one week of completion of work.
a. The permittee shall be required to comply with all Federal, State,
County and Municipal regulations, laws and ordinances in regard to the
work, the protection of property and welfare and safety of the passing
public and his employees.
b. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to abide by the Construction
Safety Code of the Department of Labor and Industry, Bureau of
Engineering and Safety, of the State of New Jersey, dated November 15,
1963, and its amendments.
c. Except in cases of emergency, the ordinary working day shall be
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday,
inclusive.
d. Prior to any excavation, the permittee shall cut all pavement to a neat
line six inches back from each edge of the proposed trench using
pneumatic hammers or mechanical cutters.
e. The permittee shall be responsible for the location and protection of all
underground utilities within the limits of the work area.
f. Care shall be taken so as to protect the existing sections of pavement,
curbing, sidewalks, underground pipes and structures of any kind.
g. The excavation shall be supported and placed in accordance with good
engineering design and practice.
h. Excavation materials which will, in the opinion of the Engineer, cause a
hazard to the traveling public or to private property, shall be removed
from the site.
§ 16-2.2 BRIELLE CODE § 16-2.3
1:270
i. Excavations which are hazardous to the traveling public shall be
properly barricaded and lighted. Lighting shall be functioning from 1/2
hour before sunset until 1/2 hour after sunrise.
j. The site of the work shall at all times be barricaded and lighted with the
prescribed safeguards so as not to be a hazard to the traveling public or
persons in the vicinity of the work. The permittee shall at all times be
responsible for providing the necessary prescribed safeguards.
k. Detailed excavation and backfill procedures for any openings wider
than four feet shall be submitted to the Engineer for his approval prior
to the initiation of any excavation work.
l. When excavations are carried below groundwater level, the permittee
shall submit to the Engineer details of the method he proposes to use
for de-watering the excavation before commencing work.
m. Backfill material in the roadway area shall consist of bankrun sand or
other material approved by the Engineer.
n. Backfill material shall be compacted in six inch layers by approved
vibratory compactors or flat-faced mechanical tampers to at least 95%
density.
o. The backfill material shall be brought to 12 inches from the finished
surface in roadway areas. In the roadway areas, four inches of quarry
process stone shall be placed and compacted, on top of which eight
inches of bituminous stabilized base shall be placed and compacted so
as to provide a smooth surface. A thick tack coat shall be applied to the
sides of the existing pavement.
p. After settlement has occurred, a skin of bituminous concrete shall be
placed over the bituminous stabilized base. The patch shall extend six
inches beyond the existing pavement on each side. The edges shall be
kept straight and a thin tack coat shall be applied between the existing
pavement and the bituminous concrete.
q. Flagmen shall be provided when they are necessary in the opinion of
the Engineer.
r. It shall be the permittee's responsibility to maintain accessibility to
utility valve boxes and manholes and not to impede the runoff of any
surface water.
s. The permittee shall not close or obstruct any portion of a street without
first obtaining permission to do so from the Municipal Engineer. He
shall not deprive any building, dwelling or property of safe and proper
access, except with the consent of the owner or occupant and after due
notice to the Engineer.
t. In cases of necessity due to unusual or unforeseen conditions, the
Engineer is permitted to deviate from these rules.
§ 16-2.3 GENERAL § 16-2.3
1:271
§ 16-2.4. Insurance Requirements. [Ord. #29; 1972 Code § 50-4]
Each applicant, prior to receipt of a permit, shall provide the borough
with an acceptable certificate of insurance indicating that he is insured
against claims for damages for personal injury, as well as against claims
for property damage which may arise from or out of the performance
of the work, whether such performance be by himself, his subcontractor
or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall
cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by equipment
on the street, and shall include protection against liability arising from
completed operations. The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by
the Engineer in accordance with the nature of the risk involved; provided,
however, that the liability insurance for bodily injury in effect shall not be
in an amount less than $100,000 for each person and $300,000 for each
accident; and for property damages an amount not less than $50,000 with
an aggregate of $100,000 for all accidents. Public utilities and authorities
may be relieved of the obligation of submitting such certificates if they are
insured in accordance with the requirements of this section and furnish
evidence thereof to the Engineer.
§ 16-2.5. Openings in New Streets. [Ord. #29; 1972 Code § 50-5]
u. In cases where the safety of the traveling public is involved, or
emergencies involving utilities or structures of any type, the Engineer
may, at his discretion, order the necessary work done to alleviate the
hazard without waiting for the permittee to arrive at the site. The cost
incurred in instituting these emergency measures shall be chargeable
to the permittee.
v. In all instances where the Municipal Engineer is required to perform
the necessary work, the permittee by the acceptance of a permit agrees
to save harmless the Municipal Engineer and the municipality, its
servants and agents, from any and all liability in connection with the
work performed.
a. Notices of Improvements. When the Borough shall improve or pave any
street, the Borough Clerk shall first give notice to all persons owning
property abutting on the street about to be paved or improved, and to
all public utilities and authorities operating in the Borough, and all such
persons, utilities and authorities shall make all connections as well as
any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the street
within 30 days from the giving of such notice. The time shall be
extended if permission is requested in writing and approved by the
Borough Engineer.
b. Restrictions Upon Opening New Streets. No permit shall be issued by
the Engineer to any person given notice under paragraph b hereof
which would allow an excavation or opening in a paved and improved
street surface less than five years old unless the applicant can clearly
§ 16-2.3 BRIELLE CODE § 16-2.5
1:272
§ 16-2.6. General Provisions. [Ord. #29; 1972 Code § 50-6]
§ 16-2.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #29; 1972 Code § 50-7;
New]
Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. In addition, that person shall be
responsible for reimbursement for any cost of repair necessary to replace
the surface to its previous condition. Each day that a violation is permitted
to exist after notice in writing shall have been served by the Engineer shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 16-3. MANDATORY PROGRAM FOR THE SEPARATION AND
COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
§ 16-3.1. Preamble. [Ord. #721, Preamble; Ord. #999]
The growing problem of solid waste disposal and the conservation of the
recyclable materials is an important public concern. The separation of
certain recyclable materials will serve the public interest by reducing solid
waste and conserving our material resources. The promotion of that public
interest is best served by establishing rules and regulations for the
separation, recovery, collection, storing and marketing of the recyclable
material.
§ 16-3.2. Purpose. [Ord. #721, § 1; New; Ord. #833;Ord. #999]
demonstrate that public health or safety require that the proposed work
be permitted, or unless an emergency condition exists.
c. Penalty for Opening New Streets. If, by special action of the Engineer, a
permit is issued to open any paved and improved street surface less
than five years old, a penalty charge shall be made for the opening,
except that the penalty shall be waived in the event the work is of an
emergency nature. The penalty charge shall be on a sliding scale and
shall be equal to 2% of the cost of restoring the opening for each
unelapsed month, or fraction thereof, of the five year restricted period.
a. A public utility having undergound mains, conduits or conductors shall
furnish to the Borough Engineer, if he so requests, detailed information
as to the location, size and type of its facilities at any specified location.
b. Notices to property owners and tenants. If the work to be undertaken
by the permittee is such that it will affect the use of properties abutting
or adjoining the project or subsurface installations in the vicinity of the
proposed opening, the Engineer shall require the permittee to submit
evidence in affidavit form that the permittee has served the owners and/
or tenants of such properties and subsurface installations personally or
by certified mail, return receipt requested.
§ 16-2.5 GENERAL § 16-3.2
1:273
a. On and after January 1, 1987, it shall be mandatory for all persons,
lessees and occupants of residential property, business and industrial
property, private, public and government institutions and buildings to
separate newspapers, glass bottles and jars, aluminum cans, and leaves
from all other solid waste produced by such residences and
nonresidential establishments for collection and the ultimate recycling
of the materials.
b. On and after July 1, 1987, it shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees
and occupants of business and industrial property and of private, public
and governmental institutions and buildings to also separate
corrugated cardboard and high-grade paper from all other solid waste
produced by the nonresidential establishments for collection and the
ultimate recycling of the material.
c. On and after January 1, 1987, it shall be unlawful to dispose of used
motor oil in any manner other than through an authorized "used oil
collection site" as per this section. On and after the adoption of the
section, and in accordance with existing State regulations (N.J.A.C.
14A:3-11), all service stations, oil retainers and motor vehicle
reinspection stations with "used oil holding tanks" shall accept up to
five gallons at a time of used motor oil from individuals changing oil
from cars, lawn mowers, motorcycles and other motorized vehicles and
machinery, and shall post a sign informing the public that they are a
"Used Oil Collection Site".
d. On and after April 1, 1988, it shall be mandatory for all owners, lessees
and occupants of residential, business and industrial property and of
private, public, and governmental institutions and buildings to also
separate tin and bi-metal cans from other solid waste for the collection
and recycling of said materials.
e. On and after October 1, 1988, it shall be unlawful for anyone to dispose
of asphalt, concrete or wood waste, which includes stumps, land
clearing debris, pallets and waste lumber from construction or
demolition projects.
f. On and after January 1, 1987, it shall be mandatory for all
nonresidential establishments not served by the municipal recycling
program to provide a record to the municipality of the types and
quantities of materials recycled. Weight receipts and/or letters on
official company stationery should clearly describe the quantity and
disposition of each material and shall be submitted quarterly. All
nonresidential establishments shall further provide the Borough with
the name and address of both the solid waste hauler and recycling
hauler utilized where other than that provided by the Borough, and
shall further provide information to the Borough of any change of either
hauler within 30 days of such change. All submissions required to be
made to the Borough pursuant to this section shall be made by the
fifteenth day of each month following the end of the calendar quarter.
§ 16-3.2 BRIELLE CODE § 16-3.2
1:274
g. On and after September 1st, 1993 it shall be mandatory for all
residential and nonresidential establishments to recycle plastic
beverage and laundry containers that comply with the recycling code
#1 PET and #2 HDPE (see definitions), corrugated cardboard and
mixed paper, including shredded paper.
h. Upon the adoption of these paragraphs g and h, all residential and
nonresidential establishments shall comply with the provisions of the
Monmouth County District Solid Waste Management Plan as amended
in September 1993 and as further amended in February 2009. All
residential and nonresidential establishments shall be required to
adhere to the implementation schedule as promulgated by the County
of Monmouth, to wit:
1. The following items must be separated from the trash by all waste
generators for the purpose of recycling:
(a) Grass clippings (May 1993).
(b) Batteries (automotive and "wet cell"/household and "dry cell")
(July 1993).
(c) White goods (all large metal appliances) (July 1993).
(d) Asphalt shingles (September 1993).
(e) Bulk ferrous and nonferrous metals (January 2010).
(f) Electronics (January 2010).
2. The following requirements of the Monmouth County District Solid
Waste Management Plan shall take effect upon adoption of these
paragraphs g and h.
(a) Residents, businesses and institutions within the municipality
may only use properly permitted haulers and facilities.
(b) Businesses, institutions and multi-family housing complexes
not served by municipal recycling collection programs shall
provide the Municipal Recycling Coordinator with the name
and address of the company providing solid waste and
recycling collection services.
(c) Businesses or institutions hauling their own recyclables shall
provide the municipality with quarterly reports on the quantity
and destination of recyclables.
(d) The municipality shall issue construction and demolition
permits only after the applicant has identified disposal and
recycling arrangements. The applicant shall provide
appropriate records documenting the quantity and disposition
of all materials.
§ 16-3.2 GENERAL § 16-3.3
1:275
§ 16-3.3. Definitions. [Ord. #721, § II; New; Ord. #833; Ord. #999]
As used in this section:
ALUMINUM CANS — Shall mean all aluminum containers used for soda,
beer or other beverages.
BATTERIES — Shall mean automotive and wet cell/household and dry cell
batteries.
BULK FERROUS AND NON-FERROUS SCRAP METAL — Examples of
ferrous scrap include scrap iron and steel recovered from old automobiles,
farm equipment, household appliances, structural steel, and anything else
that was made from iron and steel.
Examples of non-ferrous scrap include aluminum, copper, zinc, lead, and
nickel and is also characterized as either obsolete or industrial.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Shall mean cardboard of the type used to
make cardboard boxes, cartons, pasteboard and similar corrugated and
kraft paper material.
DEMOLITION MATERIALS — Shall mean and include asphalt, concrete,
tree stumps, land clearing debris, pallets, and waste lumber.
ELECTRONICS — Shall mean computers, computer monitors, analog and
digital televisions.
GLASS — Shall mean all products made from silica or sand, soda ash and
limestone; the product being transparent or translucent and being used for
packaging or bottling of various matters excluding however, blue or flat
glass commonly known as window glass.
HIGH GRADE PAPER — Shall mean white and/or off-white stationery,
photocopy and computer paper.
LEAVES — Shall mean and include all foliage from trees and shrubs.
MIXED PAPER — Shall mean all high grade bond paper, mixed office and
school papers, scrap paper, including but not limited to computer printouts,
magazines, gift wrapping paper, soft cover books and junk mail and
chipboard. (Excluded are carbon paper, kraft paper and newsprint.)
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean and include paper of the type commonly
referred to as newsprint. Expressly excluded, however, are all magazines
or other periodicals as well as all other paper products of any nature
whatsoever, except when such items are included in the newspaper.
PLASTIC CONTAINER — Shall mean common plastic resin types as found
in the household, but limited to #1 plastic PET (polyethylene terephthalate)
and #2 HDPE (high density in polyethylene) in the form of bottles and
containers used to purvey beverage and laundry products.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean and include all garbage and rubbish normally
produced by the occupants of commercial, industrial and a residential
property and disposed of by private or public pickup.
§ 16-3.3 BRIELLE CODE § 16-3.3
1:276
TIN AND BI-METAL CANS — Shall mean and include all disposable cans
made of tin, steel or a combination of metals including, but not limited to,
containers commonly used for the storage of food products. The term "tin
and bi-metal cans" shall exclude paint and oil cans, aerosol cans and any
cans which contain toxic materials.
§ 16-3.4. Recycling Coordinator. [Ord. #721, § III; New; Ord. #999]
§ 16-3.5. Collection by Authorized Persons. [Ord. #721, § IV; New;
Ord. #999]
The Governing Body may use municipal personnel to collect recyclable
material set forth herein at curbside and/or from a drop-off center and shall
sell the recyclable material if a market exists therefor pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.
The Governing Body may elect to enter into agreements with qualified
persons or corporations authorizing them to collect the recyclable material
at curbside or from a drop-off center and to sell the recyclable material.
§ 16-3.6. Collection by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited. [Ord.
#721, § V; New; Ord. #999]
Recyclable material as defined herein shall be the property of the Borough
once placed on the curbside or brought to a drop-off center.
It shall be a violation of this section for any person unauthorized by the
Governing Body to pick up or cause to be picked up, the recyclable material
a. The position of Recycling Coordinator is hereby created and established
within the Borough.
b. The Recycling Coordinator shall be appointed by the Governing Body
for a term of one year expiring December 31st of each year. The term of
the person first appointed as Recycling Coordinator shall expire
December 31st of the year of that person's appointment.
c. The Recycling Coordinator, in conjunction with the Brielle Recycling
Coalition and subject to the approval of the Governing Body, shall
establish and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations as to the
manner, days and times for the collection, sorting, transportation, sale
and/or marketing of the recyclable material in order to encourage the
preservation of material resources while minimizing the cost of the
recycling program to the Borough. Violation of the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Recycling Coordinator shall subject the
offender to the fines and penalties as set forth in subsection 16-3.10.
d. The Recycling Coordinator shall be required to comply with the
Certification Requirements of the State of New Jersey. The Recycling
Coordinator shall have completed or be in the process of meeting the
requirements for certification as a "Certified Recycling Professional"
(CRP) no later than January 13, 2010.
§ 16-3.3 GENERAL § 16-3.6
1:277
as defined herein. Each such collection in violation hereof, shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 16-3.7. Direct Disposal of Recyclable Material by Resident. [Ord.
#721, § VI; New; Ord. #999]
§ 16-3.8. Collection of Recyclable Material. [Ord. #721, § VII; New;
Ord. #999]
§ 16-3.9. Enforcement. [Ord. #721, § VIII; New; Ord. #999]
The enforcement of the provisions of this section shall be the responsibility
of the Monmouth County Board of Health, the Recycling Coordinator, the
Code Enforcement Officer and the Police Department. The responsibility of
monitoring the program for the adequacy of the collection shall fall to the
Superintendent of Public Works/Recycling Coalition or his designees and it
shall be incumbent upon them to direct the Code Enforcement Officer to
suspected areas of noncompliance.
§ 16-3.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #721, § IX; New; Ord.
#999]
Violation of separating or disposal requirements or the rules and
regulations will result in a $50 fine for a first offense. Subsequent violations
a. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any person,
partnership or corporation who is owner, lessee or occupant of a
residential or nonresidential real property, may donate or sell the
recyclable material as defined herein, to any person, partnership or
corporation whether or not operating for profit. The person,
partnership or corporation, however, shall not pick up the recyclable
materials at curbside or at a drop-off center.
b. The Municipal Drop-Off Center shall accept recyclable materials from
residents and small businesses.
a. Those materials required to be recycled in the Borough pursuant to this
section shall be placed for collection in such manner and at such times
as provided for in the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Recycling Coordinator. Materials shall be placed in clearly marked
containers. Containers shall not exceed 30 pounds in weight nor 30
gallons in capacity.
b. Any unauthorized solid waste hauler shall be prohibited from collecting
any solid waste which constitutes or includes any recyclable material as
set forth and defined in subsections 16-3.2 and 16-3.3.
c. Effective January 1st, 2010 the Borough shall commence curbside
collection of both mixed paper and cardboard, in addition to newspaper
and commingled recyclables currently collected curbside.
§ 16-3.6 BRIELLE CODE § 16-3.10
1:278
will result in a fine not to exceed $200 and/or performance of community
service in the recycling program, for a period not to exceed 90 days.
Unauthorized collectors or prohibited collections of recyclable material are
subject to a fine of $500 for each offense. Failure to provide reports to the
municipality pursuant to subsection 16-3.2f will result in a fine of $100 for
each offense.
Each day such violation or neglect is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
§ 16-3.11. Compliance with Monmouth County District Solid Waste
Management Plan. [Ord. #999]
The Brielle Planning Board shall be required to amend the Recycling
Element of the Brielle Master Plan to ensure compliance with the provisions
of the Monmouth County District Solid Waste Management as promulgated
on February 26th, 2009.
§ 16-4. ENCROACHMENTS AND OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
§ 16-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. #796, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit encroachments and obstructions
upon any street in the Borough to prevent dangers to persons and property,
prevent delays, avoid interference with the traffic flow, and for the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough.
§ 16-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #796, § 2]
Whenever in this Chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
ALLEY — Shall mean a public way within a block, generally giving access to
the rear of lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Shall mean Police vehicles, vehicles of the Fire
Department, ambulances, vehicles carrying a State, County or municipal
officer employee in response to an emergency call, and emergency vehicles
of public service corporations on an emergency call.
ENCROACHMENT STRUCTURE — Shall mean any tower, pole, poleline,
pipe, pipeline, fence, billboard, basketball hoop, guy line, stand or building,
or any other such object or structure which is placed in, upon, under or over
any portion of any public street, public highway, or other public property.
PARKWAY — Shall mean that portion of a street other than a roadway or a
sidewalk.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the privilege of the immediate use of the
roadway.
§ 16-3.10 GENERAL § 16-4.2
1:279
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STREET — Shall include an avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, parkway and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public. Street shall be considered to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless
the contrary is expressed or unless such construction is inconsistent with
the apparent intent.
§ 16-4.3. Obstructions. [Ord. #796, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause, create or
maintain any obstruction or encroachment structure in, upon, under or over
any parkway, street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may be
specified by ordinance.
§ 16-4.4. Encroachment Permits. [Ord. #796, § 4]
a. Any person desiring to erect, construct or maintain an encroachment
structure upon public property must first obtain an encroachment
permit therefor. An encroachment permit may be obtained by filing a
written application with the Zoning Officer on a form supplied through
his office. The application shall be accompanied by a legal description
and the name and address of the owner of the adjacent real property
benefited by the encroachment, a one sheet plot plan illustrating the
proposed structure and a written justification as to the need for the
encroachment.
b. Each applicant for an encroachment permit shall, at the time of filing
the application, pay a nonrefundable application fee of $50.
c. If the Zoning Officer finds that a proposed encroachment will not be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the community or the
surrounding property and when completed will not interfere with
access to any public place, he shall refer the application to the
Governing Body for action. If the proposed encroachment does not meet
each of the requirements set out in the preceding sentence, the Zoning
Officer shall deny the permit, giving his reasons in writing.
d. If at any time it is determined by the Zoning Officer that the
encroachment structure has become detrimental to the health, safety or
welfare of the community or the surrounding property, interferes with
access to any public place, or if a public works project or development
requires removal of the encroachment, the encroachment permit
granted hereunder shall be revoked by the Borough Clerk without
notice.
e. No encroachment permitted under this section is intended to grant any
permanent right or title to a street or to any part of any street.
§ 16-4.2 BRIELLE CODE § 16-4.5
1:280
§ 16-4.5. Nuisance, Injunction. [Ord. #796, § 5]
Any violation of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance. In addition
to any other relief provided by this section, the Borough may apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation
of any violation of this section. Such application for relief may include
seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent
injunction.
§ 16-4.6. Penalty. [Ord. #796, § 7]
Any person who violates or who fails to comply with the provisions of this
section shall upon conviction be liable to the penalty established in Chapter
1, Section 1-5.
§ 16-5. STREET VACATIONS.
§ 16-5.1. Application; Fee. [Ord. #805, § 1]
Any person, who is desirous of applying to the Borough of Brielle, for
the vacation of any street, highway, right-of-way or other public place,
heretofore, dedicated to the Borough, shall be required to complete a street
vacation application, on a form to be promulgated by the Borough Clerk,
and shall file same with the Borough Clerk, together with a nonrefundable
fee in the amount of $1,000 which shall be payable to the Borough of Brielle.
The street vacation application shall call for the following information:
a. The name, address, and telephone number of the person applying for
such vacation.
b. If such person is represented by an attorney, the name, address, and
telephone number of such attorney, and/or the name, address, and
telephone number of any other person to be contacted on behalf of the
applicant.
c. The name, and a general description of the street, highway, right-of-way
or other public place to be vacated.
d. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or other entity, the name
and address of each person holding an interest of 10% or more on the
ownership of such corporation, partnership or other entity.
e. A list of the lot and block numbers of all property adjoining the area to
be vacated, together with a list of the names and addresses of the
assessed owners of such adjoining properties.
f. A narrative description of the current use of the area to be vacated.
g. A narrative description of the applicant's intended use of the area to be
vacated.
h. A description of any improvement on the area to be vacated including
but not limited to paving, gravel, utilities, or structures.
§ 16-4.5 GENERAL § 16-5.1
1:281
§ 16-5.2. Review of Application. [Ord. #805, § 2]
Upon receipt of a completed application, together with the required fee,
the Borough Clerk shall forward a copy of same to the office of the
Superintendent of Public Works, the Borough Engineer, the Planning Board,
the Police Department, the First Aid Squad and the Fire Department for
review and recommendation. The aforementioned agencies/departments
shall complete their review within 35 days after receipt of the application,
and shall forward their written recommendation, together with a copy
of such report to the Borough Clerk. The Borough Clerk shall thereafter
disseminate the reports to the Borough Council for its determination. If any
agency/department does not respond before the time limitations referenced
in this subsection, the Borough Council may act without such report.
Further, the Borough Council is under no obligation to follow any
recommendation provided to it under this subsection.
§ 16-5.3. Council Determination; Notification. [Ord. #805, § 3]
Upon receipt of the recommendations and reports, as referenced in
subsection 16-5.2 above, the Borough Council shall notify the applicant, in
writing, of its determination on the application.
§ 16-5.4. Favorable Determination; Additional Fees. [Ord. #805, § 4]
Where the applicant has been notified that the Borough Council has
determined to act favorably on the application, the applicant shall forthwith
provide the Borough Clerk with a metes and bounds description of the area
to be vacated, prepared and sealed by a surveyor, together with such other
information as may be requested by the Borough Council in its notification
to the applicant. Such additional information may include providing a title
search of the property to be vacated. In addition, the applicant shall forward
the following additional fees to the Borough Clerk which shall be payable to
the Borough of Brielle:
i. The applicant shall furnish with the application a reproduction of the
tax map, showing the area surrounding the area to be vacated, as well
as all intersecting roads, adjoining parcels, the current zoning of all
properties adjoining the area to be vacated, and where application has
been made for the vacation of any street, highway or other right-of-way,
the reproduction shall show the entire length of such street, highway or
right- of-way.
j. The applicant shall furnish with the application, executed forms to be
furnished by the Borough Clerk, which shall indicate the consent (or
lack thereof) of the owners of each property adjoining the area to be
vacated to the proposed vacation.
k. The application shall be executed by the applicant or the applicant's
representative, indicating that the information set forth or attached to
the application is true and accurate.
§ 16-5.1 BRIELLE CODE § 16-5.4
1:282
§ 16-5.5. Copy of Vacation Ordinance to Tax Assessor. [Ord. #805,
§ 5]
Upon the adoption of an ordinance vacating the area which is the subject of
such application the Borough Clerk shall forward a copy of such ordinance
to the Tax Assessor.
§ 16-6. SPILLING, DUMPING OR DISPOSAL OF MATERIALS INTO
THE MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM.
§ 16-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. #960]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Brielle or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
a. The sum of $160 toward the preparation of the ordinance to be enacted
by the Borough Council in connection with the proposed vacation.
b. A sum equal to the costs of advertising the ordinance to be enacted by
the Borough Council. The Borough Clerk shall prepare such estimate
and make the same available to the applicant.
c. A sum equal to the estimated recording costs of the ordinance to be
enacted by the Borough Council. The Borough Clerk shall prepare such
estimate and make the same available to the applicant.
d. Where the Borough Council has advised the applicant that action upon
the application is contingent upon the reservation of an easement or a
development restriction, an additional sum of $275 shall be payable by
the applicant to the Borough toward the cost of the preparation of such
easement and/or deed providing for restricted development.
§ 16-5.4 GENERAL § 16-6.2
1:283
§ 16-6.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #960]
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operate by the Borough of Brielle
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 16-6.3. Exception to Prohibition. [Ord. #960]
§ 16-7. YARD WASTE COLLECTION PROGRAM.
a. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
b. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters)
c. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non- contact
cooling water)
d. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff)
e. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows
f. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
g. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
h. Flows from firefighting activities.
i. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
1. Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
2. Equipment use in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 16-6.2 BRIELLE CODE § 16-7.1
1:284
§ 16-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. #960]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, County, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and brush.
§ 16-7.2. Yard Waste Collection. [Ord. #960]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this ordinance. If such placement of yard waste
occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove
the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of
this section. Yard waste shall be placed in piles no larger than four feet by
six feet.
§ 16-7.3. Enforcement. [Ord. #960]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Brielle Police
Department and the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 16-7.4. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. #960]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of this section shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $50 for the first offense. Subsequent violations shall
result in a fine not to exceed $200 and/or performance of community service
in the Department of Public Works for a period not to exceed 90 days.
§ 16-8. ILLICIT CONNECTION.
§ 16-7.1 GENERAL § 16-8.1
1:285
§ 16-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. #960]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Brielle, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other
than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit
Number NJO14 1852). Non-physical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Brielle or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
§ 16-8.1 BRIELLE CODE § 16-8.1
1:286
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, byproduct, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 16-8.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #960]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Brielle any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 16-8.3. Enforcement. [Ord. #960]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 16-8.4. Violation and Penalty. [Ord. #960]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of this section shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $50 for the first offense. Subsequent violations shall
result in a fine not to exceed $200 and/or performance of community service
in the Department of Public Works for a period not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 17
PROTECTION OF NATURAL FEATURES
§ 17-1. PRESERVATION OF TREES AND NATURAL FEATURES.
§ 17-1.1. Statement of Policy. [Ord. #460; 1972 Code § 83.1]
It is the stated policy of the Borough, and of its Governing Body, that
existing natural features in the Borough, including streams, ponds, trees
and the natural configuration of the ground, shall be retained wherever
possible.
§ 17-1.2. Application to Change Natural Features. [Ord. #460; 1972
Code § 83-2]
Unless specifically exempted herein, a property owner desiring to change
any such natural feature, which shall include removal of soil from the
premises, shall indicate the same by way of an application supported by
appropriate engineering documentation, which application shall recite the
reasons for the proposed changes.
§ 16-8.1 GENERAL § 17-1.3
1:287
§ 17-1.3. Submission of Application. [Ord. #460; 1972 Code § 83-3]
If the aforesaid application shall be in connection with proposed
construction, it may be submitted as a portion of the application for a
building permit. In all other cases, the application shall be submitted to the
Planning Board.
§ 17-1.4. Referral to Shade Tree Commission. [Ord. #460; 1972
Code § 83-4]
In all cases involving the removal of trees having a trunk circumference in
excess of 9 1/2 inches, measured two feet above the ground, the application
shall be referred to the Shade Tree Commission, which shall render a
written report within 30 days after the referral.
§ 17-1.5. Issuance of Tree Removal Permit. [Ord. #460; 1972 Code
§ 83-5]
Permits for removal of trees shall be granted as a matter of course in
areas to be occupied by buildings, driveways or recreation areas, and within
a distance of 15 feet around the perimeter of such structures. Permits
for tree removal shall otherwise be granted if the presence of such trees
causes actual or potential hardship or endangers persons or property or
substantially interferes with a permitted use of property, or if the proposed
removal of trees is to be performed in a selective manner consistent with
the public interest, such as thinning a heavily wooded area.
§ 17-1.6. Approval of Natural Features; Change Application. [New]
Except as provided in Section 17-1.4, upon a determination by the Planning
Board that the proposed changes will not be detrimental to the health,
safety or welfare of the Borough or its inhabitants, the application for
change to the natural features shall be approved.
§ 17-1.7. Issuance of Building Permit. [Ord. #460; 1972 Code
§ 83-6]
No building permit shall be issued until a written plan of any change in
natural features has been approved.
§ 17-1.8. Protection of Existing Trees. [Ord. #460; 1982 Code
§ 83-7]
No material, machinery or temporary soil deposits shall be placed within
six feet of any existing tree trunk or stem. Where regrading shall have been
approved, such approval may be conditioned upon the welling of existing
trees.
§ 17-1.3 BRIELLE CODE § 17-1.9
1:288
§ 17-1.9. Application. [Ord. #460; 1972 Code § 83-8]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to a homeowner who wishes to
remove trees from the lot upon which he actually resides, provided always
that this exemption shall not apply to the removal or cutting of trees upon
any public right-of-way.
§ 17-1.10. Enforcement. [Ord. #460; 1972 Code § 83-9]
This section shall be enforced by the Mayor or Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 17-1.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #460; 1972 Code § 83-10]
Violations of this section shall constitute disorderly persons offenses, and
shall be punishable in accordance with the Statutes of New Jersey. In
addition, the Borough shall have the right to seek injunctive relief in the
event of any threatened violation.
§ 17-1.12. Appeals. [Ord. #460; 1972 Code § 83-11]
Any applicant aggrieved by the provisions of this section, or by the decision
of any officer or body pursuant hereto, shall have the right to appeal to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 17-2. REGULATIONS OF THE SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
§ 17-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-6]
As used in this section:
PERSON — Shall mean every person, firm, association, partnership and
corporation.
PLANT CONSTRUCTION — As applied to public utility companies shall
mean poles, wires, cables, subsurface conduits, pipes, manholes and
appurtenant facilities of such companies installed in a street.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Shall mean a public utility as defined in the
Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey (N.J.R.S. 48:2-13).
SHADE TREE — Shall mean shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery
situate or which may hereafter be situate in any public highway, park or
parkway.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — Shall mean the Shade Tree Commission of
the Borough of Brielle.
STREET — Shall mean:
Any public street designated by the Governing Body to be within the
jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission, and paragraphs b, c, and d
of this definition, if applicable.
a.
b. Municipal parks and parkways.
§ 17-1.9 GENERAL § 17-2.1
1:289
§ 17-2.2. Unlawful Acts. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-7]
§ 17-2.3. Nonutility Operations Requiring a Permit. [Ord. #511;
1972 Code § 33-8]
No person shall do any of the following acts to any tree on a street without
the prior permit of the Shade Tree Commission:
c. County roads.
d. State highways.
a. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for
any person or persons to prune or cut a shade tree without the consent
of the Shade Tree Commission.
b. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for
any person or persons to injure, tamper, willfully break, destroy or
remove any highway shade tree.
a. Cut, prune, climb with spikes, break, damage or remove or kill.
b. Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root.
c. Spray with any chemical.
d. Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device. (Nothing herein shall
prevent any governmental agency from affixing, in a manner approved
by the Shade Tree Commission, a public notice upon a tree in
connection with administering governmental affairs.)
e. Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree or
shrub.
f. Conduct razing, removal or renovation of any structure if deemed by
the Commission to be damaging to neighboring street trees.
g. Place or distribute chemicals, including but not limited to salt,
deleterious to tree health.
h. Maintain a stationary fire or device which vaporizes noxious fumes
deleterious to tree health.
i. Disturb soil in any manner that will disturb a root system.
j. Construct new sidewalks and/or driveways with any material
whatsoever within five feet of a tree.
k. Plant a tree or shrub.
l. Plant and/or maintain any tree(s) or shrubbery extending over any
portion of a sidewalk and/or right-of-way unless such tree(s) or
shrubbery extending over vehicular roadways has a minimum clearance
§ 17-2.1 BRIELLE CODE § 17-2.3
1:290
§ 17-2.4. Utility Operations. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-9]
§ 17-2.5. Application for Permit. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-10]
of 13 1/2 feet and such tree(s) or shrubbery extending over pedestrian
roadways has a minimum clearance of eight feet.
a. The Shade Tree Commission may grant to public utility companies a
blanket permit for tree pruning for line clearance and for the
installation and maintenance of subsurface and aboveground plant
construction if there is interference with or endangerment to street
trees.
b. Public utility companies may, during periods of emergency, without
specific prior permit, install temporary attachments to trees and make
emergency subsurface repairs.
c. Each public utility company shall exercise reasonable diligence in the
maintenance of its plant construction so as to avoid damage to trees
under the jurisdiction of the Brielle Borough Shade Trade Commission.
a. Application for a permit for removal or destruction, as defined in this
section, shall be made directly to the Shade Tree Commission and shall
contain the name of the applicant, the location of the property, a plot
plan where a building(s) is to be erected and, in addition thereto, the
purposes for which the application is being made. The following shall be
considered to be a legitimate purpose for the removal of a tree:
1. Fire prevention.
2. Industrial use.
3. Private parks.
4. Scenic improvement.
5. Hardship or danger to adjacent property.
6. Removal of diseased or damaged trees.
7. Transplanting or removal in a growing condition to other locations.
8. Installation of utilities or drainage of surface water.
b. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the lands covered by each application
shall be viewed by a member of the Shade Tree Commission who shall
inspect the same as to the trees which are the subject of the
application, as well as other physical conditions existing on the
property. The Shade Tree Commission shall then issue a permit upon
finding that the destruction and/or removal to be permitted would not
impair the growth and development of the remaining trees on the
property of the applicant or the adjacent properties, would not cause
soil erosion, would not impair the existing drainage patterns, would not
§ 17-2.3 GENERAL § 17-2.5
1:291
§ 17-2.6. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-11]
Requests for permits required by the provisions of this section for the
performance of work should be directed to the Shade Tree Commission,
Borough of Brielle, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
§ 17-2.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-12]
Any person, association, group or others found guilty of violating any of
the provisions of these regulations shall, upon conviction be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day any violation of this
section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 17-2.8. Supplemental Provisions. [Ord. #511; 1972 Code § 33-13]
This section shall not be deemed to be a repeal of any existing ordinances or
parts of ordinances other than those expressly repealed hereby, and shall be
deemed to be in addition and supplemental to, and not in conflict with, prior
or existing ordinances of this Borough, and shall be additional provision for
the regulation and control of highway shade trees.
Chapter 18
CABLE T.V.
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance
Nos. 535 and 842 and 1972 Code §§ A116-1 through A116-23.
§ 18-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #929, § 1]
For the purpose of this Chapter the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean that statute of the State of
New Jersey relating to cable television, known as the Cable Television Act,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Shall mean Cablevision’s application for Renewal of
Municipal Consent, which application is on file in the Borough Clerk’s office
and is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this Chapter.
BOARD — Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New
Jersey or its successor agency.
BOROUGH — Shall mean the governing body of the Borough of Brielle in
the County of Monmouth, and the State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — Shall mean Cablevision of Monmouth, Inc. (“Cablevision”) the
grantee or rights under this Chapter.
lessen property values in the neighborhood and would not substantially
impair the aesthetic values of the area.
§ 17-2.5 BRIELLE CODE § 18-1
1:292
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — Shall mean that Federal statute relating to cable
communications commonly known as the Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of
1996, or as those statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Shall mean those Federal regulations relating
to cable television services, 47 C.F.R. Section 76.1 et seq. (and, to the
extent applicable, any other Federal rules and regulations relating to cable
television, including but not limited to, those described in 47 C.F.R. Section
76-3, or as such regulations may be amended.
STATE — Shall mean the State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Shall mean those regulations of the State of
New Jersey Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television. N.J.A.C.
14:17-1.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be
amended.
§ 18-2. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. #929, § 2]
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Borough hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 18-3. GRANT OF AUTHORITY. [Ord. #929, § 3]
The Borough hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to place
in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles, wires,
cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Borough of a cable television system, and for the provisions of any
communication service over the such system as may be authorized by
Federal or State regulatory agencies. Operation and construction, pursuant
to said consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public
Utilities.
§ 18-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. #929, § 4]
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
10 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
§ 18-5. EXPIRATION AND SUBSEQUENT RENEWAL. [Ord. #929,
§ 6]
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
§ 18-1 GENERAL § 18-5
1:293
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-16, and applicable State and Federal rules
and regulations. The Company shall also petition the Board for approval
authorizing continued operation during the period following expiration of
the consent granted herein, and until such a time that a decision is made by
the Borough and the Board relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ 18-6. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. #929, § 7]
The consent granted under this Chapter to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough and any property hereafter annexed.
§ 18-7. PRIMARY SERVICE AREA. [Ord. #929, § 8]
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence within the portion of the
franchise territory, as described in the application for municipal consent, at
tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard installation.
§ 18-8. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. #929, § 9]
Cablevision shall extend service along any public right-of-way outside its
primary service area to those residential areas within the franchise territory
which are located in areas that have a residential density of 25 homes
per mile or greater, or areas with less than 25 homes per mile where
residents agree to share the costs of such extension in accordance with the
line extension formula as provided by the Company in the attached Exhibit
A.24 Extension of service to commercial establishments will be governed in
accordance with the commercial line extension policy as provided by the
Company in its application for municipal consent.
§ 18-9. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. #929, § 10]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the Borough, as an annual franchise fee, a sum
equal to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable
television reception services in the Borough. In the event applicable law
hereinafter permits a larger franchise fee to be collected, but does not fix
the amount thereof, the Borough and Cablevision shall negotiate in good
faith with respect to the amount thereof.
§ 18-10. FREE SERVICE. [Ord. #929, § 11]
a. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide free of charge, one
standard installation and the basic monthly level of cable television
reception service to all State or locally accredited elementary and
secondary public schools and all municipal public libraries, as well as
24.Editor's Note: Exhibit A, referred to herein, may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 18-5 BRIELLE CODE § 18-10
1:294
§ 18-11. CONSTRUCTION/SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #929,
§ 12]
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable State and Federal law. The Company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the Borough:
municipal buildings located within the Borough as set forth in Exhibit B
to this Chapter.25
b. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide free of charge, one
high-speed cable modem and monthly Internet access service,
including a standard installation, to all State or locally accredited
elementary and secondary public schools and all municipal public
libraries, as well as one municipal building located within the Borough
as designated by the Borough. The Borough shall be permitted, at its
designated location, to network up to three additional personal
computers to the cable modem provided thereto by Cablevision.
a. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the Company
shall at its sole expense restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
b. If at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
Company, upon reasonable notice by the Borough shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at its own expense.
c. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Borough, the Company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
Company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days' prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
d. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Borough so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the Company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the Company's facilities.
25.Editor's Note: Exhibit B, referred to herein, may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 18-10 GENERAL § 18-12
1:295
§ 18-12. TECHNICAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS. [Ord.
#929, § 13]
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable Federal and State laws,
rules and regulations.
§ 18-13. LOCAL OFFICE OR AGENT. [Ord. #929, § 14]
§ 18-14. DESIGNATION OF COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. #929,
§ 15]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ 18-15. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. #929, § 16]
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole cost
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the Borough as an additional insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of: (1) $500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person, (2)
$500,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident, (3)
$1,000,000 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident or
occurrence stemming from or arising out of the company's exercise of its
rights hereunder, (4) $5,000,000 umbrella excess liability, and (5) statutory
workers' compensation.
§ 18-16. PERFORMANCE BOND. [Ord. #929, § 17]
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this Agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
a. Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of
receiving, investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality
of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office
shall be open daily during normal business hours, and in no event less
than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception
of holidays. In addition, representatives of the Company will provide
telephone responses for service problems, 24 hours per day, seven days
per week.
b. Notwithstanding anything contained in the application to the contrary,
Cablevision currently maintains its local office at 1501 18th Avenue,
Wall, New Jersey. In the event that the Company relocates this office at
any time during the period of this consent, it must provide notice to the
Borough in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:18-5.1.
§ 18-12 BRIELLE CODE § 18-16
1:296
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ 18-17. RATES. [Ord. #929, § 18]
§ 18-18. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. #929, § 19]
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages pursuant to State and Federal requirements. The Company shall
in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the Borough or any other
person, during an emergency, if for any reason the municipality is unable
to make full use of the cable television system as contemplated herein. The
Borough shall utilize the state-approved procedures for such emergency
uses.
§ 18-19. EQUITABLE TERMS. [Ord. #929, § 20]
In the event that another multi-channel video program provider's service
within the borough creates a significant competitive disadvantage to
Cablevision, the Company shall have the right to request from the Borough
lawful amendments to its franchise that relieve it of burdens which create
a. The rates of the Company for cable television services shall be subject
to regulation to the extent permitted by Federal and State law.
b. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
10% off the monthly rate of the broadcast basic level of cable television
reception service to any person 62 years of age or older who subscribes
to the Company's cable television service, subject to the following:
1. Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than 62 years of age; and,
2. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21; and,
3. The senior discount herein relates only to the broadcast basic level
of cable television service, and shall not apply to any additional
service, feature, or equipment offered by the company, including
any premium channel services and pay-per-view services; and,
4. Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or per
channel a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount.
c. To the extent required by applicable Federal and State law, bills for
service shall be itemized for the convenience of Cablevision
subscribers.
§ 18-16 GENERAL § 18-19
1:297
the unfair competitive situation. Should the Company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good-faith
appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the Company of
such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an agreement on
such terms, the Borough agrees to support the Company's petition to the
Board for modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47
and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate amendments
to the franchise, the Borough acknowledges that the Company shall have
the right to petition the Board directly for such amendments in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7; provided, however, the
Borough shall be under no obligation to support Cablevision's request for
such relief from the Board.
Cablevision represents and acknowledges that as of the date of its
acceptance of this municipal consent, competition within the Borough has
not yet risen to the level of creating a significant competitive disadvantage
sufficient to enable the Company to seek relief under this section.
§ 18-20. REMOVAL OF FACILITIES. [Ord. #929, § 21]
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this Chapter, Cablevision at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six months after such expiration, termination
or revocation obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system or any other Federal or State certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ 18-21. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
[Ord. #929, § 22]
a. The Company shall continue to provide noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access on a joint basis with other
municipalities in the region, and shall designate one channel on its
system for PEG access use. The Company shall be required to designate
one additional noncommercial PEG access channel, any time the
existing designated PEG access channel is in continuous use with the
cablecasting of "locally produced original PEG programming" during at
least 75% of the time, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.,
during any consecutive 12 week period during the term of this consent.
If the usage ratio of the second PEG channel should at any time fall
below 50%, based upon the formula described herein, use of the second
designated PEG access channel shall revert back to the company upon
60 days advance written notice to the Borough. For purposes of this
section, "locally produced original PEG programming" shall mean
programming produced by the Borough and its Cablevision subscribers
within the Borough, and the governmental agencies, schools and/or
§ 18-19 BRIELLE CODE § 18-21
1:298
§ 18-22. PERIODIC PERFORMANCE EVALUATION. [Ord. #929, § 23]
school districts within the Borough, but excluding programming
consisting of character generated message and/or repeat
programming.
b. The Borough agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Borough is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the Company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use and the Company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Borough's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
c. The company agrees to follow any applicable statutory and/or
regulatory provisions prohibiting the transmission of obscene
programming on any of its PEG channels.
d. Provided that PEG access channel use shall remain on a shared basis
with other municipalities in the region, the company shall continue to
be responsible for administering, interpreting and enforcing reasonable
rules for PEG access channel use, in accordance with applicable
Federal and State law.
e. The Company shall continue to provide PEG access facilities as
described in its application for municipal consent. The Company further
agrees to provide training in the use of equipment and studio facilities
to the Borough and to qualified PEG access users within the Borough.
Such training shall be provided no more frequently than semi-annually,
upon the advanced written request of the Borough on a first come, first
served basis, and shall be free of charge.
f. In consideration for the rights granted in this Chapter, the Company
shall provide the Borough with a one-time grant of $8,000, which may
be used by the Borough for any cable and/or other telecommunications
related purpose as the Borough, in its discretion, may deem
appropriate.
a. Upon sixty-day notification by the Borough, the Company shall be
prepared to participate in a meeting or series of meetings evaluating
the performance of the Company under this Chapter. The timing of such
performance evaluation sessions shall be solely in the discretion of the
Borough; however, each such session shall not be initiated sooner than
one year after the close of a previously conducted performance
evaluation session. All performance evaluation meetings shall be open
to the public.
b. Topics which may be discussed at any performance evaluation session
may include, but not be limited to, cable system performance,
§ 18-21 GENERAL § 18-22
1:299
§ 18-23. PARITY. [Ord. #929, § 24]
Cablevision agrees that the capabilities of the cable system shall be
maintained technologically current throughout the duration of the
franchise, as compared with other communities, of similar size, served
by Cablevision of Monmouth, Inc. from the same system, to the extent
economically reasonable and commercially practicable. Cablevision further
agrees that it will exercise reasonable efforts to deploy the same or
comparable cable services in the Borough, that are provided to other
similarly situated communities operated by Cablevision of Monmouth, Inc.,
from the same system, on other than a trial or test basis; provided, however,
this obligation shall apply only to comparisons with other communities
where Cablevision has the same technical capabilities to offer such cable
services, including, but not limited to bandwidth capacity, physical
architecture, and network construction; and, further provided that this
requirement shall be subject to Cablevision's reasonable right to consider
the commercial practicality of providing such cable service in the Borough,
including its ability to obtain a reasonable rate of return on investment over
the remaining term of the consent.
§ 18-24. INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION. [Ord. #929, § 25]
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Borough by the Company except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this Chapter by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
compliance with this Chapter and applicable law, customer service and
complaint response, services provided, fees described in this Chapter,
free services, applications of new technologies, and judicial, Federal
or State filings pertaining to the operation of the cable system in the
Borough. Not less than 45 days prior to such performance evaluation
session, the Borough shall furnish to franchisee a list of the issues,
which it seeks to consider at such meeting.
c. During review and evaluation, Company shall reasonably cooperate
with the Borough.
d. Each performance evaluation session shall be deemed to have been
completed as of the date the Borough issues a final report on its
findings.
e. In the event that the Borough shall determine, as a result of any
performance evaluation review session that the Company has not
substantially complied with all material obligations under this Chapter,
the Borough shall have the right to request that the Board take
appropriate action, provided, however, that the Borough shall first give
the Company written notice of all alleged instances of noncompliance
and an opportunity to cure same within 60 days.
§ 18-22 BRIELLE CODE § 18-24
1:300
modified, change, limited, or altered by this Chapter, or to the extent that
they conflict with State or Federal law.
§ 18-25. CONSISTENCY WITH APPLICABLE LAWS. [Ord. #929,
§ 26]
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
Federal, State and local laws.
§ 18-26. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. #929, § 27]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ 18-27. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. #929, § 28]
This Chapter shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities.
Chapter 19
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 470,
567, 587, 736 and 998
§ 19-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 19-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. #1024 § 19-1.1]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Brielle,
of Monmouth County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 19-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. #1024 § 19-1.2]
a. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Brielle are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
§ 18-24 GENERAL § 19-1.2
1:301
§ 19-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. #1024 § 19-1.3]
It is the purpose of this Chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 19-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. #1024 § 19-1.4]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this Chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. Protect human life and health;
b. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
c. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
f. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
h. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
§ 19-1.2 BRIELLE CODE § 19-1.4
1:302
§ 19-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #1024 § 19-2.0]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this Chapter its most reasonable application.
ADVISORY BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (ABFE) — Shall mean the elevation
shown on a community's Advisory Flood Hazard Map that indicates the
advisory stillwater elevation plus wave effect (ABFE = SWEL + wave effect)
resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (AFHA) — Shall mean the land in the
floodplain within a community subject to flooding from the 1% annual
chance event depicted on the Advisory Flood Hazard Map.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD MAP — Shall mean the official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Administration has delineated the
areas of advisory flood hazards applicable to the community.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Construction Code
Official's interpretation of any provision of this Chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH, or
VO Zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with
a 1% annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — Shall mean an area of special flood
hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action
from storms or seismic sources.
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 19-1.4 GENERAL § 19-2
1:303
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Shall mean the
official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built, in
the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top
of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high hazard
area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
elevated floor, elevated above the base flood elevation by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In areas of coastal
high hazard "elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting
the definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed
by means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — Shall mean the process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
§ 19-2 BRIELLE CODE § 19-2
1:304
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
(2)
d.
§ 19-2 GENERAL § 19-2
1:305
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — Shall mean a continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
SAND DUNES — Shall mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in
ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean for other than new construction
or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
§ 19-2 BRIELLE CODE § 19-2
1:306
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before
damage would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the
"start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures
which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
Chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this Chapter.
§ 19-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 19-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. #1024
§ 19-3.1]
This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Brielle, Monmouth County, New Jersey.
§ 19-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. #1024 § 19-3.2]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Brielle, Community No.
340290, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Monmouth
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated September 25, 2009.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Monmouth County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel(s) 34025C0455F and
34025C0456F, whose effective date is September 25, 2009.
c. Advisory Base Flood Elevations and Advisory Flood Hazard Maps - Point
Pleasant NE (Panel No. 4007464 ne) dated January 12, 2013, and Point
Pleasant NW (Panel No. 4007464 nw) dated January 7, 2013. These
documents shall take precedence over previous panels and FIS in
construction and development regulations only. Where the Special
§ 19-2 GENERAL § 19-3.2
1:307
§ 19-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. #1024 § 19-3.3]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this Chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this Chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $1,250 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both,
for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Brielle
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 19-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. #1024
§ 19-3.4]
This Chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 19-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. #1024 § 19-3.5]
In the interpretation and application of this Chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 19-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. #1024 § 19-3.6]
The degree of flood protection required by this Chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This Chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) and the Advisory Flood Hazard Area (AFHA)
Maps conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
requirement shall prevail.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this Chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at 601 Union Lane, Brielle, New Jersey.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 19-3.2 BRIELLE CODE § 19-3.6
1:308
This Chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Brielle,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 19-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 19-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. #1024
§ 19-4.1]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in subsection 19-3.2. Application for a
development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction
Code Official and may include, but not be limited to; plans in duplicate
drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations
of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of
materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically,
the following information is required:
§ 19-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. #1024
§ 19-4.2]
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this Chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 19-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [Ord.
#1024 §§ 19-4.3 — 19-4.3-5]
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in Section 19-5.2b; and,
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this Chapter have been satisfied.
§ 19-3.6 GENERAL § 19-4.3
1:309
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of subsection 19-5.3a are
met.
4. Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of
the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood
damage.
5. Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with Section 19-5.4b, 4.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
19-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Construction Code Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, in order to administer subsections 19-5.2a,
Specific Standards, Residential Construction, and 19-5.2b, Specific
Standards, Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 19-4.1c.
3. In coastal high hazard areas, certification shall be obtained from a
registered professional engineer or architect that the provisions of
subsections 19-5.4b, 1 and 14-5.4b,2(a) and (b) are met.
4. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this Chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
§ 19-4.3 BRIELLE CODE § 19-4.3
1:310
§ 19-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. #1024, §§ 19-4.4 — 19-4.4-2]
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
19-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Planning Board as established by Mayor and Council shall hear
and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this Chapter.
2. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Code Official in the
enforcement or administration of this Chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the appropriate court as
provided by statute.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this Chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
§ 19-4.3 GENERAL § 19-4.4
1:311
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 19-4.4a, 4 and the
purposes of this Chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this Chapter.
6. The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a)-(k) in subsection 19-4.4a,4 have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
§ 19-4.4 BRIELLE CODE § 19-4.4
1:312
§ 19-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 19-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. #1024 §§ 19-5.1 — 19-5.1-5]
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
19-4.4a, 4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction to be placed or substantially improved and
substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
§ 19-4.4 GENERAL § 19-5.1
1:313
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and,
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
§ 19-5.1 BRIELLE CODE § 19-5.2
1:314
§ 19-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. #1024 §§ 19-5.2 — 19-5.2-3]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 19-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 19-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement together
with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, elevated at or
above the base flood elevation or advisory base flood elevation
whichever is more restrictive, plus one foot (minimum);
2. Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all
new construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade one foot above (minimum) the
depth number specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth
number is specified) or at or above the advisory base flood
elevation plus one foot, whichever is more restrictive. And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood
waters around and away from proposed structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities.
1. Either:
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation or advisory base
flood elevation whichever is more restrictive, plus one foot
(minimum); and
(b) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM that
all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade one foot above the depth number
specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth number is
specified) or at or above the advisory base flood elevation plus
one foot, whichever is more restrictive. And, require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood
waters around and away from proposed structures;
2. Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one foot
(minimum), or advisory base flood elevation plus one foot
§ 19-5.2 GENERAL § 19-5.2
1:315
§ 19-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. #1024 § 19-5.3]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
19-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
(minimum), (whichever is more restrictive) the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in subsection 19-4.3c,2(b).
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 19-5.1a,2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation or advisory base flood elevation, plus
one foot (minimum) (whichever is more restrictive).
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If subsection 19-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 19-5 Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than two-tenths of a foot
at any point.
§ 19-5.2 BRIELLE CODE § 19-5.4
1:316
§ 19-5.4. Coastal High Hazard Area. [Ord. #1024 §§ 19-5.4 —
19-5.4-3]
Coastal high hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in subsection 19-3.2. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges
and hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
a. Location of Structures.
1. All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
2. The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or manufactured home
subdivision.
b. Construction Methods.
1. Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation, advisory base flood elevation or
as required by the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23),
whichever is more restrictive, and,
(b) With all space below the lowest floor's supporting member
open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided or in subsection 19-5.4b,4.
2. Structural Support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values
each of which shall have a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (100-year mean recurrence
interval).
(c) There shall be no fill used for structural support.
3. Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of subsections
19-5.4b, 1 and 19-5.4b, 2(a) and (b).
4. Space Below the Lowest Floor.
§ 19-5.4 GENERAL § 19-5.4
1:317
Chapter 20
LAND USE PROCEDURES
§ 20-1. TITLE. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-1; § 19-10]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as: the Land Use Procedure
Chapter of the Borough of Brielle.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this Chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or State codes) may be
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions.
(1) Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood and,
(2) The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable State or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Building Subcode Official for approval.
c. Sand Dunes. Prohibit manmade alteration of sand dunes within Zones
VE and V on the community's DFIRM which would increase potential
flood damage.
§ 19-5.4 BRIELLE CODE § 20-2
1:318
§ 20-2. PURPOSE. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-2; New]
The purpose of this Chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations, and
procedures for the submission of development applications in compliance
with Chapter 291 of P.L. 1975 of New Jersey, "The Municipal Land Use Law."
§ 20-3. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #231; Ord. #255; Ord. #583; Ord.
#592; Ord. #652; 1972 Code § 89-5 and § 75-6; New; Ord. #804, § 1;
Ord. #915; Ord. #970; Ord. #988; Ord. No. 1017]
a. All definitions not included herein, but included in the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et. seq., shall be included in this Chapter by
reference.
b. The definitions herein set forth and otherwise included are intended for
use in conjunction with Chapters 20 through 24 inclusive of the Code of
the Borough of Brielle.
c. Definitions. As used in these Chapters:
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — Shall mean one which:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall mean the secretary of the
Municipal Agency, depending on which Board has reviewing authority.
AGRICULTURAL — Shall mean the growing of crops, truck gardening,
raising or breeding of horses, sheep, dairy, poultry or other farm
livestock; orchard, woodlot, reforestation, nursery or greenhouses or
other agricultural or horticultural purposes. Agricultural land shall
include open or wooded areas, ponds, brooks, swamps and meadows.
When the Planning Board or the Subdivision Committee is determining
whether the division of land is for agricultural purposes, they will give
1. Is subordinate to and serves any principal building or use;
Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building
or principal use served;
2.
Contributes to the comfort, convenience or needs of occupants of
the principal building or principal use served;
3.
Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal building or
principal use served;
4.
5. Shall not be used as an extension of a permitted home occupation.
Shall not contain any plumbing fixtures or facilities above the
ground floor of the structure, and not contain any habitable space
on any floor of the structure.
6.
Shall not be physically attached to the principal structure, and shall
nearly match the architecture and finishes utilized in the principal
structure.
7.
§ 20-2 GENERAL § 20-3
1:319
full consideration as to whether or not the lot has been approved for
farm tax assessment.
ALTERATIONS — Shall mean a change of rearrangement in the
structural parts or in the existing facilities which alter the use of
the building, or an enlargement, whether by extension of a side or
by increasing in height or by moves from one location or position to
another. The addition or expansion of dormers are to be considered an
enlargement.
APARTMENT — Shall mean the room or suite of rooms which is
designed or intended to be, or is in fact used, as one dwelling unit.
AUTOMOTIVE GASOLINE STATION — Shall mean any establishment
servicing motor vehicles with fuel and oil but not including repairs,
changing of tires, or any other replacement of accessory parts.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR GARAGE — Shall mean any establishment
servicing motor vehicles with fuel, supplies, and accessories, oil,
lubrication, major repair services, vehicle parts sales, wrecker and
hauling services, body work and painting, and heavy repair requiring
engine or drivetrain dismantling. When trucks or heavy equipment are
repaired even for oil changes, lubrication, minor tune-ups, installation
of batteries, wiper blades, and similar minor repairs, the establishment
shall be considered to be a repair garage.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND SERVICES — Shall mean any establishment
selling motor vehicles new and used, supplies and accessories, and
including service and repair facilities, but not solely the storage of
vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES LOT — Shall mean any establishment with space
for the sale and storage of new or used motor vehicles, but not
including the dispensing of gasoline and fuel, service, repairs, or solely
the storage of vehicles.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION — Shall mean any establishment
servicing motor vehicles with gas, oil, lubrication services, lubricants,
and other vehicle maintenance supplies and parts and equipment not
requiring extensive or prolonged mechanical work for installation.
Service work offered should be limited to oil changes, lubrication,
minor tune-ups, installation of batteries, tires, wiper blades and similar
equipment, wheel balancing and alignment, and the replacement of
minor mechanical parts such as hoses, spark plugs, ignition wiring,
points alternators, water pumps and similar parts not requiring engine
or drivetrain dismantling.
BASEMENT — Shall mean:
§ 20-3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-3
1:320
a. For the purposes of this Chapter, with reference to occupancy or
use and to regulate the height and bulk of buildings, is the portion
of a building in which the ceiling averages less than four feet above
the finished grade where such grade meets the outside walls of the
building, which shall not be considered a story and habitable.
b. If the ceiling height averages more than four feet above such grade
and has a clear height of seven feet or more, such space shall be
considered a story and habitable.
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean a building or part
thereof, other than a hotel or restaurant, wherein furnished or
unfurnished rooms, with or without cooking facilities are provided for
compensation for two or more persons not related to the owner or
proprietor.
BUFFER STRIP OR SCREEN — Shall mean a combination of lawn
and landscape screen of densely-planted (or having equivalent natural
growth) evergreen shrubs or trees at least four feet in height at the
time of planting of a type that will form a year-round dense screen at
least six feet high, which shall be maintained in good condition at all
times. Where required in the district regulations, a screen be installed
along or within the lines of a lot as a protection to adjoining nearby
properties. Solid fencing may be substituted to meet only part of the
requirement and must be supplemented with planting to soften the
appearance.
BUILDING — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction adapted to permanent, temporary, or continuous
occupancy and having a roof.
BUILDING ACCESSORY — Shall mean a building in which an accessory
use is contained.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Shall mean the vertical distance, measured from
the elevation of the centerline (opposite the midpoint of the front lot
line) of the improved public street upon which the building lot fronts,
to the highest point of the building. Chimneys, spires, and similar
projections, other than signs, shall not be included in calculating
building height. In the case of a corner lot, building height shall be
measured from the higher of the two street centerline elevations
opposite the mid-point of each of the front lot lines. On building lots,
where existing slopes are 6% or greater, measured from street
centerline to the proposed building line, building height shall be
measured from the average existing elevation along the proposed front
building wall.
BUILDING LINE — Shall mean a line formed by the intersection of
a horizontal plane at average grade level and a vertical plane that
coincides with the exterior surface of the building on any side. In
case of a cantilevered section of a building, the vertical plane will
coincide with the most projected surface. All yard requirements shall
be measured to the building line.
§ 20-3 GENERAL § 20-3
1:321
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — Shall mean a building, on a lot, in which the
principal use of that lot is conducted.
CAR WASH (AUTO —
LAUNDRY) — Shall mean a building or structure portion thereof where
vehicles are washed or cleaned with the use of a mechanical device.
CELLAR — See definition of basement.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Shall mean a Certificate issued by
the Building Inspector upon completion of the construction of a new
building or upon a change in the use of a building which certifies that
all requirements of this Chapter, or such adjustments thereof which
have been granted by the appropriate agency, and all other applicable
requirements, have been complied with. A certificate of occupancy shall
be required upon a change in the use, occupancy or ownership of a
building.
CLINIC — Shall mean medical or dental clinic, any place used for the
administering of medical or dental treatment free, or at a low cost,
or any place used as an in-patient or out-patient medical or dental
treatment center wherein certain medical and dental conditions and
disorders are treated primarily through surgical intervention that is not
commonly performed in normal, private medical or dental practice.
CLUB — Shall mean a non-profit corporation, organization, or
association of persons who are members thereof, which owns or leases
a building or part thereof for the use of members or guests. Said clubs
or lodges shall have been principally established for the promotion
of a common objective and shall be distinctly not considered as a
semi-public use under the provisions of this Chapter. Food, meals and
alcoholic beverages may be served as an incidental and occasional
function of this use, provided that adequate facilities are present and
further provided that all Federal, State and Municipal laws are
complied with.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area within
or related to a site designated as a development, and designed and
intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the
development. Common open space may contain such complementary
structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the
use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY BUILDING — Shall mean a building for civic, social,
educational, cultural and recreational uses, not operated primarily for
monetary gain or profit.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — Shall mean an application for
development which shall be deemed "complete" when the
administrative official determines that all requirements for submission
have been met and that all necessary documentation has been provided
which is necessary for the Municipal Agency to review and act on the
application.
§ 20-3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-3
1:322
CONDITIONAL USE — Shall mean a use permitted in a particular
zoning district only upon a showing that such use in a specified location
will comply with the conditions and standards for the location or
operation of such use as contained in this Chapter and upon the
issuance of an authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONSOLIDATION — Shall mean a conveyance of land so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
COURTYARD — Shall mean an open unoccupied space bounded on at
least two opposing sides by a building wall, but not a front side, or rear
yard.
CURB LEVEL — Shall mean the grade of the curb in front of the
midpoint of the lot as established by the Municipal Engineer.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into
two or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other
structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or
extension of use of land, including alteration to a site, for which
permission is required pursuant to this Chapter.
DORMITORY — Any building, or portion thereof, designed or converted
to contain living quarters which are provided as residences or for
overnight sleeping of individuals or groups, operated as an accessory
use to a school, college, university, boarding school, convent,
monastery, nonprofit educational institution, religious order, or
other.[Added 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1076]
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean an establishment which is
designed to provide, either wholly or in part, service to customers while
in their automobiles parked or standing upon the premises.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a house, trailer, or other structure or
a portion of any building or structure designed, arranged or used for
living quarters for one or more persons living as a single housekeeping
unit with cooking and bathroom facilities, but not including units in
hotels or other structures designed for transient residence.
DWELLING UNIT DENSITY (RESIDENTIAL DENSITY) — Shall mean
the average number of dwelling units per acre of ground in a given
location or area.
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY — Shall mean a dwelling unit
consisting of a single room or common space inclusive of bathroom,
kitchen facilities.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY — Shall mean a building used or designed
as a residence for four or more families living independently of each
other and doing their own cooking therein, including apartment houses,
garden apartments, but not including motels.
§ 20-3 GENERAL § 20-3
1:323
DWELLING, MULTI-LEVEL — Shall mean a building more than 2-1/2
stories and more than 35 feet in height, on one lot, used and designed
as a residence for four or more families living independently of each
other.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — Shall mean a detached building designed
for, or occupied exclusively by, one family.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED — Shall mean a dwelling having a party
wall in common with another dwelling but which otherwise is designed
to be and is substantially separate from any other structure or
structures except accessory buildings.
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY — Shall mean a building designed for, or
occupied exclusively by, three families, living independently of each
other.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSES — Shall mean more than two one-family
attached dwellings in a continuous row.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — Shall mean a building designed for, or
occupied exclusively by, two families, living independently of each
other.
EASEMENT — Shall mean a right, privilege, service or convenience
which one has to use the land of another for a special or limited
purpose, such as a right-of-way, drainage conservation, sight or utility
easement. An easement may be for the benefit of a private party or
parties, for public or quasi-public purposes, or both.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — Shall mean a plan
which fully indicates necessary land treatment measures, including
a schedule of the timing of their installation, which will effectively
minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. Such measures shall be
equivalent to or exceed standards adopted by the New Jersey State
Soil Conservation Committee and administered by the Freehold Soil
Conservation District or any duly designated successor or agency.
EXTERIOR BALCONIES, DECKS, PATIOS — And other similar exterior
areas shall be included in the gross floor area calculations of
commercial establishments where the services of the establishment are
available on a routine basis in these locations, solely for the purpose of
determining the number of parking spaces required in accordance with
Chapter 21, Section 21-32, Off-Street Parking Minimum Spaces.
FACADE — Shall mean the total wall surface, including door and
window areas of a building's face. Each wall surface shall be considered
a separate facade.
FAMILY — Shall mean one or more persons living together as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit which exhibits the kind of stability,
permanency and functional life-style and relationships which is
equivalent to that of the traditional family unit, as distinguished from
individuals or groups occupying a hotel, club, group home, boarding
house or similar arrangement. The foregoing shall not be construed
§ 20-3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-3
1:324
to permit an owner of property in a single-family district to solicit the
public at large to rent rooms.
FARM — Shall mean a lot, as defined herein, having an area of not
less than five acres and used exclusively for agricultural purposes as
defined by this ordinance.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT — Shall mean the fast food restaurant,
which may or may not have tables, but which is essentially designed to
dispense quick, ready-made food of limited variety. The patron obtains
food directly from the dispensing counter for consumption on or off
such premises. The term fast food restaurant shall include drive-in
restaurant.
FENCE — Shall mean a barrier constructed of any type of material
including, but not limited to wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal or
any other non-vegetative material, or combination of such materials,
erected for the purpose of acting as an enclosure or screening of yard
area or other areas on a lot.
FINAL APPROVAL — Shall mean the official action of the Municipal
Agency taken on a preliminarily approved major subdivision after all
conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been
installed or guarantees properly posted for their completion, or
approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees.
FINAL PLAT — Shall mean the final map of all or portion of the
subdivision which is presented to the Municipal Agency as provided for
in this Chapter.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Shall mean the sum of the area of all floors of
buildings or structures compared to the total area of the site.
GARAGE, PARKING — Shall mean a building which is used for
commercial purposes and is used only for the storage of motor vehicles.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — Shall mean an accessory building or part of a
principal building used only for the storage of motor vehicles as an
accessory use. In a Residential Zone, a garage is intended for and
used for storing privately owned motor vehicles, boats and trailers and
personal belongings of the family or families resident in the principal
residential use on the lot.
GARDEN APARTMENT — Shall mean a building, not more than 2-1/2
stories and 35 feet in height, as measured from the average level of the
ground immediately adjacent to the base of the structure to its highest
point exclusive of chimney or tower, on one lot containing three or more
separate dwelling units, and sharing joint utility services or facilities or
both.
GARDEN APARTMENT DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean two or more
garden apartments on a single lot.
§ 20-3 GENERAL § 20-3
1:325
GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS — Shall mean the conditions
under which preliminary approval is granted including Plat Details,
Improvements, Off-Site Improvements, and Design Standards.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the area of all floors of a building
intended or proposed for human occupancy including interior balconies
and mezzanines, but excluding exterior balconies and decks, except as
noted herein. All horizontal dimensions of each floor are to be measured
from the exterior faces of walls of each such floor. The gross floor area
of buildings on a lot shall include the floor area of accessory buildings
on the same lot, measured the same way.
GROSS HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the floor or several floors of a dwelling unit
measured between the inside face of exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two dwelling units, having a clear ceiling
height of seven feet, six inches or greater, but not including any
unfinished cellar or basement or any garage space, breezeway, interior
patios, enclosed porches or accessory building space.
HABITABLE SPACE — Shall mean any combination of building
construction, materials, or equipment that would form space suitable
for human occupation for dwelling purposes.
HOME OCCUPATION — Shall mean any use conducted entirely within
a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes and in connection with which there is no display, no stock in
trade nor commodities sold upon the premises, unless the commodities
sold are clearly secondary to and identified with the permitted
occupation. Beauty shops, barber shops, and similar occupations shall
not be included as permitted home occupations.
HOSPITAL — Shall mean an institution which maintains and operates
organized facilities and services for the diagnosis, treatment or care
of persons suffering from illness, injury or deformity and/or obstetrics,
and in which all diagnosis, treatment and care are administered by or
performed under the direction of persons licensed to practice medicine
or osteopathy in the State of New Jersey. The institution shall also
conform with the revised standards for hospital facilities as adopted by
the State Board of Control of the Department of Health.
HOTEL/MOTEL — Shall mean a building containing furnished rooms,
without kitchen facilities, used, rented or hired out to be occupied
for sleeping purposes by transient guests who have their residence
elsewhere. A general kitchen, dining room, or meeting rooms may be
provided within the building or as an accessory building. Customary
Hotel/Motel services must be provided, such as, but not limited to, maid
services, laundering of linen, telephone and secretarial or desk service
and the use and upkeep of furniture.
JUNK OR SALVAGE YARD — Shall mean a lot, or structure, or part
thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage, and sale of waste
§ 20-3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-3
1:326
paper, rags, scrap metal or discarded material; or for the collection,
dismantling, storage and salvaging of machinery and/or motor vehicles.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Shall mean any activity involving the clearing,
grading, transporting, filling of land and any other activity which causes
land to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
LANDSCAPED AREA — Shall mean areas containing trees, shrubs, and
ground covers, pedestrian and recreation areas, ponds, streams or any
other areas or features which can be reasonably included, but shall not
include areas occupied by buildings or structures, paving for parking,
loading or access thereto, required buffers, or areas utilized for outside
storage.
LOADING SPACE — Shall mean an off-street space or berth abutting
upon a street or other appropriate means of access intended for the
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials.
LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land established
by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — Shall mean an area of land which is determined by the
limits of the lot lines bounding the area and shall be expressed in terms
of square feet. Any portion of a lot included in a street right-of-way shall
not be included in calculating lot area.
LOT COVERAGE — Shall mean the proportion of the area of a lot,
expressed as a percent, that is covered by the maximum horizontal
cross-section of a building or buildings.
LOT DEPTH — Shall mean the shortest horizontal distance between the
street line and the nearest part of a rear lot line. The greater frontage
on a corner lot shall be its depth.
LOT FRONTAGE — Shall mean the horizontal distance between side lot
lines measured along the street line. The minimum lot frontage shall
be the same as the lot width except that on curved alignments with an
outside radius of less than 500 feet the minimum distance between the
side lot lines measured at the street line shall not be less than 60% of
the required minimum lot width. In the case of a corner lot, either street
frontage which meets the minimum frontage required for that zone may
be considered the lot frontage.
LOT LINE — Shall mean a lot line shall be the boundary line of a parcel
of land as shown on a certified filed map or as defined by a filed map or
both. A lot line shall not be considered unless legally subdivided.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the straight and horizontal distance between
side lot lines at setback points on each side lot line measured an equal
distance back from the street line. The minimum lot width shall be
measured at the minimum required building setback line. Where side
lot lines are not parallel, the minimum lot width at the street line shall
§ 20-3 GENERAL § 20-3
1:327
be not less than 60% of the required minimum lot width. The lesser
frontage of a corner lot shall be its width.
LOT, CORNER — Shall mean a lot bounded by two or more streets at
their intersection. Required front yard areas shall apply to all frontages.
Required rear yard areas shall apply to those areas opposite the
primary access to the principal structure. Required side yard areas
shall apply to all other areas not described above. Driveway access shall
be to the street of lesser traffic classification.
LOT, THROUGH — Shall mean a lot running through from one street to
another.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Shall mean any security, other than
cash, which may be accepted by the Municipality for the maintenance
of any improvements required by this Chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any subdivision not classified as a
minor subdivision.
MARINE FACILITY — Shall mean a waterfront facility wherein berthing
spaces for two or more watercraft are provided. A marine facility, in
addition to berthing spaces shall include two or more of the following:
automobile parking spaces; sanitary facilities; motor fuel sales; and
boat sales, repairs, maintenance and service.
MASTER PLAN — Shall mean a composite of one or more written or
graphic proposals for the development of the Municipality as adopted
by the Planning Board.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Shall mean any site plan which alters or amends
an existing site or site plan by 10% or less or involves an estimated
cost of $1,000 or less shall be considered to be a minor site plan. A
minor site plan may be prepared by someone other than a licensed
professional, and the applicant may request waivers from the site plan
requirements if agreed to by the Municipal Agency.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a subdivision of land that does not
involve:
a. The creation of more than three lots;
b. Planned development;
c. Any new street; or
d. Extension of an off-tract improvement.
The creation of three lots shall include the new lots plus the lands
remaining. Only one minor subdivision shall be permitted on one
parcel of land during any eighteen-month period, and the total number
of lots created on any one parcel shall be five plus the one lot
remaining.
MOBILE HOME — Shall be synonymous with Trailer Home.
MOTEL — (See Hotel).
§ 20-3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-3
1:328
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean a dwelling designed for or
containing three or more dwelling units. This definition shall not
include a hotel or motel.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — Shall mean a Municipal Planning Board or the
Board of Adjustment, or the Governing Body when acting pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law. The word "Agency" shall mean Municipal
Agency.
NURSERY SCHOOL — Shall mean a school designed to provide daytime
care or instruction for two or more children from two to five years of
age, inclusive, and operated on a regular basis.
NURSING HOME — Shall mean a hospital for two or more convalescent
or aged people which may include kitchen facilities, recreation areas,
and similar necessary adjunct uses for patient care.
OCCUPANCY — Shall mean the use of a lot or structure.
OFF-SITE — Shall mean located outside the lot lines of the lot in
question but within the property of which the lot is a part, which is the
subject of a development application, and shall include the contiguous
portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Shall mean not located on the property which is the
subject of a development application, nor on a contiguous portion of a
street or right-of-way.
OFFICIAL MAP — Shall mean a map adopted by ordinance pursuant
to Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey, 1975, or any other prior act
authorizing such adoption.
ON-SITE — Shall mean located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Shall mean located on the property which is the subject
of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water
essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or
reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and
enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring
such open space, provided that such areas may be improved with only
those buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and other
improvements that are designed to incidental to the natural openness
of the land.
OWNER — Shall mean any individual, firm, associate, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided.
PARKING AREA — Shall mean an area other than a street, used for the
parking of motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — Shall mean an off-street space available for the
parking of a motor vehicle which in this Ordinance is held to be an
§ 20-3 GENERAL § 20-3
1:329
area nine feet wide and 18 feet long, exclusive of passageways and
driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access thereto, except that
all parallel off-street parking spaces shall have an area nine feet wide
and 22 feet long. No parking space of the dimensions herein defined
shall encroach into any adjoining parking space, passageway or
driveway.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Shall mean any security, which may
be accepted by the Municipality, including cash, provided that the
Municipality shall not require more than 10% of the total performance
guarantee in cash.
PLANNING BOARD — Shall mean the officially appointed Planning
Board of the Borough of Brielle, New Jersey.
PLAT — Shall mean a map or maps of a subdivision or site plan.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Shall mean the conferral of certain rights
pursuant to this Chapter, and the Municipal Land Use Law, prior to
final approval, after specific elements of a development plan have been
agreed upon by the Municipal Agency and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — Shall mean the preliminary map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the Municipal
Agency.
PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICE — Shall mean the office or studio
of a resident professional, upon finding that such occupation is truly
professional in character by virtue of the need for similar training and
experience as a condition for the practice thereof, such as Architects,
Landscape Architects, Engineers, Doctors, Lawyers, Planners and
similar professions. Such residential professional office shall not
include the office of any person professionally engaged in the purchase
or sale of economic goods. Group teaching instructors, tea rooms,
tourist homes, beauty parlors, barber shops, hairdressing and
manicuring establishments, convalescent homes, mortuary
establishments, and stores, trades or business or similar uses of any
kind shall not be deemed to be such residential Professional Home
Offices. The professional must reside in the home portion of the
structure, and no more than two other employees shall be permitted.
The Professional Home Office shall be limited to 30% of the first floor
gross square footage, but not exceed a maximum of 600 square feet of
gross floor space, and shall not be in a separate building. The office
shall be an integral part of the residence and there shall be no change
to the facade of the building to make it look other than a residential
structure.
PROJECTION — Shall mean an extension of a building which protrudes
or juts out from the vertical plane of the building not more than two
feet.
PUBLIC DRAINAGE WAY — Shall mean the land reserved or dedicated
for the installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or
required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the
§ 20-3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-3
1:330
biological as well as drainage function of the channel and providing
for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation, and erosion and to assure the adequacy of existing
and proposed culverts and bridges, to induce water recharge into the
ground where practical, and to lessen nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area conveyed or
otherwise dedicated to the Municipality, Board of Education, State or
County agency, or other public body, for recreational or conservational
uses. Dedication and acceptance of public open spaces shall be
undertaken as required in the Zoning, Chapter 21).
RESERVE STRIP — Shall mean a privately owned strip of land of less
width than the lot depth required by the Zoning, Chapter 21 on one side
by a proposed street and on the other by the boundary of a subdivision
containing the proposed street.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — Shall mean an area to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing residential housing units
which have a common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean an eating establishment where food and
beverages are consumed by patrons within the primary building, which
also may incidentally sell "take out" meals and/or catered meals for
patron consumption away from the establishment. Within the meaning
of this definition, eating places customarily termed "fast food
establishments" are specifically excluded.
RESUBDIVISION — Shall mean:
a. The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to
law; or
b. The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets
within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, but does not include conveyances so as to combine
existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, (R.O.W.) — Shall mean a private strip of land over
which other parties have the right to pass over, traverse, or install
utilities.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, (R.O.W.), PUBLIC — Shall mean a publicly owned strip
of land over which the general public has the right to pass over,
traverse, or have utilities installed therein.
SCHOOL, PAROCHIAL — Shall mean a use primarily engaged in the
education and instruction of individuals in academic or religious
subjects and operated for non-profit, from kindergarten through Grade
12; and administered, supervised and directly affiliated with an
exempted non-profit religious organization.
§ 20-3 GENERAL § 20-3
1:331
SCHOOL, PUBLIC — Shall mean any school operated under the
administrative authority of a duly constituted State, County, Regional
or Municipal Board of Education.
SCREENING — Shall mean a visual barrier made up of planted or
architectural materials for the purpose of preventing the view of an
object or area by the general public.
SEASHORE COLONIAL DESIGN THEME — Shall mean an
architectural scheme similar to that of nineteenth century
developments found in the coastal southern Monmouth County area.
These architectural components are reflected in remaining homes and
businesses in surrounding municipalities. The desired seashore colonial
design theme should be "timeless" and mimic the seashore homes
and businesses that dot the historic New Jersey shore. The specific
characteristics of these desired structures include:
a. Building materials used in area historic structures including but not
limited to wood and clapboard shingles or modern replications in more
durable materials.
b. Muted or natural colors and signage that coordinates with building
facade.
c. Buildings greater than one story with clear delineation of the
boundary between each floor of the structure through belt courses,
cornice lines or similar architectural detailing.
d. Pitched or gabled rooflines.
e. Overhanging eaves.
f. Utilization of awnings, covered walkways, open colonnades or similar
weather protection where applicable.
g. Main entrances must face the street and be clearly articulated
through architectural detailing.
h. Other architectural features in the center area should include
corner towers, cupolas, clock towers, spires, balconies, colonnades or
similar features.
SERVICE DRIVE — Shall mean a roadway at least 22 feet in width
which provides common access to two or more uses, and where
adjacent to a public right-of-way is separated from that right-of-way by
a planting strip at least five feet wide.
SETBACK — Shall mean the minimum horizontal distance between the
street, rear or side lot lines and the closest part of any building. When
two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property
lines so grouped shall be used in determining setbacks. The front
setback shall be measured from any future right-of-way line as adopted
in the Master Plan. The term setback is synonymous with "required
setback" and shall mean a line beyond which a building is not permitted
to extend.
§ 20-3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-3
1:332
SIGN — Shall mean any device, structure, or object including painted
wall signs for visual communication that is used for the purpose of
advertising the property or establishment upon which the display is
exhibited, but not including any flag of any public or religious group.
SIGN AREA — Shall mean the maximum projected area of the shape
which encloses the sign, devices or representation. In the case of
lettering attached to building facades, the sign area shall be the
product of the maximum vertical dimension multiplied by the maximum
horizontal dimension of all lettering and symbols which form the sign,
including the empty space between the letters and symbols.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — Shall mean any notice or advertisement, pictorial
or otherwise, used as an outdoor display not related to a use on the lot
regardless of its size or dimension.
SIGN, FREE STANDING — Shall mean a sign mounted on a structure
erected, not attached to any building.
SIGN, OVERHANGING — Shall mean a sign attached to and
perpendicular to an exterior wall of a building which overhangs the
street right-of-way.
SIGN, ROOF — Shall mean a sign attached on a roof that projects
higher than the highest part of the building. Also includes signs
inscribed or painted on a roof except as required by the Federal
Aeronautical Authorities.
SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of one or more lots
on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot,
including but not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation,
drainage, floodplains, marshes and waterways; the location of all
existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways,
means of ingress and egress, stormwater management, utility services,
landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and screening devices; and
any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make
an informed determination pursuant to this chapter requiring review
and approval of site plans pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — Shall mean the examination of the specific
development plot for a lot. Whenever the term "site plan approval" is
used in this chapter, it shall be understood to mean a requirement that
the site plan be reviewed and approved by the Borough.
SKETCH PLAT — Shall mean the sketch map of a subdivision of
sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and
classification and meeting the sketch plat detail requirements of this
Chapter.
STORY — Shall mean that part of a building between the surface of any
floor and the next floor above it, or in absence, the finished ceiling or
roof above it. A "split level" story shall be considered a second story
if the floor level is six feet or more above the level of the line of the
finished floor next below it, except a cellar.
§ 20-3 GENERAL § 20-3
1:333
STORY, HALF — Shall mean the finished area of an attic where the
intersection of the roof rafters and the exterior wall occurs within 12
inches of the floor/ceiling system, and in which space the possible floor
area with the headroom of five feet or less occupies at least 50% of the
square footage of the story directly beneath it.
STREAM RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the distance or width located
on both sides of a stream or watercourse which has been dedicated,
deeded or granted by easement to any government agency for Stream
Right-of-Way or which has been indicated in an officially adopted
stream improvement program.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive or other way;
a. Which is an existing State, County, or Municipal roadway; or
b. Which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or
c. Which is approved by official action as provided by law; or
d. Which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning
Board and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats;
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
STREET LINE — Shall mean that line determining the limit of the
highway rights of the public, either existing or contemplated. Street
line and right-of-way line are synonymous.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL — Shall mean a street or portion thereof which
is located in a residential zone.
STREETSCAPE THEME — Shall mean a scheme of site improvements
similar to those constructed by the Borough along Higgins Avenue.
Elements include granite block curbs, clay brick paver walkways,
indigenous landscape plantings, and ornamental lighting.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on,
above, or below the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVIDER — Shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
co-partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity, commencing
proceedings under this Chapter, subdivision of land hereunder for
himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of
land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for
sale or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions
within the meaning of this act, if no new streets are created:
Divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision
Committee thereof, appointed by the Chairman, to be for
1.
§ 20-3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-3
1:334
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — Shall mean a committee of three
Municipal Agency members appointed by the Chairman of the Agency
for the purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE — Shall mean a swimming pool located
as an accessory use on the same lot as the principal use it serves, is
utilized only by the owner or his nonpaying guests, and is not operated
for profit.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — Shall mean a swimming pool open to the
general public or open to the members only of a club or organization
whether operated for profit or not.
TOURIST HOME — Shall mean a dwelling unit in which overnight
accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests for
compensation.
TOWNHOUSE COMPLEX — Shall mean an integrated scheme of
townhouse dwelling structures and common tracts and facilities.
TOWNHOUSE DWELLING STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure
containing two or more townhouse dwelling units.
TOWNHOUSE DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean one of a series of single
family dwelling units which may be attached by a common wall between
it and the adjacent units together with an individual rear or front yard
designed as an integral part of each unit and having been constructed
in conformity with an approved site and design plan.
TRACT — Shall mean a parcel or portion or other division of land which
is in whole or in part proposed for subdivision, composed of a portion
of one lot, or one or more contiguous lots in the same ownership. Lots
separated by easements, street or other public rights-of-way shall be
considered contiguous for the purposes of this definition.
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size;
2. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including but not limited to
judgments of foreclosure;
3.
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or any other recorded
instrument.
4.
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which
are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to
the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax
map or atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also
include the term "resubdivision".
5.
§ 20-3 GENERAL § 20-3
1:335
TRAILER HOME — Shall mean any dwelling unit for living or sleeping
purposes which is equipped with wheels or some device used for the
purpose of transporting such unit from place to place whether by motor
vehicle or other means, or any factory built unit equipped with wheels
used for living or sleeping purposes whether the same is on blocks,
posts or any other type of foundation.
USE — Shall mean the specific purpose for which land or a building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — Shall mean a use which is incidental to that of a
principal use on the same lot.
USE, NON-CONFORMING — Shall mean a use of a building or land
that does not conform with the provisions of this Chapter for the zone
in which it is located.
USE, PERMITTED — Shall mean a use of a building or land, that
conforms with the provisions of this Chapter.
USE, PRINCIPAL — Shall mean a use which is the major use of the lot.
In any residential zone, a dwelling on a lot shall be deemed the principal
use of that lot.
USE, PUBLIC — Shall mean any use of land or structures thereon
which is owned and used by the Federal, State, County or Municipal
Governments. Public use shall also include property not owned by a
governmental entity but is leased or used for that purpose.
USE, QUASI-PUBLIC — Shall mean any use which is public in nature
but owned and used by a private interest group. Quasi-public uses
include churches, parish houses, parochial schools, historical sites and
similar uses, but does not include clubs, lodges, or similar private use.
USE, RESIDENTIAL — Shall mean the use of a building or part as a
dwelling unit.
WATER'S EDGE — Shall mean the interface between the land area and
a natural waterbody, where in the absence of an existing or approved
proposed retaining structure, shall be the mean high water line.
WATERFRONT — Shall mean the land area between the water's edge
to the first public road or other cultural feature generally parallel to the
waterway.
YARD — Shall mean an open space on the same lot with a principal
building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings from the
ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. The
minimum required yard shall be the same as required setback.
YARD, FRONT — Shall mean the yard extending across the entire
width of the lot between the street line and the nearest part of any
building. On a corner lot, the front setback shall be required for all
street frontages.
§ 20-3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-3
1:336
§ 20-4. MUNICIPAL PLANNING BOARD.
§ 20-4.1. Members. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-4; Ord.
#986; Ord. #1014]
There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S. 40:55D-23 a Planning Board
of nine members. Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-25c(I), the Planning Board shall exercise to the same extent and
subject to the same restriction all of the powers heretofore granted to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Membership shall consist of the following four classes:
§ 20-4.2. Terms of Office. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code, § 19-4]
The term of the Mayor shall correspond with his official tenure.
YARD, REAR — Shall mean the yard extending across the entire width
of the lot between the rear lot line and the nearest part of the principal
building.
YARD, SIDE — Shall mean a yard extending along the side lot line from
the front yard to the rear yard and lying between the side lot line and
the nearest part of the principal building.
ZONING MAP — Shall mean the map annexed to and made a part of
Chapter 21.
ZONING OFFICER — Shall mean the duly appointed zoning officer for
the Borough.
a. Class I. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
b. Class II. One of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the Governing Body to be appointed by the Mayor.
c. Class III. A member of the Governing Body to be appointed by it.
d. Class IV. Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
one of whom shall be a member of the Environmental Commission as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1.
Alternate Members. In addition to the foregoing, the Mayor shall
appoint four alternate members of Class IV. Such members shall serve
their respective terms in compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1
In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member
is to vote, Alternate Number One shall vote.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25c, the Class I and Class III members shall
not participate in the consideration of applications for development
which involve relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55d-70(d).
§ 20-3 GENERAL § 20-4.2
1:337
The terms of the Class II and III members shall be for one year or terminate
at the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first.
The term of the Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever occurs first.
The terms of all other Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
ordinance shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such term shall be distributed evenly over the first four
years after their appointment; provided that the initial Class IV term of
no member shall exceed four years. Thereafter all Class IV members shall
be appointed for terms of four years. If a vacancy in any class shall occur
otherwise than by expiration of the Planning Board term, it shall be filled by
appointment, as provided above, for the unexpired term.
All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment is
made.
§ 20-4.3. Removal for Cause. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code
§ 19-4]
No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
Any member other than a Class I member, after a public hearing if he
requests one, may be removed by the Governing Body for cause.
§ 20-4.4. Absent Members. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code
§ 19-4; Amended 11/87]
When any hearing before a Planning Board shall carry over two or more
meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for one or more of the
meetings, shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was
conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the meetings,
provided, however, that such Board member has available to him a
transcript or recording of the meeting from which he was absent, and
certifies in writing to the Board that he has read such transcript or listened
to such recording prior to voting on application.
§ 20-4.5. Quorum. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-14]
A quorum of the Planning Board shall be a majority of the full authorized
membership.
§ 20-4.6. Organization of Board. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code
§ 19-4]
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 20-4.2 BRIELLE CODE § 20-4.7
1:338
§ 20-4.7. Experts, Staff and Expenses. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972
Code § 19-4]
§ 20-4.8. Powers and Duties. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code
§ 19-4; New]
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt by-laws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
a. The Governing Body shall make provisions in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
b. The Planning Board may employ or contract for the services of legal
counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, and experts and other staff
and services as it may deem necessary not exceeding exclusive of gifts
or grants the amount appropriated by the Governing Body for its use.
a. To make, adopt and amend a master plan for the physical development
of the Municipality in accordance with this Chapter and the provisions
of New Jersey Statutes c. 40:55D-28.
b. To administer the provisions of Land Subdivision, Chapter 22 and Site
Plan, Chapter 23 in accordance with this Chapter, the provisions of
these Chapters and the New Jersey Statutes c. 40:55D-1 et seq.
c. To review and recommend actions regarding the Official Map in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and New Jersey Statutes
c. 40:55D-32.
d. To review and administer Zoning, Chapter 21 in accordance with this
Chapter and New Jersey Statutes c. 40:55D-64 regarding referrals and
c. 40:55D-67 regarding conditional uses.
e. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend same to the Governing Body.
f. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Board of Adjustment, as specified in Section
20-5 of this Chapter.
1. Variances pursuant to New Jersey Statute c. 40:550-70c, from lot
area, lot dimensional, setback, and yard requirements; provided
that relief pursuant to this section from lot area requirements shall
not be granted for more than one (1) lot.
2. Direction pursuant to New Jersey Statutes c. 40:55D-34 permit for
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to New Jersey Statutes c. 40:55D-32.
§ 20-4.7 GENERAL § 20-4.8
1:339
3. Direction pursuant to New Jersey Statutes c. 40:55D-36 of said act
for issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to a
street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of a
hearing on the application for development shall include reference
to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit
as the case may be.
g. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or Federal law or regulations.
h. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
i. To consider and make reports to the Governing Body within 35 days
after referral, as to any proposed development regulation, revision or
amendment. The Governing Body, when considering the adoption of a
development regulation, revision or amendment thereto, shall review
the report of the Planning Board and may disapprove or change any
recommendation by a vote of a majority of its full authorized
membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons for not
following such recommendations. Failure of the Planning Board to
transmit its report within the thirty-five-day period provided herein
shall relieve the Governing Body from the requirements of this section
in regard to the proposed development regulation, revision or
amendment thereto referred to the Planning Board.
j. To consider and make reports to other municipal bodies or officers
having final authority thereon on matters authorized by ordinance to be
referred. Such reference shall not extend the time for action by the
referring body, whether or not the Planning Board has submitted its
report. Whenever the Planning Board shall have made a
recommendation regarding a matter authorized by this act to another
municipal body, such recommendation may be rejected only a majority
of the full authorized membership of such other body.
k. To review all use variances referred to them by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and shall return a written report with recommendations to
them within 120 days, the time for action by the Board of Adjustment.
Failure of the Planning Board to transmit its report within the mandated
time period shall relieve the Board of Adjustment from the
requirements of this subsection.
l. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Governing Body for the aid and assistance of the
Governing Body or other agencies or officer.
§ 20-4.8 BRIELLE CODE § 20-4.9
1:340
§ 20-4.9. Environmental Commission Review. [Ord. #543; Ord.
#585; 1972 Code § 19-4]
Whenever the (Environmental Commission) has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment, an index of the natural
resources of the Municipality, the Boards shall make available to the
Environmental Commission an informational copy of every application for
development submitted to them. Failure of the Boards to make such
information copy available to the Environmental Commission shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 20-4.10. Time for Decision. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #698;
1972 Code § 19-4; New]
Whenever an application for approval or a subdivision plat site plan or
conditional use includes a request for relief pursuant to subsection 20-4.8
of this Chapter, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the
application within 120 days after submission by a developer of a complete
application to the administrative officer or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within
the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the application and a
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval,
herein required, and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer
for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 20-5. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 20-5.1. Dissolution of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord.
#543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5; New; Ord. #986]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment was dissolved by Ordinance 986 to the
extent that such Board existed as a separate functioning body within the
Borough. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55d-25C and Ordinance 986, the Planning
Board shall exercise all of the powers of the Board of Adjustment. See
subsection 20-4.1 for establishment of the Planning Board.
§ 20-5.2. Repealed. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5; Ord.
#986]
Provisions of Section 20-4 shall control.
§ 20-5.3. Repealed. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5; Ord.
#986]
Provisions of Section 20-4 shall control.
§ 20-4.9 GENERAL § 20-5.4
1:341
§ 20-5.4. Repealed. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5; Ord.
#986]
Provisions of Section 20-4 shall control.
§ 20-5.5. Repealed. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5; Ord.
#986]
Provisions of Section 20-4 shall control.
§ 20-5.6. Repealed. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5; Ord.
#986]
Provisions of Section 20-4 shall control.
§ 20-5.7. Powers. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5;
Amended by NJSA 40:55D-70; New]
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter
21 Zoning, Chapter 23 Site Plan and Chapter 24 Subdivisions.
b. Hear and decide requests for the interpretation of the Zoning Map or
municipal ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which the Board is authorized to the Municipal Land Use Law.
c. 1. Where:
(a) By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property, or
(b) By reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical
features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property, or
(c) By reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any
regulation of the Zoning Chapter that would result in peculiar
and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and
undue hardship upon, the developer of such property, grant,
upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a
variance from such strict application of such regulation so as to
relieve such difficulties or hardship;
2. Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of
property the purposes of this act would be advanced by a deviation
from the zoning ordinance requirements and the benefits of the
deviation would substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a
variance to allow departure from regulations pursuant to the
zoning ordinance of this act provided, however, that no variance
§ 20-5.4 BRIELLE CODE § 20-5.7
1:342
from those departures enumerated in subsection d of this section
shall be granted under this subsection; and provided further that
the proposed development does not require approval by the
planning board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use, in
conjunction with which the planning board has power to review
a request for a variance in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter.
d. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to allow
departure from regulations of the Zoning Chapter to permit:
1. A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use
or principal structure,
2. An expansion of a nonconforming use,
3. Deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to section 54 of
P.L. 1975. c. 291 (C. 40:55D-67 pertaining solely to a conditional
use,
4. An increase in the permitted floor area ratio,
5. An increase in the permitted density except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling
unit buildings, which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot
or lots resulting from a minor subdivision. A variance under this
subsection shall be granted only by affirmative vote of at least five
members, in the case of a municipal board.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the zone plan and zoning
Chapter 21. An application under this section, may be referred
to any appropriate person or agency, for its report; provided that
such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the
zoning board of adjustment shall act.
Whenever the Planning Board shall have made a recommendation
to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, such recommendation may be
rejected only by a majority of the full authorized membership of the
Board.
e. Direct the issuance of permits for buildings or structures in the bed on
any street or public drainage way, flood control basin of public area
reserved as shown on the official map, or shown on a legally filed plat
before adoption of the official map. Whenever one or more parcels of
land, upon which is located the bed of such a mapped street or public
drainage way, flood control basin or public area cannot yield a
reasonable return to the owner unless a building permit is granted, the
Board of Adjustment may, in a specific case, by an affirmative vote of a
majority of the full authorized membership of the Board, direct the
§ 20-5.7 GENERAL § 20-5.7
1:343
§ 20-5.8. Experts, Staff and Expenses. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972
Code § 19-5]
§ 20-5.9. Appeals and Applications. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972
Code § 19-5]
§ 20-5.10. Time for Decision. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code
§ 19-5]
issuance of permit for a building or structure in the bed of such mapped
street or public drainage way or flood control basin or public area,
which will as little as practicable increase the cost of opening such
street, or tend to cause a minimum change of the official map and the
Board shall impose a reasonable requirement as a condition of granting
the permit so as to promote the health, morals, safety and general
welfare of the public.
f. Direct the issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to
a street where the enforcement of the requirement that every lot shall
abut a street giving access to such proposed building or structure
would entail practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, or where the
circumstances of the case do not require the building or structure to be
related to a street. The Board of Adjustment may upon application or
appeal, vary this provision and direct the issuance of a permit subject to
conditions that will provide adequate access for firefighting equipment,
ambulances and other emergency vehicles necessary for the protection
of health and safety and that will protect any future street layout shown
on the official map or on a general circulation plan element of the
Municipal Master Plan.
a. The Governing Body shall make provision in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the Board of Adjustment.
b. The Board of Adjustment may employ, or contract for, and fix the
compensation of legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, and
experts and other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, not
exceeding exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
Governing Body for its use.
a. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
Municipality based on or made in the enforcement of Chapter 21,
Zoning, or official map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal is taken
specifying the grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
b. A developer may file an Application for Development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
to an administrative officer.
§ 20-5.7 BRIELLE CODE § 20-5.10
1:344
§ 20-5.11. Modification on Appeal. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972
Code § 19-5]
The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or
may modify the action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or
determination appealed from and to that end have all the powers of the
administrative officer from whom the appeal is taken.
§ 20-5.12. Stay of Proceedings by Appeal; Exception. [Ord. #543;
Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5]
An appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made unless the officer from whose action the appeal is taken certifies
to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed
with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by an order of the Superior Court upon notice
to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
§ 20-5.13. Board of Adjustment Review in Lieu of Planning Board.
[Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5]
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant to the same extent
and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board, subdivision
or site plan approval, or conditional use approval, whenever the Board of
Adjustment is reviewing an application for approval of a use variance. If
the use variance is denied, the subdivision or site plan application shall be
severed from the use variance and reapplication to the Planning Board for
their review and action shall be required in the same manner as permitted
by this Chapter. No additional fee for reapplication shall be required under
this section.
a. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date: (1) An appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative officer; or (2) The submission of a complete Application
for Development to the Board of Adjustment.
b. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundred and
twenty-day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant, shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant. A
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Board of
Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence
of approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
§ 20-5.10 GENERAL § 20-5.14
1:345
§ 20-5.14. Referral. [Ord. #542; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-5]
An application under subsection 21-5.13, shall be referred to the Planning
Board for its report; provided that such reference shall not extend the
period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
§ 20-6. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE PLANNING BOARD AND
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 20-6.1. Meetings. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #625; 1985 Code
§ 19-6]
§ 20-6.2. Hearings. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #625; 1972 Code
§ 19-6; Amended by NJSA 40:55D-10]
a. Every Municipal Agency shall by its rules fix the time and place for
holding its regular meetings for business authorized to be conducted by
such agency. Regular meetings of the Municipal Agency shall be
scheduled not less than once a month and shall be held as scheduled
unless cancelled for lack of applications for development to process.
The Municipal Agency may provide for special meetings, at the call of
the chairman, or on the request of any two of its members, which shall
be held on notice to its members and the public in accordance with
State Law. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum
being present. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of a quorum,
except as otherwise required by this Chapter. Nothing herein shall be
construed to contravene any act providing for procedures for governing
bodies.
b. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with
State law. An executive session for the purpose of discussing certain
matters as specified by State law shall not be deemed a regular or
special meeting within the meaning of this Chapter.
c. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Municipal Agency and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action
taken by the Municipal Agency, the findings, if any, made by it and
reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for
public inspection during normal business hours at the office of the
Secretary. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party
may be charged a reasonable fee as specified by municipal ordinance
for reproduction of the minutes for his use.
a. The Municipal Agency shall hold a hearing on each application for
development or adoption, revision, or amendment of the Master Plan.
§ 20-5.14 BRIELLE CODE § 20-6.2
1:346
b. The Municipal Agency shall make the rules governing such hearings.
Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the Secretary. The applicant may produce other documents,
records, or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or
supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
c. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may designate
shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the
attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant evidence,
including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the "County and Municipal Investigations Law" shall
apply.
d. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
e. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Agency may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
f. The Municipal Agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Municipal Agency shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at his expense.
g. The Municipal Agency shall include finding of fact and conclusions
based thereon in each decision on any application for development and
shall reduce the decision to writing. The Municipal Agency shall
provide the findings and conclusions through:
1. A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period
provided in the act for action by the Municipal Agency on the
application for development; or
2. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 days after the date of the meeting at which the Municipal
Agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
Municipal Agency who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution.
An action pursuant to subsection 20-6.1 of the Chapter (resulting
from the failure of a motion to approve an application) shall be
memorialized by resolution as provided above, with those members
voting against the motion for approval being the members eligible
to vote on the memorializing resolution. The vote on any such
§ 20-6.2 GENERAL § 20-6.2
1:347
§ 20-6.3. Contents of Notice of Hearing on Application for
Development and Adoption of Master Plan. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585;
Ord. #625; 1972 Code § 19-6; NJSA 40:55D-10]
§ 20-6.4. Notice of Applications. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #625;
1972 Code § 19-6; Ord. #804, § 1; Ord. #863, § 1; Ord. #934]
Notice pursuant to paragraphs a, b, c, e, f and g of this subsection shall be
given by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of the action
of the Municipal Agency and not to be an action of the Municipal
Agency; however, the date of the adoption of the resolution shall
constitute the date of the decision for purposes of the mailings,
filings and publications required by subsections h and I of this
section. If the Municipal Agency fails to adopt a resolution or
memorializing resolution as hereinabove specified, any interested
party may apply to the Superior Court in a summary manner for
an order compelling the Municipal Agency to reduce its findings
and conclusions to writing within a stated time, and the cost of the
application, including attorney's fees, shall be assessed against the
municipality.
h. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Municipal Agency within
10 days of the date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then
to his attorney, without separate charge, and to all who request a copy
of the decision for a reasonable fee. A copy of the decision shall also be
filed by the Municipal Agency in the office of that Agency. The secretary
shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested party
for a reasonable fee as specified by municipal ordinance and it shall be
available for public inspection at his office during reasonable hours.
i. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality, if there be one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality. Such publication shall be
arranged by the Secretary of the Municipal Agency. The period of time
in which an appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the first
publication of the decision. A fee of $10 shall be charged to the
applicant for this publication.
a. Notices pursuant to this Chapter shall state the date, time and place of
the hearing, the nature of the matters to be considered and in the case
of notices pursuant to subsection 20-6.4, an identification of the
property proposed for development by street address, if any, or by
reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's Office, and the location and
times at which any maps and documents for which approval is sought
are available pursuant to subsection 20-6.2.b.
a. Public Notice of a hearing is required on all applications for
development. Public Notice shall be given by publication in the official
§ 20-6.2 BRIELLE CODE § 20-6.4
1:348
newspaper of the municipality, if there be one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality.
b. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to paragraph a
above, shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicates, located in the State and within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing; provided
that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the (1)
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has
a unit above or below it, or (2) horizontal property regime, in the case of
any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it.
Notice shall be given by:
1. Serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on the said
current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property; or
2. Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on the said current tax duplicate.
Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service
upon its president, a vice-president, secretary or other person
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf
of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas. The notice provisions
provided herein shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 as
amended and supplemented.
c. Upon the written request of an applicant, the administrative officer of
the municipality shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from
the current tax duplicates of names and addresses of those owners
pursuant to paragraph b of this subsection. The applicant shall be
entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure
to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding. A sum of $10 shall be charged for such list.
d. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality.
e. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing County road or proposed road shown
on the official County map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining
other County land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
§ 20-6.4 GENERAL § 20-6.4
1:349
§ 20-6.5. Notice Concerning Master Plan; Development Regulations.
[Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #625; 1972 Code § 19-6]
Notice shall be given as follows:
§ 20-6.6. Effect of Mailing Notice. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord.
#625; 1972 Code § 19-6]
Any notice made by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
f. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a State highway.
g. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the State
Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. The notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Municipal Clerk.
h. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the
Municipal Agency holding the hearing on the application for
development in the event that the applicant is required to give notice
pursuant to this Section.
a. Public notice of a hearing on adoption, revision or amendment of the
Master Plan and Development Regulations. Such notice shall be given
by publication in the official newspaper of the municipality, if there be
one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality at least
10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
b. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of an adjoining
municipality of all hearings on adoption, revision or amendment of a
Master Plan and Development Regulations involving property situated
within 200 feet of such adjoining municipality at least 10 days prior to
the date of any hearing.
c. Notice by personal service or certified mail to the County Planning
Board of:
1. All hearings on the adoption, revision or amendment of the
Municipal Master Plan and Development Regulations at least 10
days prior to the date of the hearing; such notice shall include a
copy of any such proposed Master Plan, or any revision or
amendment thereto.
2. The adoption, revision or amendment of the Master Plan and
Development Regulations not more than 30 days after the date of
such adoption, revision or amendment; such notice shall include a
copy of the Master Plan, Development Regulations or revision or
amendment thereto, as the case may be.
§ 20-6.4 BRIELLE CODE § 20-6.7
1:350
§ 20-6.7. Fees. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #625; 1972 Code § 19-6;
Ord. #714, § 1; Ord. #735, § 1; Ord. #863, § 1; Ord. #888; Ord.
#914; Ord. #1011; Ord. #1034; Ord. No. 1052-2016]
The Municipal Agency shall charge fees for administration of its functions,
powers and duties as follows:
a. Base Fees. The following nonrefundable fees shall be payable in
connection with the following schedule of land use development
applications to the Planning Board. The base fees provided for herein
have been established to cover the cost of the administrative scheduling
and coordination in conjunction with normal applications. Applicants
will be required to post escrow fees, as provided for under subsection
20-6.7e, to cover all billings submitted by Board Professionals
associated with services rendered in conjunction with individual
applications.
1. Site Plans.
Minor Site Plan $500
Preliminary Major Site
Plan
$500
Final Major Site Plan $250
2. Subdivisions.
Minor Subdivision $500
Major Subdivision
Sketch Plat
$500
Preliminary Major
Subdivision
$1,000
Final Major Subdivision $350
3. Variance and Design Waiver.
Applications
Bulk Variance $100
Use Variance $500
Special Permit
Permit to construct on a mapped street or public
drainage way, flood control basin or public area
reserved as described in N.J.S.A. 40:550-76
$500
Appeals (Pursuant to 40:55D-70(a) $300
Design Waivers (1) $300
Design Waiver - Each Additional $100
4. Special Meetings (requested by applicant) $1200
§ 20-6.7 GENERAL § 20-6.7
1:351
5. Pre-application Review for Subdivisions or Site Plans $500
6. Rezone application $1,000
7. Abridged Site Plan $500
8. Informal Hearing Concept Plan for Development Pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.1 and subsection 20-7.15 $300 towards fee for
review of an application for development, if any.
b. Fees for Revisions Submitted After Initial Meeting. In the event
applicant submits a revision subsequent to the initial meeting in which
an application shall be heard, the applicant shall tender an additional
fee of 1/2 of the application fee set forth above for each such revision.
c. Consultation with Planning Board Professional Staff, Reimbursement of
Costs. The applicant is hereby advised that he may consult with any
member of the Brielle Planning Board Professional Staff prior to any
meeting with the provision that the applicant submit a letter indicating
that he will reimburse the Board for any costs incurred by the Board
due to such consultation.
d. Costs of Multiple Forms of Relief. In the event an applicant is seeking
multiple forms of relief, such applicant shall pay the fee for each such
form of relief.
For example, in the event the applicant is seeking a preliminary and
final site plan approval of a project, including a single variance, the
applicant shall pay:
$4,000 - Preliminary Major Site Plan
$3,500 - Final Site Plan
$1,000 - Variance
$8,500 - Total Base Fee
e. Refundable Escrow Fees. These fees, in the amounts listed below, are to
be known as Refundable Escrow Account, to be maintained by the
Borough Treasurer. Such amounts shall be paid, at the request of the
Board, in cash, certified check or money order and no further action will
be taken until such fee is received.
All costs, expenses and fees incurred by the Board, for the services of
a planner, engineer, attorney or other professional consultant or expert
during the application review process shall be paid by the Board from
the escrow funds. When the escrow balance has become depleted, to
20% of the original amount, the Board may require the deposit of such
additional amounts as are deemed necessary.
Unit charges of experts, consultants and other professionals, shall be in
accordance with rates normally charged the municipality or Board for
similar work.
§ 20-6.7 BRIELLE CODE § 20-6.7
1:352
Upon final action with regard to the application (including withdrawal
or dismissal), the Borough Treasurer shall provide the applicant with
an accounting of the escrow funds, itemizing each individual
disbursement. Where the escrow balance exceeds the aggregate of
additional costs associated with the application, the difference, along
with interest, if required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1 will be refunded. In
the event that the additional costs exceed the escrow balance, the
applicant shall be required to satisfy such deficiency before any plats
will be signed or permits issued.
Escrow
Site Plans
Minor Site Plan $3,000
Preliminary Major Site Plan $4,000
1.
Final Major Site Plan $3,500
Subdivisions
Minor Subdivision $4,000
Major Subdivision Sketch Plat $1,500
Preliminary Major Subdivision $4,000
2.
Final Major Subdivision $4,000
Variance and Design Waiver
Variance $4,000
Use Variance $4,000
Interpretation of Ordinance/
Map
$1,000
Special Permit $2,000
3.
Appeals $2,500
Special Meetings
Special Meeting (Applicant
Request)
$4,000
4.
Design Waivers (each) $300
5. Pre-Application Review $1,500
6. Re-Zone Application $3,500
7. Abridged Site Plan $2,000
8. Informal Review of Concept
Plan for Development pursuant
to N.J.S.A.40:55D-10.1 and subsection
20-7.15
$750
§ 20-6.7 GENERAL § 20-6.8
1:353
§ 20-6.8. Filing of Ordinances. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #625;
1972 Code § 19-6; as amended by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-16]
Development regulations, except for the official map, shall not take effect
until a copy thereof shall be filed with the County Planning Board. A zoning
ordinance or amendment or revision thereto which in whole or in part is
inconsistent with or not designed to effectuate the land use plan element
of the master plan shall not take effect until a copy of the resolution shall
be filed with the County Planning Board. The Secretary of the County
Planning Board shall within 10 days of the date of receipt of a written
request for copies of any development regulation make such available to
the party so requesting with said Secretary's certification that said copies
are true copies and that all filed amendments and resolutions are included.
A reasonable charge may be made by the County Planning Board for said
copies.
The official map of the municipality shall not take effect until filed with the
county recording officer.
Copies of all development regulations and any revisions or amendments
thereto shall be filed and maintained in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 20-7. APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
§ 20-7.1. Application. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #643; Ord. #649;
1972 Code § 19-7]
a. An application for development is required for all development as
defined in this Chapter. Approval by the Municipal Agency of
subdivision or individual lot applications for detached single-family and
two-family dwelling unit buildings and their accessory buildings shall
be exempt from site plan review and approval. No building permit shall
be issued until approval has been given by the Municipal Agency for
those applications requiring approval.
b. A development application may take the form of a request for site plan
approval, conditional use, subdivision, variance from the standards of
the Zoning, Chapter 21, or it may combine any of the above.
c. All development applications shall be submitted to the Secretary of
Municipal Agency at least 21 days prior to the Municipal Agency
meeting at which consideration is desired. They shall be submitted in
11 blue or black on white prints and shall be accompanied by 11 copies
of the application form.
d. The Municipal Clerk shall retain one full set of the application and
documentation and shall forward the remaining copies to the
appropriate Municipal Agency.
The secretary of the Municipal Agency shall forward one complete set
immediately upon receipt and prior to a public hearing, to the following
persons or agencies:
§ 20-6.8 BRIELLE CODE § 20-7.1
1:354
§ 20-7.2. Simultaneous Review and Approval. [Ord. #543; Ord.
#585; Ord. #643; Ord. #649; 1972 Code § 19-7]
The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for subdivision
approval without the developer being required to make further application
to the Planning Board, or the Planning Board being required to hold further
hearings. The longest time period for action by the Planning Board, whether
it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply.
Whenever approval of a conditional use is requested by the developer
pursuant to this Subsection, notice of the hearing on the plat shall include
reference to the request for such conditional use.
§ 20-7.3. Preliminary Approvals. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #643;
Ord. #649; 1972 Code § 19-7; Amended by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.2]
1. Planning Board Engineer, where required.
2. The Board of Health, where required.
3. Soil Conservation Service, U.S.D.A., where required.
4. Such other Municipal, County or State officials as directed by the
Municipal Agency.
5. Environmental Commission.
e. The Municipal Agency shall review each application for its
completeness at its first regular meeting after submission, and if
complete, shall set a public hearing date, if required, and so notify the
applicant. If an application for development is found to be incomplete,
the developer shall be notified thereof within 45 days of the submission
of such application or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
f. Where County Planning Board review and approval of site plans and
subdivisions is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 and 6.6, the Municipal
Clerk shall provide County Planning Board applications and
instructions to the applicant and shall receive the County submission
and required fee for forwarding to the County. Applications shall be
forwarded to the County within five days of receipt of a complete
submission. The Municipal Agency shall condition any approval that it
grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report, or approval by the
County Planning Board's failure to report thereon within 30 days.
g. A copy of all other site plans and subdivisions shall be sent to the
County Planning Board for informational purposes and the Municipal
Agency approval shall not require waiting for County action.
h. No application shall be heard nor deemed complete until submission of
a certification by the tax collector that all outstanding taxes on the
property subject to development have been paid in full.
§ 20-7.1 GENERAL § 20-7.3
1:355
a. Site Plan.
1. It is required that the developer submit a site plan and such other
information as is reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision as to whether the requirements necessary for preliminary
site plan approval have been met. The site plan and any
engineering documents to be submitted shall be required in
tentative form for discussion purposes for preliminary approval.
Architectural plans are required to be submitted for site plan
approval and the preliminary plans and elevations shall be
sufficient. Minor site plans shall be submitted in the same manner
and are subject to the same time periods and restrictions. However,
the site plan details may be waived upon application to and
approval of the Planning Board.
2. If the Planning Board required any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been
the subject of a hearing, an amended application for development
shall be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the
original application for development. The Planning Board shall, if
the proposed development complies with the Chapter and the
Municipal Land Use Law, grant preliminary site plan approval.
3. Upon the submission to the Secretary of a complete application for
a site plan of more than 10 acres of land or less, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date
of such submission or within such further time as may be consented
to by the developer. Upon the submission of a complete application
for a site plan of more than 10 acres, the Planning Board shall grant
or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to
have granted preliminary approval of the site plan.
b. Minor Subdivision.
1. It is required that a developer submit minor subdivisions to the
Planning Board for approval. Minor subdivision approval shall be
deemed to be final approval of the subdivision by the Board,
provided that the Board may condition such approval on terms
ensuring the provision of the certain improvements permitted by
law.
2. The Municipal Agency shall require notice and public hearing for
an application for subdivisions if the Agency finds that the
application conforms to the definition of "minor subdivision" as
defined by this Chapter. They shall proceed as specified in this
Chapter.
3. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied within 45
days of the date of submission of a complete application to the
Secretary of the Municipal Agency or within such further time as
§ 20-7.3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-7.3
1:356
may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning
Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute minor
subdivision approval and a certificate of the administrative officer
as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued
on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of
the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein
required, and shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer
for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
4. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date
of municipal approval unless within such period a plat in
conformity with such approval and the provisions of the "Map
Filing Law", or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer, the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor.
Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been
signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board. In
reviewing the application for development for a proposed minor
subdivision, the Planning Board may be permitted to accept a plat
not in conformity with the "Map Filing Act", provided that if the
developer chooses to file the minor subdivision as provided herein
by plat rather than deed, such plat shall conform with the
provisions of said act.
5. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision
approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of minor subdivision approval, provided that
the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as
provided in this section.
6. The Secretary of the Municipal Agency shall notify, in writing the
person submitting a minor subdivision of the action taken by the
agency within 10 days of the meeting at which the decision was
made.
c. Major Subdivision.
1. It is required that a developer submit major subdivisions to the
Planning Board for approval and shall require that the developer
submit to the Secretary of the Municipal Agency a plat or such
other information as is reasonably necessary to make an informed
decision as to whether the requirements necessary for preliminary
approval have been met, provided that minor subdivisions pursuant
to this Chapter shall not be subject to this section. The plat and any
other engineering documents to be submitted shall be required in
tentative form for discussion purposes for preliminary approval.
2. If the Planning Board required any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been
the subject of a hearing, an amended application shall be submitted
§ 20-7.3 GENERAL § 20-7.3
1:357
and proceeded upon, as in the case of the original application for
development. The Planning Board shall, if the proposed subdivision
complies with this Chapter, grant preliminary approval to the
subdivision.
3. Upon the submission to the Planning Board of a complete
application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the date
of such submission or within such further time as may be consented
to by the developer. Upon the submission of a complete application
for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to
by the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to
have granted preliminary approval to the subdivision.
4. A corporation or partnership applying to a Planning Board or a
Board of Adjustment or to the governing body or a municipality for
permission to subdivide a parcel of land into six or more lots, or
applying for a variance to construct a multiple dwelling of 25 or
more family units or for approval of a site to be used for commercial
purposes shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders or
individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any class or
at least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as the case may be.
If a corporation or partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of
a corporation, or 10% or greater interest in a partnership, that
corporation or partnership shall list the names and addresses of
its stockholders holding 10% or more of its stock or of 10% or
greater interest in the partnership, as the case may be, and this
requirement shall be followed by every corporate stockholder or
partner in a partnership, until the names and addresses of the
noncorporate stockholders and individual partners, exceeding the
10% ownership criterion established in this act, have been listed.
d. As-Built Plan Requirement. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the construction official until endorsed by the Municipal Engineer
certifying that the completed construction, building or development
substantially complies with the requirements of the Land Use
Ordinances, the requirements of the Board of Adjustment and/or the
Planning Board if applicable. Prior to such endorsement and at the time
of the foundation inspection, the owner shall provide the land use
officer with an as-built plan pursuant to subsection 22-7.3.d on those
cases where a site plan approval has been granted, the as-built plan
shall be accompanied with a copy of the approved site plan signed by
the project architect or engineer certifying that the project has been
completed in compliance with the approved site plan.
§ 20-7.3 BRIELLE CODE § 20-7.4
1:358
§ 20-7.4. Effect of Preliminary Approval. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585;
Ord. #643; Ord. #649; 1972 Code § 19-7]
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or a site plan shall, except as
provided in paragraph d of this subsection, confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
a. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements; layout and design standards for streets, curbs and
sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract improvements; and, in
the case of a site plan, any requirements peculiar to site plan approval;
except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
municipality from modifying by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health and safety;
b. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may
be; and
c. That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided
that if the design standards have been revised by Ordinance, such
revised standards may govern.
d. In the case of subdivision of, or site plan for, an area of 50 acres or
more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
paragraphs a, b and c above for such period of time, longer than three
years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration:
1. The number of dwelling units and non-residential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval;
2. Economic conditions; and,
3. The comprehensiveness of the development.
e. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the Planning Board may
thereafter grant, an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable taking into consideration:
1. The number of dwelling units and non-residential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval; and
2. The potential number of dwelling units and non-residential floor
area of the section or sections awaiting final approval;
3. Economic conditions; and,
§ 20-7.4 GENERAL § 20-7.4
1:359
§ 20-7.5. Exceptions. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #643; Ord. #649;
1972 Code § 19-7]
§ 20-7.6. Final Approval. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #643; Ord.
#649; 1972 Code § 19-7; Amended 11/87; Amended by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-52, 40:55D-53]
4. The comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the
design standards have been revised, such revised standards may
govern.
a. The Municipal Agency when acting upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval or preliminary site plan approval shall have
the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements for
subdivision approval as may be reasonable and within the general
purpose and intent of the provisions for subdivision review and
approval of an ordinance adopted pursuant to this Chapter, if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of the Chapter, is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question.
a. Site plans and major subdivisions.
1. The Municipal Agency shall grant final approval, if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final
approval conform to the standards established by ordinance for
final approval, the conditions of preliminary approval and, in the
case of a major subdivision, the standards prescribed by the "Map
Filing Law" provided that in the case of a residential cluster the
Planning Board may permit minimal deviations from the conditions
of preliminary approval necessitated by change of conditions
beyond the control of the developer since the date of preliminary
approval without the developer being required to submit another
application for development for preliminary approval.
2. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the Planning Board, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute final approval and a certificate of the Secretary as
to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein required, and
shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purposes
of filing subdivision plats.
3. As a condition for approval of a subdivision or site plan, a developer
shall pay his pro-rata share of the cost of providing reasonable and
necessary street improvements and water, sewerage and drainage
facilities, and easements therefor, located outside the property
limits of the subdivision or development but necessitated or
§ 20-7.4 BRIELLE CODE § 20-7.6
1:360
required by construction or improvements within such subdivision
or development. Such payments shall be based on circulation and
comprehensive utility service plans as required in the Master Plan
and shall be established by fair and reasonable standards to
determine the proportionate or pro-rata amount of the cost of such
facilities that shall be borne by each developer or owner within
a related and common area, which standards shall not be altered
subsequent to preliminary approval. Where a developer pays the
amount determined as his pro-rata share under protest he shall
institute legal action within one year of such payment in order to
preserve the right to a judicial determination as to the fairness and
reasonableness of such amount.
4. Effect of final approval of a site plan or major subdivision.
(a) The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the
developer pursuant to this Chapter, whether conditionally or
otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years after
the date of final approval, provided that in the case of major
subdivision the rights conferred by this Section shall expire if
the Plat has not been duly recorded within the time period
required by this Chapter. If the developer has followed the
standards prescribed for final approval and, in the case of a
subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required, the
Planning Board may extend such period of protection for
extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter, the
granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval for the section granted final approval.
(b) In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned
development of 50 acres or more or conventional subdivision
or site plan for 150 acres or more, or site plan for development
of a non-residential floor area of 200,000 square feet or more,
the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
Subsection 1 of this Section for such period of time, longer
than two years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board
to be reasonable taking into consideration:
(1) The number of dwelling units and non-residential floor
area permissible under final approval;
(2) Economic conditions; and,
(3) The comprehensiveness of the development.
(c) The developer may apply for thereafter, and the Planning
Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for
such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
§ 20-7.6 GENERAL § 20-7.6
1:361
(1) The number of dwelling units and non-residential floor
area permissible under final approval;
(2) The number of dwelling units and non-residential floor
area remaining to be developed;
(3) Economic conditions; and
(4) The comprehensiveness of the development.
5. Guarantees required; surety; release:
(a) Before recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of
final site plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a
zoning permit pursuant to this Chapter, the approving
authority may require and shall accept in accordance with the
standards adopted by ordinance for the purpose of assuring
the installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements:
(1) The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the
municipality in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost
of installation for improvements it may deem necessary or
appropriate including: streets, grading, pavement,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees,
surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and
required by the "Map Filing Law," P.L.1960, c. 141 (C.
46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewage disposal,
drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation
control devices, public improvements of open space and, in
the case of site plans only, other on-site improvements and
landscaping.
(2) Provisions for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with
the Governing Body for a period not to exceed two years
after final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount
not to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement. In the
event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or
maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency,
no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case
may be, shall be required by the municipality for such
utilities or improvements.
(b) The time allowed for installation of the improvements for
which the performance guarantee has been provided may be
extended by the Governing Body by resolution. As a condition
or as part of any such extension, the amount of any
performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the
case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
§ 20-7.6 BRIELLE CODE § 20-7.6
1:362
the installation as determined as of the time of the passage of
the resolution.
(c) If the required improvements are not completed or corrected
in accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and
surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the municipality for the
reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or
corrected and the municipality may either prior to or after the
receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such improvements.
(d) Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements, and the connection of same to the public
system, the obligor may notify the Governing Body in writing,
by certified mail addressed in care of the municipal clerk of the
completion or substantial completion of improvements and
shall send a copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer. Thereupon
the Municipal Engineer shall inspect all improvements of
which such notice has been given and shall file a detailed
report, in writing, with the Governing Body, indicating either
approval, partial approval or rejection of such improvements
with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The cost of the
improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
(e) The Governing Body shall either approve, (partially approve)
or reject the improvements, on the basis of the report of the
Municipal Engineer and shall notify the obligor in writing, by
certified mail, of the contents of said report and the action of
said approving authority with relation thereto, not later than
65 days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the
completion of the improvements. Where partial approval is
granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant
to its performance guarantee, except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure provision of the improvements
not yet approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the
performance guarantee posted may be retained to ensure
completion of all improvements. Failure of the Governing Body
to send or provide such notification to the obligor within 65
days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the
improvements and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be
released from all liability, pursuant to such performance
guarantee for such improvements.
(f) If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete such
improvements and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
(g) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right
of the obligor to contest by legal proceedings any
determination of the Governing Body or the Municipal
Engineer.
§ 20-7.6 GENERAL § 20-7.6
1:363
§ 20-7.7. Recording of Final Approval of Major Subdivision. [Ord.
#543; Ord. #585; Ord. #643; Ord. #649; 1972 Code 19-7; New]
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer. The Planning
Board may for good cause shown extend the period for recording for an
additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
§ 20-7.8. Filing of All Subdivision Plats. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord.
#643; Ord. #649; 1972 Code § 19-7]
§ 20-7.9. Penalty for Selling Before Approval. [Ord. #543; Ord.
#585; Ord. #643; Ord. #649; 1972 Code § 19-7]
If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person transfers
or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement
expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as owner or agent, any
land which forms a part of a subdivision for which municipal approval is
required by ordinance pursuant to this act, such person shall be subject to
a penalty not to exceed $1,000, and each lot disposition so made shall be
deemed a separate violation.
§ 20-7.10. Suits. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #643; Ord. #649;
1972 Code § 19-7]
In addition to the foregoing, the municipality may institute and maintain
a civil action for injunction relief and to set aside and invalidate any
(h) The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for the
foregoing inspection of improvements; provided that the
municipality may require of the developer a deposit for all or a
portion of the reasonably anticipated fees to be paid to the
Municipal Engineer for such inspection.
a. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as indicated on
the instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board or a certificate has been issued pursuant to this
Chapter. The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board shall not be affixed until the developer has posted the guarantees
required pursuant to this Chapter. If the County Recording Officer
records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be deemed
null and void, and upon request of the municipality, the plat shall be
expunged from the official records.
b. It shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer to notify the
Planning Board in writing within seven days of the filing of any plat,
identifying such instrument by its title, date of filing, and official
number.
§ 20-7.6 BRIELLE CODE § 20-7.10
1:364
conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale if a certificate of
compliance has not been issued in accordance with this Chapter.
§ 20-7.11. Lien. [Ord. 543; Ord. #585; Ord. #643; Ord. #649; 1972
Code § 19-7]
In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to
a lien upon the portion of the land, from which the subdivision was made
that remains in the possession of the developer or his assigns or successors,
to secure the return of any deposits made or purchase price paid, and also, a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any
such action must be brought within two years after the date of the recording
of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six
years, if unrecorded.
§ 20-7.12. Certificate Showing Approval; Contents. [Ord. #543; Ord.
#585; Ord. #643; Ord. #649; 1972 Code § 19-7; New]
The prospective purchaser, prospective mortgagee, or any other person
interested in any land which forms part of a subdivision, may apply in
writing to the Secretary of the Municipal Agency, for the issuance of a
certificate certifying whether or not such subdivision has been approved
by the Planning Board. Such application shall contain a diagram showing
the location and dimension of the land to be covered by the certificate
and the name of the owner thereof. The secretary shall make and issue
such certificate within 15 days after the receipt of such written application
and the fees therefor. The Secretary shall keep a duplicate copy of each
certificate, consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee
charged, in a binder as a permanent record of his office. Each such
certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of subdivision of
land," and shall certify:
§ 20-7.13. Right of Owner of Land Covered by Certificate. [Ord.
#543; Ord. #585; Ord. #643; Ord. #649; 1972 Code § 19-7]
a. The existence in the Borough of the duly established Planning Board
and the ordinance controlling subdivision of land adopted under the
authority of c. 291 Laws of New Jersey 1975.
b. Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Planning Board, and, if so, the
date of such approval and any extensions and terms thereof showing
that subdivision on which the lands are a part is a validly existing
subdivision.
A fee of $10 shall be charged for each certificate.
a. Any person who shall acquire for a valuable consideration an interest in
the lands covered by any such certificate of approval of a subdivision in
reliance upon the information therein contained shall hold such
interest, free of any right, remedy or action which could be prosecuted
§ 20-7.10 GENERAL § 20-7.13
1:365
§ 20-7.14. Conditional Uses. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; Ord. #643; Ord.
#649; 1972 Code § 19-7]
§ 20-7.15. Informal Review of Concept Plan for Development. [Ord.
#863, § 1]
or maintained by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of this
Chapter.
b. If the Secretary designated to issue any such certificate fails to issue
the same within 15 days after receipt of an application and the fees
therefor, any person acquiring an interest in the lands described in such
application shall hold such interest free of any right, remedy or action
which could be prosecuted or maintained by the municipality pursuant
to this Chapter.
Any such application addressed to the Clerk of the Municipality shall
be deemed to be addressed to the proper designated officer and the
municipality shall be bound thereby to the same extent as though the
same was addressed to the designated official.
a. Any applicant shall be required to submit a development application
pursuant to this Chapter for conditional uses, formerly called special
exceptions.
b. The Planning Board shall grant or deny an application for a conditional
use within 95 days of submission of a complete application by a
developer to the Secretary, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
c. The review by the Planning Board of a conditional use shall include any
required site plan review pursuant to this Chapter. The time period for
action by the Planning Board on conditional uses pursuant to
subsection 20-7.14b of this section shall apply to such site plan review.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall
constitute approval of the application and a certificate of the Secretary
as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written
endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein required, and shall
be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for purposes of filing
subdivision plats if involved.
a. At the request of the developer, the Municipal Agency shall grant an
informal review of a concept plan for development for which the
developer intends to prepare and submit an application for
development. The amount of any fees for such an informal review shall
be a credit towards fees for review of the application for development.
The developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review
is requested, and the Municipal Agency shall not be bound by any such
review.
§ 20-7.13 BRIELLE CODE § 20-7.15
1:366
§ 20-8. APPEALS.
§ 20-8.1. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. #543; Ord.
#585; 1972 § 19-9]
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the
Municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning, Chapter
21, or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a
notice of appeal with the officer from whom appeal is taken specifying the
grounds of such appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall
immediately transmit to the Municipal Agency all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
§ 20-8.2. (Reserved)26
§ 20-9. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ 20-9.1. Definitions of Terms. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code
§ 19-10]
Whenever a term is used in this Chapter which is defined in Chapter 291,
P.L. 1975, such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the
definition of such term found in the Statute, unless a contrary intention is
clearly expressed from the context of this Chapter.
§ 20-9.2. Repeals. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-10]
All sections of Land Subdivision, Chapter 22, Zoning, Chapter 21, Site
Plan, Chapter 23, or any other ordinance of the Borough which contains
provisions contrary to the provisions of this Chapter shall be and are hereby,
to the extent of such inconsistency, repealed.
§ 20-9.3. Pending Applications. [Ord. #543; Ord. #585; 1972 Code
§ 19-10]
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
Chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made
on any such application shall be governed by the provisions of this Chapter.
b. The developer shall file with the secretary of the Municipal Agency at
least 21 days prior to the meeting of the Municipal Agency, 12 black on
white copies of the informal concept plan, 12 completed copies of the
application form, any other documents which will assist the Municipal
Agency in its review of the concept plan, and the applicable fee.
26.Editor's Note: Former subsection 20-8.2, Appeal to the Governing Body; Time; Notice;
Modification; Stay of Proceedings, previously codified herein and containing portions of
Ordinance Nos. 543, 585 and 1972 Code § 19-10; as amended by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 984.
§ 20-7.15 GENERAL § 20-9.4
1:367
§ 20-9.4. Copy to be Filed With County Planning Board. [Ord. #543;
Ord. #585; 1972 Code § 19-10]
Immediately upon adoption of this Ordinance the Municipal Clerk shall file
a copy of this Ordinance with the County Planning Board as required by law.
The Clerk shall also file with the County Planning Board copies of all other
ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as the Subdivision,
Zoning and Site Plan Review Ordinances.
Chapter 21
ZONING
§ 20-9.4 BRIELLE CODE § 20-9.4
1:368
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 21-1. TITLE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-1]
An ordinance to Limit and Restrict to Specified Zones and to regulate
therein, Buildings and Structures according to their construction, and the
nature and extent of their use, and the nature and extent of the uses of the
land, in the Borough of Brielle, Monmouth County, New Jersey, including
the right to regulate the restrict the height, number of stories, and sizes of
buildings, and other structures, the percentage of lot that may be occupied,
the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population
and the location and use and extent of use of buildings and structures and
land for trade, industry, residence, or other purposes.
§ 21-2. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-2]
The short title by which this Chapter shall be known is "The Zoning
Ordinance of the Borough of Brielle".
§ 21-3. PURPOSE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code 89-3]
This Zoning Chapter is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
of the State of New Jersey, Revised N.J. Statutes 40:55D-1, et seq. in
order: to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare,
to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made
disasters; to provide adequate light, air and open space, to insure the
development of the Borough of Brielle in a manner that does not conflict
with the development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities,
County and State as a whole; to promote the establishment of appropriate
population densities and concentrations that will contribute to the wellbeing
of persons, neighborhood, communities and regions and preservation
of the environment; to encourage the appropriate and effective
expenditures of public funds by the coordination of public development with
land use policies; to provide sufficient space and appropriate locations for
a variety of agricultural, residential, recreational, and commercial uses,
and open space, both private and public, according to the respective
environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of the citizens
of Brielle; to encourage the location and design of transportation routes
which will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging location of
such facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight; to promote
a desirable visual environment through creative development techniques
and good civic design and arrangements; to promote the conservation of
open space and valuable natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl and
degradation of the environment through improper use of land; to encourage
senior citizen community housing construction consistent with provisions
permitting other residential uses of a similar density in the same zoning
district; to encourage coordination of the various public and private
procedures and activities shaping land development with a view of
lessening the cost of such development to the more efficient use of land.
§ 21-1 GENERAL § 21-4
1:369
§ 21-4. SCOPE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-4]
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or Ordinances,
except those specifically or implied repealed by this Chapter.
Where this Chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings
or lot coverage, or requires greater lot area, or larger yards, or other open
spaces than are imposed or required by such rules, regulations, or permits
or by such private restrictions, the provisions of this Chapter shall prevail.
§ 21-5. DEFINITIONS.
The definitions, as set forth in Chapter 20, Section 20-3, intended to be
utilized in conjunction with Chapters 20 through 23 inclusive, are hereby
adopted by reference, as though fully set forth herein. (Amended 11-87)
§ 21-4 BRIELLE CODE § 21-5
1:370
ARTICLE II
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
§ 21-6. ZONES. [Ord. #701, § 1; 1972 Code § 89-6; Ord. #915]
For the purpose of this Chapter, the Borough is divided into 10 zones known
as:
R-1 Single-Family Residential Zone.
R-2 Single-Family Residential Zone.
R-3 Single-Family Residential Zone.
R-4 Single-Family Residential Zone.
R-5 Multi-Family Residential Zone.
R-6 Townhouse Residential Zone.
C-1 Central Commercial Zone.
C-1A Gateway Zone.
C-2 Marine Commercial Zone.
C-3 Highway Commercial Zone.
§ 21-7. OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-7]
The aforesaid zones are hereby established by the designations, locations
and boundaries thereof set forth and indicated on the Official Zoning Map
to be located in the offices of the Municipal Clerk. A general map indicating
such designations, locations and boundaries shall be attached to all copies
of the Zoning Ordinance for informational purposes only.
The Zoning Map is also included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 21-7.1. Amendments. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-7]
If, in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, and the revised
statutes of the State of New Jersey, changes are made in the zone
boundaries or other matters portrayed in the Map by the Governing Body,
such changes shall be made thereon promptly by the Municipal Clerk after
such amendment has taken effect as provided by law. For each such change
in the Map, note shall be made thereof in the revision box, of the date of
revision, zone affected by the revision and of a brief identifying description
of the revision. These changes are to be endorsed upon the Map on the
effective date of the amendment.
§ 21-6 GENERAL § 21-7.2
1:371
§ 21-7.2. Violations and Penalty. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-7]
Unauthorized and intentional changes of any kind on the Map or matter
shown thereon shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $200 or 90 days
in jail, or both.
§ 21-8. RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES.
[Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-8]
Whenever an uncertainty or ambiguity exists as to the true location of any
boundary line of any zone shown on the Map, the zone boundary lines shall
be decided by the Zoning Officer and may be appealed to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
§ 21-8.1. Center Lines. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-8]
Boundary lines indicated as following or approximately following streets,
highways or other public or private ways, shall be construed to follow the
center lines thereof.
§ 21-8.2. Platted Lines. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-8]
Boundaries indicated as following or approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines as the same appear on
the Tax Map of the Borough as revised.
§ 21-8.3. Municipal Lines. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-8]
Boundaries indicated as following or approximately following municipal
lines shall be construed as following such municipal lines.
§ 21-8.4. Waterway Lines. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-8]
Boundaries indicated as following streams, rivers, or other bodies of water
shall be construed as following the center lines thereof.
§ 21-8.5. Parallels and Extensions. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-7]
All distances between parallel or concentric lines, or extensions or
prolongations of features indicated in subsection 21-8.4 above, shall be
construed to be at right angles in the case of parallel lines or radial in the
case of concentric lines.
§ 21-9. REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL ZONES.
§ 21-7.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-9.1
1:372
§ 21-9.1. Use Conformance. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9; New]
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof,
and no lot or land or part thereof, shall hereinafter be used except in
conformity with the regulations herein prescribed. Any lawful use that
does not conform to the use regulations of this Chapter shall be deemed
a non-conforming use except that uses granted as conditional uses by the
appropriate Municipal Agency shall be deemed to be conforming uses. Any
enlargement of a conditional use shall require reapplication to the same
Agency. Use variances granted by the Board of Adjustment or granted on
appeal by the Governing Body shall be deemed legal non-conforming uses.
All uses not expressly permitted in this Chapter are excluded.
§ 21-9.2. Building Conformance. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof
shall hereinafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or rebuilt except
in conformity with the lot dimension, yard, coverage, height and spacing
regulations herein prescribed. Any building or structure that does not
conform to such regulations, hereinafter referred to as the building
regulations of this Chapter, shall be deemed a non-conforming structure,
irrespective of the use to which it is put. Building variances granted by the
appropriate Municipal Agency on grounds of practical difficulties or undue
hardship shall be deemed to be non-conforming structures or uses.
§ 21-9.3. Pre-Existing Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
Any legally established existing use of a building or structure, lot or land, or
part thereof, at the time of adoption of this Chapter, which use constitutes a
non-conforming use under the provisions of this Chapter, may be continued.
§ 21-9.4. Definitions. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-9]
Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, the present tense shall
include the future; the singular shall include the plural; the word "lot"
shall include the work "plot"; the word "structure" shall include the word
"building"; the word "shall" is always mandatory and directory; the work
"may" is permissive. The word "use" and the word "used" refer to any
purpose for which a lot or land or part thereof is arranged, intended, or
designed to be used, occupied, maintained, made available or offered for
use, or erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, moved or rebuilt with the
intention or design of using the same.
§ 21-9.5. Sharing of Yard, Open Space or Parking Areas Prohibited.
[Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-9]
No yard, or part thereof, or any other open space, or off-street parking or
loading space required, about, or in connection with any building for the
§ 21-9.1 GENERAL § 21-9.5
1:373
purpose of complying with this Chapter, shall be included as part of a yard,
open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any
other building.
§ 21-9.6. Pre-Existing Yards, Open Spaces and Parking Areas. [Ord.
#255; Ord. #592; 1972 Codes § 89-9]
No yard, lot, open space, parking or loading area or other areas required
by this Chapter that existed at the time of passage of this Chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth
herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Chapter shall
meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Chapter.
§ 21-9.7. Yards. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-9]
Except as hereinafter specified in this Chapter, yards and courts required
by this Chapter shall be entirely free of building or parts thereof.
§ 21-9.8. Corner Lots. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-9]
Corner lots shall provide the minimum front yard setback requirements for
the respective zone for all intersecting streets.
§ 21-9.9. Eaves and Chimneys. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
Cornices and eaves, chimneys and bay windows shall not project more than
two feet over any required yard or court except that no projection shall be
closer than three feet to a lot line. Any projection over two feet shall be
considered part of the principal building and shall conform to all setbacks.
§ 21-9.10. Ornamental Features. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
Sills, leaders, belt courses and similar ornamental or structural features
shall not project more than six inches into any required yard or court.
§ 21-9.11. Porches and Entries. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
Porches and entries, uncovered or covered, shall be considered as part of
the principal building and shall not project into required yard areas if they
are three feet or more in height.
§ 21-9.12. Through Lots. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-9]
On any through lot, the front of such lot shall, for the purposes of this
Chapter, be considered that frontage upon which the majority of the
buildings in the same block front, but in case there has been no clearly
defined building frontage established, the owner shall, when applying for a
building permit, specify which lot line shall be considered the front lot line.
§ 21-9.5 BRIELLE CODE § 21-9.13
1:374
§ 21-9.13. Frontage or Right-of-Way. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-9]
All front yards must face on a fifty-foot wide right-of-way for at least 40
feet along the right-of-way line, except in the case of cul-de-sacs or deadend
turn-arounds in which case the lot must face on the right-of-way for
at least 30 feet. No building or use will be permitted on a lot, unless that
lot has frontage on a right-of-way that has been improved in accordance
with minimum municipal standards, or a street for which improvements
satisfactory to the Municipal Engineer have been guaranteed either by cash
or bond.
§ 21-9.14. Front Yard Setbacks. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
Where a building lot has frontage upon a street which on the Master
Plan or official map of the municipality is contemplated for right-of-way
widening, the required front yard setback or area shall be measured from
such proposed future right-of-way lines.
§ 21-9.15. Division of Lots. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
Where a lot is formed from part of another lot, and occupied by a building,
such division shall be effected in such a manner as not to impair any of the
requirements of this Chapter with respect to the existing building or yards
and open spaces in connection therewith. No permit shall be issued for the
erection of a new building on a new lot thus created, unless it complies with
all the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 21-9.16. Soil Removal. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-9;
Ord. #957]
No soil, mineral or similar material may be removed from or placed on any
lot, except that which is purely incidental to the construction of a building
or structure. When the quantity of cubic feet to be excavated (except for a
building foundation) or filled equals or exceeds 2% of the square feet of the
lot to be filled or excavated, or in any event if the change in elevation is two
feet or more, site plan approval of the Plan shall first be obtained from the
Planning Board.
(Maximum quantity of fill allowable (cubic feet) = Lot area in square feet
x 0.02. Example: 15,000 square foot lot x 0.02 = 300 cubic feet maximum
allowable fill).
Application for the permit must contain elevations or contours at not more
than two foot intervals and proposed finished grades on a map drawn to a
scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet which map shall be furnished
by a licensed engineer or land surveyor. No fill material shall consist of any
type of industrial wastes, building debris, obnoxious materials, or similar
§ 21-9.13 GENERAL § 21-9.16
1:375
substances. The Planning Board shall determine its appropriateness for the
area.
§ 21-9.17. Front Yard Prohibition. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-9]
No outside display of wares for sale, vending machines, or products
manufactured on the site shall be permitted in the front yard on any lot,
except as otherwise permitted by this Chapter.
§ 21-9.18. Roof Structures. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
Roof structures such as mechanical equipment, water towers, etc. shall be
screened from public view or designed in such a fashion as to complement
the architecture of the building.
§ 21-9.19. Street Intersections. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
At the intersection of two or more streets, no wall, fence, hedge, or other
structure shall be erected to a height in excess of three feet above curb
level, nor any other obstruction to vision shall be permitted within the
triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines at points which are
25 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along the street
line. Trees whose branches are trimmed away to a height of at least 10 feet
above curb level shall be permitted.
§ 21-9.20. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9]
All uses not specifically permitted in a zone are specifically prohibited in
that zone.
§ 21-9.21. Off-Street Parking; Permit Required. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-9]
Building permits shall be required for off-street parking in all zones.
§ 21-9.22. Trailer and Trailer Coach Restrictions. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-9; Ord. #980]
In residential zones, recreational vehicles, boat trailers, boats, landscape
trailers and storage containers commonly known as storage pods, shall be
permitted to be stored in any yard but shall not be located any closer to a
side or rear lot line than a permitted accessory building and shall be located
on a durable maintenance free surface. They shall be set back no less than
10 feet from the front lot line.
Pods and storage trailers shall only be permitted to be stored on a
residential lot during renovations and/or construction and shall be removed
§ 21-9.16 BRIELLE CODE § 21-9.22
1:376
prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. No boat in drydock or
storage nor any recreational vehicle shall be lived in by any person at any
time. There shall be no more than two boats and/or one recreational vehicle
stored on any residential lot at one time. There shall be no boat of more
than 26 feet in length on any residential lot.
No recreational vehicle, boat trailer, boat, landscape trailer, storage pod
or any similar vehicle may be parked overnight on a public street in any
residential zone.
§ 21-9.23. Tractor Trailers Prohibited. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-9]
All tractor trailers whose prime purpose is to sell, store, maintain, and
repair goods shall be prohibited in the municipality. The Municipal Building
Inspector shall not issue permits or certificates which will permit the tractor
trailers to be located within the territorial limitations of the municipality.
§ 21-9.24. Sales of Vehicles and Goods Prohibited. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; Code § 89-9]
No vehicles or temporary sales of any goods shall be permitted on any lot
unless a site plan has been approved by the municipal agency.
§ 21-9.25. Unsuitable Lands. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-9; New]
No structure shall be erected on land which is unsuitable for improvement
because it is subject to flooding or other hazards to life, health, or property,
unless owner agrees to take approved adequate measures to eliminate such
hazards. The approval must be obtained from the Planning Board, unless
otherwise required from the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the flood
plain ordinance of the Borough. The Board shall make or instigate adequate
investigation by a recognized, trained or licensed authority before granting
approval and only after a public hearing thereon. Expense incurred for
such investigation must be paid for by the applicant and no certificate
or permit shall be issued until payment in full is received. The exception
to the above would apply to structures necessary for access and safety
such as bridges, culverts, or protective walls and fences or for accessory
agricultural structures, such as irrigation facilities, dependent upon access
to water.
§ 21-9.26. Applicability. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-9]
Any use not permitted in a zone but for which approval is given by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall comply with the bulk standards of the
most restrictive zone in which the use is permitted.
§ 21-9.22 GENERAL § 21-9.27
1:377
§ 21-9.27. Flags and Pennants Prohibited. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-9]
Any combination of advertising devices such as flags, pennants, spinners, or
similar displays shall not be permitted.
§ 21-9.28. Marijuana Manufacture, Growth or Cultivation
Prohibited in All Zones. [Ord. No. 1067-2018]
The manufacture, growth or cultivation related to marijuana is prohibited
in all zones. The sale of marijuana and/or the paraphernalia that facilitates
the use of marijuana for any purpose, whether medicinal or recreational, is
prohibited in all zones.
§ 21-9.29. Dormitories. [Added 7-23-2018 by Ord. No. 1077]
All dormitories shall be prohibited as principal or accessory uses or
structures in all zoning districts within the Borough of Brielle.
§ 21-9.27 BRIELLE CODE § 21-9.29
1:378
ARTICLE III
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
§ 21-10. REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
§ 21-10.1. Commercial Vehicles. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-10]
No commercial vehicle of more than one ton (manufacturer's rated
capacity) shall be parked on any street overnight in any residential zone.
§ 21-10.2. Use Changes Prohibited. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-10]
Exterior alterations which substantially change the residential character
and nature of a building for the purpose of changing the use of the building,
such as from a residence to a home professional office, shall not be
permitted in any residential zone.
§ 21-10.3. Number of Buildings. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-10]
There shall be no more than one principal building or use erected or
established on any one lot in any residential zone, except where multifamily
buildings or agricultural buildings are permitted, more than one building
may be erected in conformance with development standards of that zone.
§ 21-10.4. Towers and Antennas. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-10]
Water towers, radio towers, cooling towers, antennas and similar structures
shall not exceed 10 feet above the permitted building height in any
residential zone, except silos, barns, and other agricultural buildings.
§ 21-10.5. Development Standards to Apply. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-10]
If a conflict arises between the permitted units of residences per acre
and the development standards, the development standards will take
precedence over density per acre. Development standards are lot size,
setbacks, and similar limiting provisions. This conflict may arise due to
unsuitable geology of land, unusual shape, or other factors which prevent
the full use of the land and still meet all development standards.
§ 21-10.6. Storage of Inoperable Cars. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-10]
Outside storage of inoperable cars shall not be permitted for more than 60
days.
§ 21-10 GENERAL § 21-11
1:379
§ 21-11. R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE.
The purpose of the R-1 Residential Zone in the Borough of Brielle is to
provide a large-lot, low-density residential area. The provisions and
regulations set forth herein encourage the future development of this area
as a residential area for generally residential purposes by prohibiting
commercial development or conversions to commercial or multi-family
housing.
§ 21-11.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-11]
A building may be erected, altered, or used and a lot or premises may be
occupied and used for any of the following purposes:
§ 21-11.2. Development Standards. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-11; Ord. #971; Ord. #988]
The R-1 Residential Zone specified herewith shall be occupied only as
indicated in the Schedule in Article XV of this Chapter and as follows:
a. Detached one-family dwelling as a principal structure.
b. Golf courses.
c. Accessory buildings and uses including:
1. Private garage.
2. Buildings for tools and equipment used for maintenance of the
grounds.
3. Swimming pools, but not public swim clubs.
4. Signs, subject to the special conditions of Article V of this Chapter.
5. Fences and hedges subject to the special conditions of Article VIII
of this Chapter.
6. Other customer accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
d. The following uses are permitted subject to approval of the Planning
Board and the special conditions of Article X of this Chapter:
1. Cluster, detached, one-family dwellings.
2. Government buildings and services which are necessary to the
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the municipality.
3. Churches, synagogues, parish houses, and similar religious uses.
4. Public utility installations.
§ 21-11 BRIELLE CODE § 21-11.2
1:380
a. Single-family (non-cluster).
1. Principal buildings:
(a) Minimum lot size 40,500 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width 150 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth 200 feet.
(d) Minimum front setback (measured from the proposed street
R.O.W.) 75 feet.
(e) Minimum each side setback 20 feet.
(f) Minimum both setbacks 45 feet.
(g) Minimum rear setback 50 feet.
(h) Minimum gross floor area 2,000 square feet.
(i) Maximum lot coverage 20%.
(j) Maximum building height 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
(k) Maximum floor area ratio 0.5.
2. Accessory buildings and uses:
(a) All accessory structures shall conform to the front setback
requirements for the principal structure. Accessory structures
15 feet in height or less shall be set back 10 feet from the side
lot line, and 10 feet from the rear lot line. Accessory structures
greater than 15 feet in height shall be set back 10 feet or 1/3
the height of the proposed structure from the side lot line,
whichever is greater; and setback 10 feet or 2/3 the height of
the proposed structure from the rear lot line, whichever is
greater respectively. The maximum height of accessory
structures shall not exceed 33 feet. The minimum horizontal
separation between principal structures and accessory
structures shall be 20 feet. Accessory structure heights shall
be measured from average adjacent grade.
Those swimming pools less than four feet high shall be
enclosed by a permanent fence not less than four feet high
with a locked gate. Building permits shall be required for all
swimming pools, above or below ground, with a water surface
area of 100 square feet or over.
(b) Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall
comply with the setbacks of principal building.
(c) No truck, tractor trailer or commercial vehicle, licensed to
transport more than 1/2 ton rated manufacturer's capacity
§ 21-11.2 GENERAL § 21-11.2
1:381
§ 21-11.3. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-11]
§ 21-12. R-2 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE. [Ord. #255;
Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-12]
The purpose of the R-2 Residential Zone in the Borough is to provide
for and protect the character of the existing low-density residential areas.
The provisions and regulations set forth herein encourage the future
development and maintenance of this area as a residential area for strictly
residential purposes by prohibiting commercial development or conversions
to commercial or multi-family housing.
shall be stored, or parked on any lot or portion of a lot as to be
visible from a public street.
b. Single-family (cluster).
1. Principal buildings:
(a) Minimum lot size 30,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width 135 feet.
(c) Minimum lot depth 175 feet.
(d) Minimum front setback (measured from the proposed street
R.O.W.) 60 feet.
(e) Minimum each side setback 20 feet.
(f) Minimum both setbacks 40 feet.
(g) Minimum rear setback 50 feet.
(h) Minimum gross floor area 2,000 square feet.
(i) Maximum lot coverage 20%.
(j) Maximum building height 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
(k) Maximum floor area ratio 0.5
2. Accessory buildings:
All accessory buildings in a cluster arrangement shall conform to
the requirements of the non-cluster arrangement.
a. Off-street parking is required subject to the special conditions of Article
VI of this Chapter.
b. Landscaping is required subject to the special conditions of Article VII
of this Chapter.
§ 21-11.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-12.1
1:382
§ 21-12.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-12]
A building may be erected, altered, or used and a lot or premises may be
occupied and used for any of the following purposes:
§ 21-12.2. Development Standards. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-12; Ord. #971; Ord. #988]
The R-2 Residential Zone specified herewith shall be occupied only as
indicated in the Schedule in Article XV of this Chapter and as follows:
a. Detached one-family dwelling as a principal structure.
b. Accessory buildings and uses including:
1. Private garage.
2. Buildings for tools and equipment used for maintenance of the
grounds.
3. Swimming pools but not public swim clubs.
4. Signs, subject to the special conditions of Article V of this Chapter.
5. Fences and hedges subject to the special conditions of Article VIII
of this Chapter.
6. Other customer accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
c. The following uses are permitted subject to approval of the Planning
Board and the special conditions of Article X of this Chapter:
1. Cluster, detached, one-family dwellings.
2. Government buildings and services which are necessary to the
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the municipality.
3. Churches, synagogues, parish houses, and similar religious uses.
4. Public utility installations.
a. Single-family (non-cluster).
1. Principal Buildings:
(a) Minimum lot size,
interior 15,000 square feet
corner 15,625 square feet
(b) Minimum lot width,
§ 21-12.1 GENERAL § 21-12.2
1:383
interior 100 feet
corner 125 feet
(c) Minimum lot depth 125 feet.
(d) Minimum front setback (measured from the proposed street
R.O.W.) 40 feet.
(e) Minimum each side setback 12 feet.
(f) Minimum rear setback 40 feet.
(g) Minimum gross floor area 1,200 square feet.
(h) Maximum lot coverage 20%.
(i) Maximum building height 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
(j) Maximum floor area ratio 0.5
2. Accessory buildings and uses:
(a) All accessory structures shall conform to the front setback
requirements for the principal structure. Accessory structures
15 feet in height or less shall be set back five feet from the side
lot line, and five feet from the rear lot line. Accessory
structures greater than 15 feet in height shall be set back 1/3
the height of the proposed structure from the side lot line, and
setback 2/3 the height of the proposed structure from the rear
lot line. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not
exceed 27 feet. The minimum horizontal separation between
principal structures and accessory structures shall be 10 feet.
Accessory structure heights shall be measured from average
adjacent grade.
Those swimming pools less than four feet high shall be
enclosed by a permanent fence not less than four feet high
with a locked gate. Building permits shall be required for all
swimming pools, above or below ground, with a water surface
area of 100 square feet or over.
(b) Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall
comply with the setbacks of the principal building.
(c) No truck, tractor trailer or commercial vehicle, licensed to
transport more than 1/2 ton rated manufacturer's capacity
shall be stored, or parked on any lot or portion of a lot so as to
be visible from a public street.
b. Single-family (cluster):
1. Principal buildings:
§ 21-12.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-12.2
1:384
§ 21-12.3. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-12]
§ 21-13. R-3 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE. [Ord. #255;
Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-13]
The purpose of the R-3 Residential Zone is to provide for smaller lot sizes in
certain parts of the municipality.
§ 21-13.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-13]
A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may be
occupied and used for any of the following purposes:
(a) Minimum lot size,
interior 11,250 square feet
corner 11,700 square feet
(b) Minimum lot width,
interior 75 feet
corner 95 feet
(c) Minimum lot depth 125 feet.
(d) Minimum front setback (measured from the proposed street
R.O.W.) 30 feet.
(e) Minimum each side setback 12 feet.
(f) Minimum rear setback 40 feet.
(g) Minimum gross floor area 1,200 square feet.
(h) Maximum lot coverage 20%.
(i) Maximum building height 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
(j) Maximum floor area ratio 0.5
2. Accessory buildings:
(a) All accessory buildings in a cluster arrangement shall conform
to the requirements of the non-cluster arrangement.
a. Off-street parking is required subject to the special conditions of Article
VI of this Chapter.
b. Landscaping is required subject to the special conditions of Article VII
of this Chapter.
§ 21-12.2 GENERAL § 21-13.1
1:385
§ 21-13.2. Development Standards. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-13; Ord. #971; Ord. #988]
The R-3 Residential Zone specified herewith shall be occupied only as
indicated in the Schedule in Article XV of this Chapter and as follows:
a. Detached, one-family dwelling as a principal structure.
b. Accessory buildings and uses including:
1. Private garage not to exceed two spaces on a lot up to and
including 40,000 square feet. On any lot over 40,000 square feet,
there shall be permitted a maximum of three garage spaces.
2. Buildings for tools and equipment used for maintenance of the
grounds.
3. Swimming pools but not public swim clubs.
4. Signs, subject to the special conditions of Article V of this Chapter.
5. Fences and hedges subject to the special conditions of Article VIII
of this Chapter.
6. Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
and incidental to the principal structure and use.
c. The following uses are permitted subject to approval of the Planning
Board and the special conditions of Article X of this Chapter:
1. Government buildings and services which are necessary to the
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the municipality.
2. Public utility installations.
3. Churches, synagogues, parish houses, and similar religious uses.
a. Single-family (except Tax Map Blocks 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, and 19).
1. Principal buildings:
(a) Minimum lot size,
interior 11,250 square feet
corner 12,500 square feet
(b) Minimum lot width,
interior 75 feet
corner 100 feet
(c) Minimum lot depth 125 feet.
§ 21-13.1 BRIELLE CODE § 21-13.2
1:386
(d) Minimum front setback (measured from the proposed street
R.O.W.) 30 feet.
(e) Minimum each side setback 10 feet.
(f) Minimum rear setback 35 feet.
(g) Minimum gross floor area 1,000 square feet.
(h) Maximum lot coverage 20%.
(i) Maximum building height 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
(j) Maximum floor area ratio 0.5.
2. Accessory buildings and uses:
(a) All accessory structures shall conform to the front setback
requirements for the principal structure. Accessory structures
15 feet in height or less shall be set back five feet from the side
lot line, and five feet from the rear lot line. Accessory
structures greater than 15 feet in height shall be set back 1/3
the height of the proposed structure from the side lot line, and
setback 2/3 the height of the proposed structure from the rear
lot line. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not
exceed 24 feet. The minimum horizontal separation between
principal structures and accessory structures shall be 10 feet.
Accessory structure heights shall be measured from average
adjacent grade. Those swimming pools less than four feet high
shall be enclosed by a permanent fence not less than four feet
high with a locked gate. Building permits shall be required for
all swimming pools, above or below ground, with a water
surface area of 100 square feet or over.
(b) Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall
comply with the setbacks of the principal building.
(c) No truck, tractor trailer or commercial vehicle, licensed to
transport more than 1/2 ton rated manufacturer's capacity
shall be stored, or parked on any lot or portion of a lot so as to
be visible from a public street.
b. Single-family (Tax Map Blocks 14, 15, 16, 17, 18 and 19).
1. Principal buildings:
(a) Minimum lot size
interior 7,500 square feet
corner 10,000 square feet
(b) Minimum lot depth 100 square feet
§ 21-13.2 GENERAL § 21-13.2
1:387
§ 21-13.3. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-13]
§ 21-14. R-4 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE. [Ord. #255;
Ord. #592; 1972 Code 89-14]
The purpose of the R-4 Residential Zone is to provide for smaller lot sizes to
meet the desires of a certain segment of the population who need least cost
housing.
(c) All other requirements of the R-3 Zone as stipulated in Section
89-13 B (1) shall be adhered to.
2. Accessory buildings and uses:
(a) All accessory structures shall conform to the front setback
requirements for the principal structure. Accessory structures
15 feet in height or less shall be set back five feet from the side
lot line, and five feet from the rear lot line. Accessory
structures greater than 15 feet in height shall be set back 1/3
the height of the proposed structure from the side lot line, and
setback 2/3 the height of the proposed structure from the rear
lot line. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not
exceed 24 feet. The minimum horizontal separation between
principal structures and accessory structures shall be 10 feet.
Accessory structure heights shall be measured from average
adjacent grade.
Those swimming pools less than four feet high shall be
enclosed by a permanent fence not less than four feet high
with a locked gate. Building permits shall be required for all
swimming pools, above or below ground, with a water surface
area of 100 square feet or over.
(b) Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall
comply with the setbacks of the principal building.
(c) No truck, tractor trailer or commercial vehicle, licensed to
transport more than 1/2 ton rated manufacturer's capacity
shall be stored, or parked on any lot or portion of a lot so as to
be visible from a public street.
a. Off-street parking is required subject to the special conditions of Article
VI of this Chapter.
b. Landscaping is required subject to the special conditions of Article VII
of this Chapter.
§ 21-13.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-14.1
1:388
§ 21-14.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-14]
A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or premises may be
occupied and used for any one of the following purposes:
§ 21-14.2. Development Standards. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code 89-14; Ord. #971; Ord. #988]
The R-4 Residential Zone specified herewith shall be occupied only as
indicated in the Schedule in Article XV of this Chapter and as follows:
a. Detached one-family dwelling as a principal structure.
b. Accessory buildings and uses including:
1. Private garage not to exceed two spaces on a lot up to and
including 40,000 square feet. On any lot over 40,000 square feet,
there shall be permitted a maximum of three garage spaces.
2. Swimming pools, but not public swim clubs.
3. Signs subject to the provisions of Article V of this Chapter.
4. Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
c. The following uses are permitted subject to approval of the Planning
Board and the special conditions of Article X of this Chapter:
1. Government buildings and services which are necessary to the
health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants.
2. Public utility installations.
3. Churches, synagogues, parish houses, and similar religious uses.
a. Principal buildings.
1. Single-family.
(a) Minimum lot area,
interior 5,000 square feet
corner 7,500 square feet
(b) Minimum lot width,
interior 50 feet
corner 75 feet
(c) Minimum lot depth 100 feet.
(d) Minimum front setback (measured from the proposed street
R.O.W.) 25 feet.
§ 21-14.1 GENERAL § 21-14.2
1:389
§ 21-14.3. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-14]
(e) Minimum each side setback eight feet.
(f) Minimum rear setback 25 feet.
(g) Minimum gross floor area 1,000 square feet.
(h) Maximum lot coverage 20%.
(i) Maximum building height 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
(j) Maximum floor area ratio 0.5.
2. Accessory buildings and uses:
(a) All accessory structures shall conform to the front setback
requirements for the principal structure. Accessory structures
15 feet in height or less shall be set back five feet from the side
lot line, and five feet from the rear lot line. Accessory
structures greater than 15 feet in height shall be set back 1/3
the height of the proposed structure from the side lot line, and
setback 2/3 the height of the proposed structure from the rear
lot line. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not
exceed 18 feet. The minimum horizontal separation between
principal structures and accessory structures shall be 10 feet.
Accessory structure heights shall be measured from average
adjacent grade.
Those swimming pools less than four feet high shall be
enclosed by a permanent fence not less than four feet high
with a locked gate. Building permits shall be required for all
swimming pools, above or below ground, with a water surface
area of 100 square feet or over.
(b) Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall
comply with the setbacks of the principal building.
(c) No truck, tractor trailer or commercial vehicle, licensed to
transport more than 1/2 ton rated manufacturer's capacity
shall be stored, or parked on any lot or portion of a lot so as to
be visible from a public street.
a. Off-street parking is required subject to the special conditions of Article
VI of this Chapter.
b. Landscaping is required subject to the special conditions of Article VII
of this Chapter.
§ 21-14.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-15
1:390
§ 21-15. R-5 GARDEN APARTMENT RESIDENTIAL ZONE. [Ord.
#255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code 89-15]
The purpose of the R-5 Residential Zone specified herewith is to provide for
and protect the coordinated unit development of Garden Apartment housing
facilities in the Municipality.
§ 21-15.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-15]
A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or premises may be
occupied and used for any of the following purposes:
§ 21-15.2. Development Standards. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-15; Ord. #988]
The R-5 Residential Zone specified herewith shall be occupied only as
indicated in the Schedule of Article XV of this Chapter and as follows:
a. Multi-Family Garden Apartment dwellings subject to all requirements
of this section.
b. Accessory buildings and uses including:
1. Swimming pools, but not public swim clubs.
2. Signs subject to the provisions of Article V of this Chapter.
3. Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Article VII of this
Chapter.
4. Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
a. Principal buildings.
1. Minimum lot size eight acres.
2. Minimum lot width 300 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth 400 feet.
4. Minimum front setbacks (measured from the proposed street
R.O.W. line) 50 feet.
5. Minimum side and rear yard setbacks 50 feet.
6. Maximum lot coverage 20%.
7. Minimum gross floor area per unit 800 square feet for a onebedroom
unit and not less than 150 square feet for each additional
bedroom.
8. Maximum building height 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less.
§ 21-15 GENERAL § 21-15.2
1:391
§ 21-15.3. Special Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-15]
In passing upon any site plan, the Planning Board shall require in addition
to ordinary and reasonable considerations, the following:
9. Maximum dwelling units six per acre.
b. Accessory buildings and uses.
1. All accessory structures shall conform to the front setback
requirements for the principal structure. Accessory structures shall
not exceed 15 feet in height, and shall be set back 10 feet from the
side lot line, and 10 feet from the rear lot line. The minimum
horizontal separation between principal structures and accessory
structures shall be 15 feet. Accessory structure heights shall be
measured from average adjacent grade.
Those swimming pools less than four feet high shall be enclosed by
a permanent fence not less than four feet high with a locked gate.
Building permits shall be required for all swimming pools, above or
below ground, with a water surface area of 100 square feet or over.
2. Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall comply
with the setbacks of the principal building.
3. No truck, tractor trailer or commercial vehicle, licensed to
transport more than 1/2 ton rated manufacturer's capacity shall be
stored, or parked on any lot or portion of a lot so as to be visible
from a public street.
a. The location of principal units shall be separated by a minimum 30 feet,
and accessory units shall be separated by a minimum 15 feet from other
principal units or accessory units.
b. No principal unit shall contain a window which shall face horizontally
opposite a window in another principal unit unless it shall be separated
by a minimum of 75 feet.
c. No structure shall be located within a minimum of 30 feet from any
access road nor within a minimum of 50 feet from any public street.
d. Accessory roads shall be constructed with sufficient width to permit
ordinary and emergency travel of vehicles in opposite directions, but in
no event shall such roads have a width of less than 25 feet.
e. Accessory units shall be located within a setback of 40 feet from any lot
line that abuts an R District.
f. Accessory roads shall be located and designed to provide access to and
proper development of other tracts within the R-4 District and to
provide access to the tract from public roadways.
§ 21-15.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-15.3
1:392
g. Provision shall be made for a proper drainage of the tract and for an
adequate water supply to a sufficient hydrant system, such
requirements to be subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer.
h. Sanitary facilities shall be constructed and located as approved by the
Brielle Board of Health.
i. Provision shall be made for the proper collection of garbage.
j. There shall be provided, for each dwelling unit, a minimum of one onecar
garage and one off-street parking spaces. Each garage shall be built
into the multiple-dwelling structure which it serves and shall have a
minimum floor area of 240 square feet.
k. No structure shall exceed 130 feet in length. In order to avoid a
straight, unbroken line of sight, all exterior walls of any structure
exceeding 80 feet in length shall contain a break, forward or backward,
at least four feet in depth, and, in addition, if there are two or more
buildings in any multi-family development, the front exterior wall of
each building shall be set back or forward not less than three feet from
the line of the front exterior wall of each neighboring building in the
development.
l. A minimum of 10% of the total land area of the development shall be set
aside for usable recreation area.
m. It being deemed to be in the public welfare that certain design
standards be established for multi-family dwellings, all such structures
shall be of either authentic traditional colonial design or contemporary
design, and all details of any such structures shall be designed and
executed in strict conformance with general standards. Within any
multi-family dwelling development, however, it is further deemed to be
in the interest of the public welfare that identical appearance is
undesirable as such among buildings, and in considering a site plan
application, the Planning Board, if it finds any of the following
conditions, may require that, as a condition of approval, such conditions
be corrected:
1. Use of the same basic dimension and plan without substantial
differentiation on one or more exterior elevations.
2. Use of same basic dimensions and plan without substantial change
in orientation of buildings on a lot.
3. Use of substantially identical height and design of a roof.
4. Use of same size, type and location of doors and windows in front
elevation.
n. All internal and external improvements found necessarily in the public
interest, including but not limited to streets, driveways, parking areas,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, lighting, shade trees, water mains, water
systems, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of
§ 21-15.3 GENERAL § 21-15.3
1:393
§ 21-15.4. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-15]
§ 21-16. R-6 TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL ZONE. [Ord. #701; 1972
§ 89-15]
The purpose of the R-6 Townhouse Zone specified herewith is to provide
for and protect the coordinated unit development of housing facilities in the
Municipality.
§ 21-16.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #701; 1972 Code § 89-15]
A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or premises may be
occupied and used for any of the following purposes:
sewage disposal, drainage structures and the like, shall be installed
in accordance with the standards set forth for major subdivisions of
land, and no building permit shall be issued unless and until adequate
performance guarantees of proper installation of such improvements
shall have been posted in an amount acceptable to the Borough
Engineer to ensure completion of all such improvements.
o. Parking lots shall be adequately lighted with wall- mounted or postmounted
ornamental fixtures which shall provide adequate shielding
from adjacent properties, as further required by this ordinance.
p. Consonant with aesthetic ecological and environmental considerations,
adequate open spaces shall be preserved in their natural state.
q. In any development containing natural features such as trees, books,
hilltops and views, such natural features shall be preserved whenever
practicable.
r. Provide, in each building, laundry facilities not less than one washer
and dryer for the exclusive use of the occupants of the building, unless
provided within each unit. No outside clothes lines or clothes hanging
facilities or devices shall be provided or allowed.
s. Provide, in an enclosed basement area, not less than 700 cubic feet of
storage for each garden apartment unit in the building.
t. Not more than one outside television antenna shall be permitted per
building.
u. No building shall be designed or occupied for more than four families.
a. Off-street parking and loading space is required as specified in Article
VI of this Ordinance.
b. Landscaping is required as specified in Article VII of this Chapter.
a. Townhouse dwellings subject to all requirements of this section.
§ 21-15.3 BRIELLE CODE § 21-16.1
1:394
§ 21-16.2. Development Standards. [Ord. #701; 1972 Code § 89-15;
Ord. #915; Ord. #988]
The R-6 Townhouse and Residential Zone specified herewith shall be
occupied only as indicated in the Schedule of Article XV of this Chapter and
as follows:
b. Accessory buildings and uses including:
1. Swimming pools, but not public swim clubs.
2. Signs subject to the provisions of Article V of this Chapter.
3. Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Article VII of this
Chapter, except that subsection 21-36.10 is modified in that a
buffer of 25 feet shall be required.
4. Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
a. Principal buildings.
1. Minimum lot size 2 acres.
2. Minimum lot width 500 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth 125 feet.
4. Minimum front setbacks (measured from the street R.O.W. line) 50
feet.
5. Minimum side and rear yard setbacks 50 feet.
6. Maximum lot coverage 20%.
7. Minimum gross floor area 1,000 square feet per unit for a onebedroom
unit and not less than 150 square feet for each additional
bedroom.
8. Maximum building heights 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
9. Maximum dwelling units six per acre.
b. Accessory buildings and uses.
1. All accessory structures shall conform to the front setback
requirements for the principal structure. Accessory structures shall
not exceed 15 feet in height, and shall be set back 10 feet from the
side lot line, and 10 feet from the rear lot line. The minimum
horizontal separation between principal structures and accessory
structures shall be 15 feet. Accessory structure heights shall be
measured from average adjacent grade.
§ 21-16.1 GENERAL § 21-16.2
1:395
§ 21-16.3. Special Requirements. [Ord. #701, § 2; 1972 Code
§ 89-15]
In passing upon any site plan, the Planning Board shall require, in addition
to ordinary and reasonable considerations, the following:
Those swimming pools less than four feet high shall be enclosed by
a permanent fence not less than four feet high with a locked gate.
Building permits shall be required for all swimming pools, above or
below ground, with a water surface area of 100 square feet or over.
2. Accessory buildings attached to a principal building shall comply
with the setbacks of the principal building.
3. No truck, tractor trailer or commercial vehicle, licensed to
transport more than 1/2 ton rated manufacturer's capacity shall be
stored, or parked on any lot or portion of a lot so as to be visible
from a public street.
a. The location of principal units shall be separated by a minimum of 30
feet, and accessory units shall be separated by a minimum of 15 feet
from other principal units or accessory units.
b. No principal unit shall contain a window which shall face horizontally
opposite a window in another principal unit unless it shall be separated
by a minimum of 30 feet.
c. No structure shall be located within a minimum of 20 feet from any
access road nor within a minimum of 50 feet from any public street.
d. Accessory roads shall be constructed with sufficient width to permit
ordinary and emergency travel of vehicles in opposite directions, but in
no event shall such roads have a width of less than 25 feet.
e. Accessory units shall be located within a setback of 40 feet from any lot
line that abuts an R District.
f. Accessory roads shall be located and designed to provide access to and
proper development of other tracts within the R-6 Zone and to provide
access to the tract from public roadways.
g. Provision shall be made for a proper drainage of the tract and for an
adequate water supply to a sufficient hydrant system, such
requirements to be subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer.
h. Sanitary facilities shall be constructed and located as approved by the
Brielle Board of Health.
i. Provision shall be made for the proper collection of garbage.
j. There shall be provided, for each dwelling unit, a minimum of one onecar
garage and one additional off-street parking space. Each garage
§ 21-16.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-16.3
1:396
§ 21-16.4. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #701, § 2;
1972 Code § 89-15]
shall be part of the multiple-dwelling structure which it serves and shall
have a minimum floor area of 240 square feet.
k. All internal and external improvements found necessary in the public
interest, including but not limited to streets, driveways, parking areas,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, lighting, shade trees, water mains, water
systems, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of
sewage disposal, drainage structures and the like, shall be installed in
accordance with the standards set forth for major subdivisions of land,
and no building permit shall be issued unless and until adequate
performance guarantees of proper installation of such improvements
shall have been posted in an amount acceptable to the Borough
Engineer to ensure completion of all such improvements.
l. Parking lots shall be adequately lighted with wall- mounted or postmounted
ornamental fixtures which shall provide adequate shielding
from adjacent properties, and as further required by this ordinance.
m. Consonant with aesthetic ecological and environmental considerations,
adequate open spaces shall be preserved in their natural state.
n. In any development containing natural features such as trees, books,
hilltops and views, such natural features shall be preserved whenever
practicable.
o. Not more than one outside television antenna shall be permitted per
building.
p. No building shall be designed for more than six dwelling units or
occupied by more than six families.
a. Off-street parking and loading space is required as specified in Article
VI of this Chapter.
b. Landscaping is required as specified in Article VII of this chapter,
except that a buffer zone of 25 feet shall be required.
§ 21-16.3 GENERAL § 21-16.4
1:397

ARTICLE IV
COMMERCIAL ZONES
§ 21-17. REGULATIONS APPLYING TO ALL COMMERCIAL ZONES.
§ 21-17.1. Driveways and Parking Lots. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-16]
No property in a residential zone shall be used as a driveway or parking lot
to serve a business or industrial use.
§ 21-17.2. Curb Cuts. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-16]
All curb cuts shall be at least 15 feet but not more than 30 feet in width,
except on County roads where County Site Plan Requirements are
established.
§ 21-17.3. Compliance. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-16]
No use shall be established, maintained or conducted in any business zone
that will conflict with performance standards of Article IX of this Chapter.
§ 21-17.4. Utility and Telephone Lines. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-16]
All utility and telephone lines and appurtenances which provide service to
the property shall be placed underground.
§ 21-17.5. Trash Storage. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-16]
An enclosed area shall be provided for the temporary storage of trash
and other refuse. The enclosed area shall be on a durable paved surface
and designed and screened by dense landscaping or attractive, solid
architectural fence at least six feet in height so that the trash and refuse
will not be seen by the general public or from adjoining properties.
§ 21-17.6. Applicability. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-16]
Whenever a use is permitted in a particular zone, by reference to another
zone, the use shall be subject to all the requirements of the particular zone
in which the use is located or to be located.
§ 21-17.7. Roof Structure. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-16]
Roof structures such as mechanical equipment, water towers, etc., shall be
screened from public view or designed in such a fashion as to complement
the architecture of the building.
§ 21-17 GENERAL § 21-17.8
1:399
§ 21-17.8. Driveways for Residential Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 § 89-16]
A residential use may be served by a parking lot or driveway on or through
a commercial or industrial zone.
§ 21-17.9. Site Plan Approval Required. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; Ord.
#668; 1972 Code § 89-16]
The foregoing shall not relieve any individual from obtaining site plan
approval of all buildings and structures comprising a commercial venture.
§ 21-17.10. Principal Building or Structure Required. [Ord. #255;
Ord. #592; Ord. #668; 1972 Code § 89-16]
No use shall be established, maintained or conducted on property in any
commercial zone without the existence of a principal building and the
use shall only be permitted in conjunction with the use conducted in the
principal building or structure.
§ 21-18. C-1 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE. [Ord. 255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-17]
The purpose of the C-1 Central Commercial Zone is to provide a retail
center in which will be found the convenience shopping goods and services
required to meet the daily needs of residents and to provide an area
for central government. It is specifically for retail sales and services and
municipal government functions. Every encouragement is given to have
appropriate architecture to enhance a marine-oriented community.
§ 21-18.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-17]
a. A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot or premises may
be occupied and used for any of the following purposes:
Antique shops.
Apparel.
Appliance store.
Artist's supply.
Bakery shop.
Bank and trust company.
Barber shop.
Beauty and cosmetic shop.
Bicycle shop.
§ 21-17.8 BRIELLE CODE § 21-18.1
1:400
Books, periodicals, newspaper sales.
Business offices.
Butcher shop or meat market (no slaughtering permitted).
Candy shop.
Card shop.
Ceramic shop.
Cigars and tobacco.
Cleaner pick-up or laundry pick-up only.
Coin dealer.
Dairy products.
Delicatessen.
Drug store.
Feed store and mill.
Finance companies.
Florists.
Fruit stores and vegetable markets.
Gift shop.
Grocery stores.
Hardware stores.
Hobby shop.
Ice cream shop.
Jewelry shop.
Library.
Liquor store.
Locksmith.
Luncheonette (non-drive-in).
Medical clinic and offices (out-patient).
Municipal uses.
Musical instrument store.
§ 21-18.1 GENERAL § 21-18.1
1:401
Newsstand.
Notaries.
Paint, glass and wallpaper stores.
Pet shop.
Pharmacy.
Photography studios.
Police and fire stations.
Professional offices.
Public utilities office.
Post office.
Real estate and insurance.
Record shop.
Restaurant (non-drive-in, non-fast food).
Sandwich shop (non-drive-in).
Savings and loan associations.
Seafood store.
Shoe or hat repair shop.
Snack bar (non-drive-in).
Specialty food stores (i.e., herbs, spices etc.)
Sporting goods store.
Stationery store.
Tailors.
Tavern.
Television, radio, electronics, sales and service.
Travel agencies.
b. Accessory buildings and uses including.
1. Private garage space not to exceed three spaces for the storage of
vehicles operated exclusively as part of a permitted use.
2. Signs subject to the provisions of Article V of this Ordinance.
§ 21-18.1 BRIELLE CODE § 21-18.1
1:402
§ 21-18.2. Development Standards. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-17; Ord. #915]
The C-1 Commercial Zone specified herewith shall be occupied only as
indicated in the Schedule in Article XV of this Chapter and as follows:
3. Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Article VII of this
Chapter.
4. Buildings for tools and equipment used for maintenance of the
grounds.
5. Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and use.
c. The following uses are permitted subject to the Planning Board
approval and the special conditions of Article X of this Chapter:
1. Government and public buildings and services necessary to the
health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants
of the township.
2. Churches, synagogues, parish houses, and similar religious uses.
3. Public utility installations.
4. Quasi-public uses, including clubs, lodges, and similar uses.
5. Automobile sales and service.
6. Automobile gasoline station.
a. Principal buildings.
1. Minimum lot size 7,500 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width 50 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth 150 feet.
4. Minimum front setback (measured from the proposed street R.O.W.
line) 30 feet.
5. Minimum each side setback. If the property abuts a residential
zone, the building shall be set back a distance of 25 feet 10 feet.
6. Minimum rear setback. If the property abuts a residential zone, the
building shall be set back a distance of 30 feet. 30 feet.
7. Minimum gross floor area 800 square feet.
8. Maximum lot coverage 25%.
9. Maximum building height 2-1/2 stories, or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
§ 21-18.1 GENERAL § 21-18.2
1:403
§ 21-18.3. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-17]
§ 21-18A. C-1A GATEWAY ZONE. [Ord. #915]
The purpose of the C-1A Gateway Zone is to provide a multi-use overlay
zone that dovetails with the "Main Street" theme of the reconstructed
Higgins Avenue corridor. It is intended to promote themed retail/
professional use development with conditional residential aspects.
Seashore colonial architectural features are recommended for any sort of
development.
§ 21-18A.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #915]
b. Accessory buildings.
1. Accessory buildings shall conform to the same height and setback
requirements as the principal building. Accessory buildings are not
permitted in the required front yard.
a. Off-street parking and loading is required subject to the special
conditions as specified in Article VI of this Chapter.
b. Landscaping is required subject to the special conditions as specified in
Article VII of this Chapter.
a. A building may be erected, altered or used, and a lot or premises may
be occupied and used for any of the following purposes:
Accountant's offices
Advertising agency
Antique shop
Apparel shop
Art gallery
Artist supply shop
Bank branch
Barber shop
Beauty and cosmetic shop
Bicycle shop
Books, periodicals, newspaper shop
Candy shop
Card shop
§ 21-18.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-18A.1
1:404
Cigar and tobacco shop
Coin and stamp shop
Dance studio
Electronics service and repair shop
Employment agency
Engineer's offices
Financial consultant offices
Florist shop
Gift shop
Health and fitness centers
Hobby shop
Insurance office
Jewelry shop
Legal offices
Liquor store
Locksmith
Museum
Musical instrument shop
Photography studio
Pottery shop
Print shop
Private school
Real estate office
Record shop
Senior citizen activity center
Ship chandlery
Shoe repair shop
Sporting goods store
Stationery store
§ 21-18A.1 GENERAL § 21-18A.1
1:405
§ 21-18A.2. Development Standards. [Ord. #915]
The purpose of the following development standards is to promote nonlinear,
cluster development of permitted uses within the Zone while
maximizing air, light, and open space.
Tailor shop
Toy shop
Travel agency
b. Accessory structures and uses including:
Signs and entry gate structures.
Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and its uses.
c. Conditional uses subject to Planning Board approval and the special
conditions of Article X of this Chapter:
Age restricted townhouse development
Government and public buildings necessary to the health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough.
Churches, synagogues, parish houses, and similar religious uses.
Quasi-public uses, including clubs, lodges, and similar uses.
Specialty food shop and/or bakery.
a. Principal Buildings.
1. Minimum lot size 40,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width 200 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth 200 feet.
4. Minimum front setback 45 feet as measured from the curbline.
5. Minimum side setback 10 feet adjacent to commercial use 25 feet
adjacent to residential use.
6. Minimum rear setback 25 feet.
7. Maximum lot coverage 75%.
8. Maximum building height 35 feet.
9. Maximum number of building stories 2 1/2.
Maximum detached structure first floor area 6,000 square feet.
§ 21-18A.1 BRIELLE CODE § 21-18A.2
1:406
§ 21-18A.3. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #915]
Off-street parking and loading is required subject to the special conditions
as specified in Article VI of this Chapter. All off-street parking shall be
located in the side and rear yards of subject lots.
Comprehensive landscape plans and rendering prepared by a licensed
landscape architect are required subject to the special conditions as
specified in Article VII of this Chapter. Designs shall incorporate repetition
of native plants in unison with streetscape theme and other adjacent
development.
All exterior signage shall be an externally lighted type only and conform
to size and location requirements specified in Article V of this Chapter. No
neon signs shall be permitted except for individual "OPEN" signs mounted
on the interior of the building and not exceeding 12 inches by 18 inches
in dimension. Only one neon "OPEN" sign shall be permitted per premises.
No such sign shall be illuminated after the close of business hours. Sign
b. Occupancy limited to persons age 55 and older, except for (1) spouse of
eligible person who is under age 55; (2) legally dependent, natural or
adoptive children residing with eligible parent(s); (3) adults under age
55 living with eligible persons if it is established that presence of such
person(s) is essential for physical care or economic support of eligible
person(s); or (4) natural or adoptive children residing with eligible
parent(s) who are physically dependent on eligible parent(s) due to
handicap.
c. No fireplaces.
d. No above-grade decks.
e. No balconies or widow's walks.
f. Minimum separation of principal structures shall be 30 feet. Minimum
separation of accessory structures from other accessory and principal
structures shall be 15 feet.
g. Minimum setback from internal access drives and parking areas shall
be 20 feet.
h. All internal access drives shall have a minimum width of 25 feet. All
development plans shall include provisions for on-site storm water
collection (and detention) where deemed necessary by the Borough
Engineer.
i. Development shall provide for congregate refuse/recycling area(s) for
use by residents. All such areas shall be fully enclosed and covered. Not
more than one outside television antenna shall be permitted per
building. No building shall be designed for more than six dwelling units.
j. Permissible Accessory Uses. Community facilities such as a pool, allpurpose
room and administrative office.
§ 21-18A.2 GENERAL § 21-18A.3
1:407
colors shall be coordinated with building colors and consistent with the
architectural design of the building. All freestanding signage shall be of
carved wood design. Seashore colonial architectural theme and finishes of
proposed development shall be similar to and harmonious with existing,
adjacent townhouse development(s) and other adjacent architectural
themes.
Site improvement elements are to match quality and detail of streetscape
improvements. Site elements include granite curb, clay brick sidewalk,
lighting standards and fixtures, and landscape species.
§ 21-19. C-2 MARINE COMMERCIAL ZONE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
Ord. #652; Ord. #653; 1972 Code § 89-18]
The purpose of the C-2 Marine Commercial Zone is to promote expanded
and upgraded recreational boating and sport fishing facilities and to provide
an area for a variety of uses that capitalize upon and enhance the unique
community wide resource of the waterfront.
§ 21-19.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; Ord. #652; Ord.
#653; 1972 Code § 89-18]
§ 21-19.2. Required Accessory Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; Ord.
#652; Ord. #653; 1972 Code § 89-18]
a. Retail sale of goods, which are clearly oriented toward marine
activities;
b. Service establishments that are clearly oriented toward marine
activities;
c. Marinas, boat basins, marine facilities, yacht basins, and yacht clubs
including boat sales, repair, storage and fueling facilities;
d. Docking facilities for party, charter and headboats and pleasure craft;
e. Other ancillary facilities and activities commonly related to party,
charter, headboat and pleasure boat activity;
f. Art galleries and museums;
g. Shops of artisans or craftsmen; and
h. Antique and curio shops.
a. Off-street parking in accordance with Article VI of this Chapter;
b. Off-street loading in accordance with the provisions of Article VI of this
Chapter;
c. Landscaping in accordance with Article VII of this Chapter.
§ 21-18A.3 BRIELLE CODE § 21-19.3
1:408
§ 21-19.3. Permitted Accessory Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; Ord.
#652; Ord. #653; 1972 Code § 89-18]
§ 21-19.4. Conditional Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; Ord. #652; Ord.
#653; 1972 Code § 89-18]
a. Private swimming pools in accordance with the provisions of Article VII
of this Chapter;
b. Fences in accordance with the provisions of Article III of this Chapter;
c. Signs permitted in both residential and commercial zones in
accordance with the provisions of Article V of this Chapter;
d. Other common and customary accessory uses and buildings which are
clearly incidental and ancillary to the principal use and building;
e. Recreational facilities such as swimming pools, basketball courts,
health club facilities, tennis courts and racquetball courts.
a. The following uses are permitted subject to the special conditions of
Article X of this Chapter and the approval of the Planning Board:
1. Public utilities;
2. Government and other public uses, except maintenance garages
and storage yards;
3. Restaurants;
4. Hotels and motels; and
5. Multi-use marine complexes.
b. The following general findings shall be made by the Planning Board in
evaluating applications for approval of conditional uses in the C-2 Zone:
1. The proposed use promotes the use of the waterfront or will
complement or serve other existing or planned uses in the C-2
Zone;
2. The design and arrangement of the proposed uses and/or
structures are compatible in use, size and scale with existing uses
and structures of the immediate area.
3. The proposed use and/or structure will have no significant adverse
impact upon property values in the immediate area;
4. Adequate off-street parking and loading facilities and traffic
circulation for the use(s) and/or structure(s) are to be provided so
as to avoid the potential for traffic congestion or the creation of
undue traffic hazard;
§ 21-19.3 GENERAL § 21-19.4
1:409
§ 21-19.5. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; Ord. #652; Ord. #653; 1972 Code § 89-18; Amended 11-87]
5. The proposed plans provided for adequate screening of adverse
aspects of the proposed use and or structure from adjoining
properties;
6. Adequate lighting is to be provided and arranged so as to minimize
glare and reflection on adjacent properties;
7. Adequate provision is to be made for safety and fire protection
including adequate water facilities for fire fighting. The Planning
Board shall require the certification of the Brielle Fire Department
and Fire Subcode Official where there is question that there is
substantial fire danger to surrounding property and that the
proposed project as located, constructed, and equipped can be
properly protected in the case of fire;
8. Adequate utilities including sanitary sewer facilities and potable
water shall be available or provided for the proposed development.
a. Building Design Criteria. The purpose of this subsection shall be to
maintain, promote and enhance the historic and nautical character of
the Borough's waterfront area. To this end proposed development and
redevelopment shall meet the following criteria:
1. All development, including rehabilitation, restoration,
reconstruction or new construction shall be of a design, and
include materials, of a character appropriate for use in a waterfront
or nautical setting.
2. In development or redevelopment areas, where more than one
structure is proposed, such buildings shall be designed as an
integral part of an overall site design related to adjacent
development and/or the nautical character of the waterfront area.
3. Roof covering, visible from a public way, shall be of shingles (slate,
asphalt, asbestos, etc.) or metal or other acceptable materials and
textures of approved colors.
4. Flat roofs are prohibited unless the Planning Board determines that
from a visual perspective, the architectural elevations of the
proposes building(s) will satisfy the intent of maintaining a nautical
character.
5. All visible metal work on roofs, except copper, shall be painted or
integrally colored in subdued earthtone colors(s).
6. All exterior building faces are to be constructed, or sheathed with
properly treated wood siding and trim. No porcelainized metal,
other metal or reinforced plastics shall be used; no exposed
concrete block, cinder block, lightweight aggregate or similar
§ 21-19.4 BRIELLE CODE § 21-19.5
1:410
materials shall be permitted as facing of an exterior wall surface;
however, exposed concrete (poured in place or precast) may be
used as articulated structural materials for piers, columns, lintels
or beams or other elements of the structural frame. In addition, and
upon specific approval of the Planning Board, exposed concrete
properly treated, colored and textured, or glass curtain walls may
be used as an exterior surface material where the use of such
material is an organic component of the structural system for a
particular building.
7. Unity and compatibility with adjacent structures is to be achieved
to the maximum extent possible in new construction, restoration
and rehabilitation work, through the consideration of components
of exterior appearance, specifically, the nature and use of surfacing
materials; including colors, textures and the general nature of
exterior materials and treatment, including building ornament and
trim.
8. To the maximum extent practicable required off- Street parking
shall be provided in garage space obscured from view from the
water's edge and public and private streets and driveways. The
provisions of off-street parking in garage space located under
residential and non-residential, and non-residential structures is
encouraged.
b. The purpose of this subsection shall be to encourage and promote
physical and visual access to the water's edge and to discourage private
development which precludes such access, particularly pedestrian
access. The goal of this subsection shall be to preserve continuous
physical and visual access along the water's edge.
1. No building shall be located within 25 feet of the water's edge;
2. Unless determined by the Planning Board to be inappropriate,
unfeasible, or unnecessary, pedestrian access to the water's edge
shall be incorporated into the design of all proposed development.
c. Environmental Impact Statement. All applications for development in
the C2 and C2A Zone on properties abutting or contiguous with the
Manasquan River and which require submission of a major site plan or
preliminary subdivision will be accompanied by an Environmental
Impact Statement (EIS) as provided below:
1. A project description which shall specify what is to be done and
how it is to be done, during construction and operation, as well as
recital of alternative plans deemed practicable to achieve the
objective.
2. An inventory of existing environmental conditions at the project
site and in surrounding regions which shall describe air quality,
water quality, water supply, hydrology, geology, soils and properties
thereof, including capabilities and limitations, sewage systems,
§ 21-19.5 GENERAL § 21-19.5
1:411
topography, slope, vegetation, wildlife, habitat, aquatic organisms,
noise characteristics and levels, demography, land use, aesthetics,
history and archaeology. Air and water quality shall be described
with reference to standards promulgated by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the State of New Jersey and soils shall
be described with reference to criteria contained in the Freehold
Area Soil Conservation District Standards and Specifications.
3. An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all topics
set forth in subparagraph b above.
4. A listing and evaluation of adverse environmental impacts which
cannot be avoided, with particular emphasis upon air or water
pollution, increase in noise, damage to plant, tree and wildlife
systems, damage to natural resources, displacement of people and
businesses, displacement of existing farms, increase in
sedimentation and siltation, increase in municipal services and
consequences to municipal tax structure. Off-site impacts shall also
be set forth and evaluated.
5. A description of steps to be taken to minimize adverse
environmental impacts during construction and operation, both at
the project site and in the surrounding region, such description to
be accompanied by necessary maps, schedules and other
explanatory data as may be needed to clarify and explain the
actions to be taken.
6. A statement concerning any irreversible and irretrievable
commitment of resources which would be involved in the proposed
action should it be implemented.
7. A statement of alternatives to the proposed project which might
avoid some or all of the adverse environmental effects, including a
non-action alternative.
8. When required, five copies of the Environmental Impact Statement
shall be submitted to the municipal agency.
9. The municipal agency shall either approve or disapprove the
Environmental Impact Statement as a part of its underlying
function with respect to site plan review. In reaching a decision, the
municipal agency shall take into consideration the effect of the
applicant's proposed project upon all aspects of the environment as
outlined above as well as the sufficiency of applicant's proposals for
dealing with any immediate or projected adverse environmental
effects.
10. Upon approval by the municipal agency, the Environmental Impact
Statement shall be marked or stamped "Approved" by the
Secretary of the municipal agency and shall be designated as the
"Final Environmental Impact Statement."
§ 21-19.5 BRIELLE CODE § 21-19.5
1:412
§ 21-19.6. Area Yard and Building Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; Ord. #652; Ord. #653; 1972 Code § 89-18; Ord. #868]
11. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the municipal agency may, at the
request of an applicant, waive the requirement for an
Environmental Impact Statement if sufficient evidence is submitted
to support a conclusion that the proposed development will have a
slight or negligible environmental impact. Portions of such
requirement may likewise be waived upon a finding that a complete
Statement need not be prepared in order to evaluate adequately
the environmental impact of a particular project.
12. An Environmental Impact Statement as required herein shall also
be submitted as to all public or quasi-public projects unless such
are exempt from the requirements of local law by supervening
County, State or Federal Law.
13. Submission of an Environmental Impact Statement or Assessment
consistent with the requirements of P.L. 1973, Chapter 185, the
Coastal Area Facility Review Act, and the rules and regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto, will be conclusively deemed to meet
the requirements of this section.
a. Minimum lot size.
interior 7,500 square feet
corner 11,250 square feet
b. Minimum lot width.
interior 50 feet
corner 75 feet
c. Minimum lot depth 150 feet.
d. Minimum front yard setback (measured from the street right-of-way
line) 30 feet.
e. Minimum side yard setback (if the property abuts a residential zone, the
building shall be set back a distance of 25 feet) 10 feet.
f. Minimum rear yard setback 30 feet.
g. Minimum gross habitable floor area:
Dwelling unit type:
Efficiency 550 square feet
1 bedroom 700 square feet
2 bedroom 850 square feet
3 bedroom 1,000 square feet
§ 21-19.5 GENERAL § 21-19.6
1:413
§ 21-20. C-2A LIMITED MARINE COMMERCIAL ZONE.
§ 21-20.1. Environmental Impact Statement. [Amended 11-87; New]
An Environmental Impact Statement shall be submitted as set forth in
subsection 21-19.5c, as to C2 and C2-A Zones.
§ 21-21. C-3 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-19]
The purpose of the C-3 Highway Commercial Zone is to provide areas for
retail sales and services to accommodate the traveling public; to promote
compatible land use development of attractive building groups; to ensure
the compatibility of the development with adjacent residential areas; to
improve and provide for the efficient and safe traffic flow within and
through C-3 Zone; and to provide highway-oriented commercial uses in the
proper location in the community.
§ 21-21.1. Permitted Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-19]
4 bedroom 1,150 square feet
5 bedroom 1,300 square feet
h. Maximum lot coverage 25%.
i. Minimum unoccupied open space 25%.
j. Minimum setback from water's edge 25 feet.
k. Height:
Forty feet or three stories, whichever is less, provided that no structure,
or part thereof, located within 150 feet of a residential zone shall
exceed 35 feet or 2 1/2 stories, whichever is less.
Within the C-2 Zone, floor area, located underneath structures, used
exclusively for the off-street parking of motor vehicles and storage,
shall not be considered in determining the number of stories contained
in a structure, provided the maximum building height is not exceeded.
l. Maximum non-residential floor area ratio (F.A.R.) .25
m. Accessory buildings shall conform to the same yard and building
requirements provided above.
a. A building may be erected, altered, or used, and a lot of premises may
be occupied and used for any of the following purposes:
Advertising agencies
Advertising specialty office.
§ 21-19.6 BRIELLE CODE § 21-21.1
1:414
Antique sales.
Apparel.
Appliance stores.
Art gallery.
Artist's supplies.
Audio visual equipment.
Auto supplies; parts and accessories (not including used or junk parts).
Bakery shop.
Banks.
Barber shop.
Beauty and cosmetic shop.
Beer, ale and liquor sales.
Blueprinting and photostating.
Bicycle shop.
Books, periodicals and newspaper sales.
Broadcasting studio.
Business equipment sales.
Business office.
Butcher shop or meat market (no slaughtering permitted).
Cafeteria.
Camera and/or photographic supply stores.
Candy sales.
Caterers.
Ceramic products.
China shop.
Cigars and tobacco sales.
Cleaners pick-up or laundry pick-up.
Clothing and pressing establishments.
Clubs.
§ 21-21.1 GENERAL § 21-21.1
1:415
Coin dealers.
Cosmetic shop.
Costume rental.
Credit union office.
Curtain shop.
Dairy products, retail.
Delicatessen.
Department store.
Diner.
Drugstore.
Eating establishments.
Employment agencies.
Electrical supplies.
Exterminator.
Fabric shops.
Finance companies.
Fire protection equipment sales, non-automotive.
Floor covering.
Florists.
Food products.
Fruit and vegetable market.
Funeral services.
Fur shop.
Furniture sales.
General office buildings.
Gift shops.
Glassware.
Greeting card shop.
Grocery.
§ 21-21.1 BRIELLE CODE § 21-21.1
1:416
Hardware.
Hobby shop.
Home furnishing.
Home improvement offices.
Hospitals, animal.
Household appliance.
Ice cream shop.
Insurance company.
Interior decorator.
Jewelry store.
Kitchen equipment.
Laundry and dry cleaning.
Lawn maintenance services office.
Leather goods and luggage.
Locksmith.
Luncheonette.
Mail order house.
Major appliance sales.
Medical clinics and offices.
Metalware.
Motorcycle sales and rental.
Muffler, seat cover and auto accessory stores.
Museum.
Musical instrument sales.
Notaries.
Nursing home.
Office equipment and supplies.
Optical goods.
Package liquor store.
§ 21-21.1 GENERAL § 21-21.1
1:417
Paint, glass and wallpaper.
Pet shop.
Phonographic sales and service.
Photographic studios.
Printers offices and establishments.
Private schools.
Physical culture and health establishments.
Professional offices.
Public utilities offices.
Record shop.
Reducing salon.
Restaurants.
Sandwich shops.
Savings and loan associations.
Seafood retail sales.
Shoe shine parlor.
Social service organization.
Specialty foods.
Sporting goods.
Stamp and coin store.
Stamp redemption centers.
Stationery store.
Supermarket.
Surgical and medical supplies sales.
Tailors.
Telephone answering service.
Television, radio, electronics, sales, service-repairs.
Toy shops.
Travel agencies.
§ 21-21.1 BRIELLE CODE § 21-21.1
1:418
Travel ticket offices.
Telephone and telegraph office.
Uniform rental and sales.
Variety stores.
Veterinary hospitals.
Window cleaning services.
b. Accessory buildings and uses including:
1. Private garage space not to exceed three spaces for the storage of
vehicles operated exclusively as part of a permitted business
function.
2. Signs subject to the provisions of Article V of this Chapter.
3. Fences and hedges subject to the provisions of Article VII of this
Chapter.
4. Buildings for tools and equipment used for maintenance of the
grounds.
5. Other customary accessory uses and structures which are clearly
incidental to the principal structure and uses.
c. The following uses are permitted subject to approval of the Planning
Board and the special conditions of Article X of this Chapter:
1. Public utility installations.
2. Car washes.
3. Automotive gasoline station.
4. Automotive service station.
5. Automotive sales and service.
6. Automotive sales lot.
7. Landscaping nurseries and garden supply sales.
8. Government public buildings.
9. Churches, synagogues, and similar religious uses.
10. Trailer and mobile home sales, recreation equipment sales,
swimming pool and boat and marine sales.
11. Eating establishments (drive-in or fast food).
12. Quasi-public uses, including clubs, lodges and similar uses.
§ 21-21.1 GENERAL § 21-21.2
1:419
§ 21-21.2. Development Standards. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code 89-19; Ord. #915]
The C-3 Highway Commercial Zone specified herewith shall be occupied
only as follows and in accordance with the schedule in Article XV of this
Chapter.
§ 21-21.3. Other Provisions and Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-19]
a. Principal buildings.
1. Minimum lot size.
interior 7,500 square feet
corner 11,250 square feet
2. Minimum lot width.
interior 50 feet
corner 75 feet
3. Minimum lot depth 150 feet.
4. Minimum front yard setback (measured from the proposed street
R.O.W. line) 30 feet.
5. Minimum side yard setback 10 feet.
6. Minimum rear yard setback 30 feet.
7. Minimum gross, floor area 800 square feet.
8. Maximum lot, coverage 20%.
9. Maximum building height 2-1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is less
b. Accessory buildings.
1. Accessory buildings shall conform to the same height and setback
requirements as the principal building. Accessory buildings are not
permitted in the required front yard.
a. Off-street parking and loading is required subject to regulations and
conditions as specified in Article VI of this Chapter.
b. Landscaping is required subject to the special conditions as specified in
Article VII of this Chapter.
§ 21-21.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-21.3
1:420
ARTICLE V
SIGN REQUIREMENTS
§ 21-22. BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-20]
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, replace or alter any
sign or other advertising structure as defined in the Chapter, except those
signs exempted under this section of the Chapter, without first obtaining a
building permit.
§ 21-23. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
§ 21-23.1. Number of Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 § 89-21]
All signs shall be limited to the lot or parcel to be sold or the premises where
the business or service is conducted.
§ 21-23.2. Sign Area. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-21]
The maximum permitted area of each sign shall be the size of one side
only. The area of the sign shall include each and every part of the sign
including mouldings and frames. Where the sign is supported by a post or
pylon whose surface is being used for advertising purposes, the area of the
post, pylon or other supporting members shall be considered as part of the
total allowable sign area. Wherever the name or advertising message on a
sign is divided between the number of panels or parts, all of the panels or
parts shall be considered as one sign. Where a sign consists of individual
letters or numbers, the area of the sign shall be considered as the total area
of the smallest rectangle, or rectangle which can enclose all of the letters
or numbers.
§ 21-23.3. Facade Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-21]
Signs erected flat against the side of a building shall not extend above the
height or beyond the sides of the vertical wall or cornice to which they are
attached. Such facade signs shall not extend from the face of the wall on
which it is attached more than eight inches.
§ 21-23.4. Rear and Side Parking Areas. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-21]
Where the side or rear of a business structure adjoins a public parking area
or a private parking area intended for the use of the structure in question,
signs may be placed on the side or rear wall to identify the business use in
the structure, subject to the maximum sign requirements of this Chapter.
§ 21-23.5. Lot Line. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-21]
No sign or any part thereof shall be located closer than 15 feet to any lot
line.
§ 21-22 GENERAL § 21-23.6
1:421
§ 21-23.6. Use Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-21]
Any sign erected in conjunction with a specific use will be removed upon
the discontinuation or removal of that use.
§ 21-23.7. Prohibited Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-21; New]
The following types of signs shall not be permitted in any zone:
a. A flashing, fluttering, animated or rotating sign.
b. Signs with any lighting or control mechanism which may cause radio or
television interference.
c. Any sign so erected, constructed or maintained as to obstruct or be
attached to any fire escape, window, door or opening used as a means of
egress or ingress, or for firefighting purposes, or placed so as to
interfere with any opening required for legal ventilation.
d. Any sign which is of such form, character or shape as to confuse or
dangerously distract the attention of the operator of a motor vehicle.
e. Any advertisement which uses a series of two or more signs or units,
placed in a line parallel to the highway, or in similar fashion, all carrying
a single advertising message, part of which is contained on each sign.
f. Signs which in any way simulate official, directional or warning signs
erected or maintained by the State of New Jersey, County or
Municipality thereof, or by any railroad, or public utility or similar
agency concerned with the protection of the public health or safety.
g. Billboard and/or outdoor display structures.
h. Roof signs.
i. Signs on railroad or vehicular overpasses.
j. Signs with more than two display surfaces, sides or faces, such as
hinged, triangular or box signs.
k. Any combination of advertising devices such as flags, pennants,
spinners, or similar displays shall not be permitted.
l. No person shall paint, mark or write on or post or otherwise affix any
handbill or sign to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone,
streetlamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad
trestle, electric light or power or telephone or telegraph or trolley wire
pole or wire appurtenance, or upon any fixture of the fire alarm or
police telegraph system, or upon any lighting system, public bridge,
drinking fountain, lifebuoy, life preserver, lifeboat or other lifesaving
equipment, street sign or traffic sign.
§ 21-23.6 BRIELLE CODE § 21-23.8
1:422
§ 21-23.8. Conformance. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-21]
All signs shall conform to the character of the neighborhood.
§ 21-24. EXEMPT SIGNS NOT REQUIRING BUILDING PERMIT.
§ 21-24.1. Real Estate Signs. [New; Ord. #875; Ord. #1016]
One nonilluminated temporary sign advertising the prospective sale or
rental of the premises upon which the sign is maintained, provided that the
area of any such sign shall not exceed three square feet, shall not exceed
four feet in height above ground level and shall be removed within 10 days
after consummation of a lease or sale transaction, and further provided that
the words "For Sale" or "For Rent" or similar words must be the largest
wording on the sign. When the premises, upon which such sign is to be
placed, fronts upon two arterial (arterial to be defined as a paved roadway
accepted and maintained by the State of New Jersey, County of Monmouth
or Borough of Brielle, a waterway accessible to boat traffic or a rear yard
which fronts on an area of open space where there is a high volume of
pedestrian traffic and the placement of a sign would have a positive benefit
to the seller) one additional sign shall be permitted, provided that each
individual sign fronts on a separate arterial and is in compliance with all the
provisions of this section.
One additional sign, commonly known as an "Open House" sign may be
permitted, but only for the duration of the event and with the prior written
approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 21-24.2. Professional Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-25]
Professional signs indicating the name and profession of the occupancy of a
dwelling, provided such signs do not exceed one square foot.
§ 21-24.3. Temporary Commercial Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-25; Ord. #875]
Temporary signs inside windows or commercial establishment not covering
more than 15% of the total window area. Whenever a new business opens in
the Borough of Brielle or an existing business, operating with an approved
mercantile license, wishes to conduct a special event, such business or
a. One directional sign shall be permitted during an "open house" event.
Such sign shall be no larger than four square feet on one side or eight
square feet, if the sign is two-sided.
Directional signs cannot be put in place earlier than two hours before
the event and must be removed within one hour of the conclusion of the
open-house.
No enhancements of the sign including, but not limited to balloons,
streamers, et al. are permitted.
§ 21-23.8 GENERAL § 21-24.3
1:423
commercial venture may make application for one fifteen-day special event
permit per annum.
Said permit may be purchased for a fee of $25 from the Code Enforcement
Officer and said permit shall allow a vendor to display flags or banners
to publicize a specific commercial activity conditioned by a fifteen-day
limitation that begins on the date that the permit takes effect.
The permittee must post a $200 cash bond, refundable no sooner than the
16th day, after the permit has taken effect and upon the completion of
an inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer to verify that all banners,
flags or any other such device employed to publicize the event, have been
removed. Failure to do so shall result in the forfeiture of the bond and the
permittee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this Chapter.
§ 21-24.4. Trespassing and Hunting Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-25]
Any signs forbidding trespassing, hunting, fishing or trapping as authorized
by the Fish and Game Laws.
§ 21-24.5. Political Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-25; New]
Temporary signs indicating a political preference or a political cause not to
exceed four square feet in residential zones or 12 square feet in any other
zone. Such signs shall not be erected prior to 30 days before an election
and shall be removed within seven days after the election. A cash bond
of $50 is required for the posting of political signs and will be refunded
provided that all political signs are removed within the time period specified
above. For purposes of this section a political sign shall mean a sign which
indicates the name, cause or affiliation of anyone seeking public office, or
which refers to an issue for which a public election is scheduled to be held.
§ 21-24.6. Charitable Organization. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-25]
Temporary charitable signs.
§ 21-24.7. Residential Family Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-22]
Decorative non-illuminated signs showing name and/or address of house or
family.
§ 21-25. ILLUMINATION. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-23]
Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, floor or spot lights shall be
so placed and so shielded so as to prevent the rays of illumination thereof
from being cast into residential properties or into a public right-of-way.
§ 21-24.3 BRIELLE CODE § 21-26
1:424
§ 21-26. SIGNS OVER PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-24]
No portion of any sign shall be located within or suspended over a public
right-of-way including a pedestrian walk.
§ 21-27. SETBACK FROM RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. [Ord. #255;
Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-25]
When signs in a non-residential district are located along the district
boundary line of any residential district, they shall be set back not less than
50 feet from such residential district boundary line.
§ 21-28. SIGN MAINTENANCE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-26]
Any sign that is or shall become dangerous or unsafe in any manner
whatsoever shall be repaired, made safe and attractive in conformity with
this Chapter or shall be removed by the owner, lessor, agent or occupant
of the building, property or land upon which it is placed or to which it is
attached. A written notice shall be served upon the owner, lessor, agent or
occupant of a building, property or land upon which a dangerous or unsafe
sign is located. The notice shall require necessary action to be taken within
10 days from the date of service of the notice upon such person, or within
such lesser time as shall be deemed reasonable in cases where the danger
to public health, safety, and general welfare is so imminent as to require
more immediate abatement. All signs shall be painted and maintained in
good repair at all times. Failure to keep signs painted, illuminated or in
good repair for a period of 12 consecutive calendar months shall constitute
abandonment, and such sign may not then be repaired or re-used and must
be removed.
§ 21-29. LOCATION OF SIGNS. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-27]
No sign shall be erected or located to obstruct the vision of drivers entering
a public street; nor shall any sign be erected which obstructs existing signs
on adjacent properties to a degree that the message contained on the
obstructed sign is no longer visible for a reasonable distance therefrom.
§ 21-30. PERMITTED SIGNS.
§ 21-30.1. Residence Zones. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-28; New]
In any residence zone, the following types of signs shall be permitted:
a. A professional or announcement sign accessory to a home professional
office or home occupation in a residence building shall not exceed one
square foot in area. Such sign shall be fixed flat on the main wall of such
building and the face shall not extend from the face of the wall on which
§ 21-26 GENERAL § 21-30.1
1:425
§ 21-30.2. Commercial Zones. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-28; Ord. #947]
it is attached more than eight inches. Only one such sign shall be
permitted and may only be interior-lighted.
b. A name or announcement sign accessory to a church or other place of
worship, a public or quasi-public building, a multiple-dwelling group,
and any permitted institutional or similar use shall not exceed 10
square feet in area. Such sign may only be interior-lighted. Not more
than one such sign shall be permitted on a lot.
c. A sign which is listed as exempt in this section and under the same
restrictions. Non-illuminated temporary signs on new construction
sites, not exceeding 15 square feet in area and provided they shall be
removed within seven days after completion of the construction work.
d. Decorative non-illuminated signs showing name and/or address of
house or family, not larger than one square foot in area. Not more than
one such sign shall be erected for each dwelling unit up to a total of two
for any one lot.
e. Farm signs not to exceed six square feet.
f. Official signs erected by the Municipality, County, State or Federal
Government not to exceed 10 square feet.
g. One sign shall be permitted for the purpose of identifying a multi-family
dwelling project of more than three units, but shall not exceed 20
square feet aggregate of both sides. Said signs shall not be allowed to
project above the ground by more than five feet. Signs may be
illuminated as long as the glare from the lights shines directly on the
sign and does not permit light to emanate beyond the property lines of
the subject site.
h. No more than one sign shall be permitted on each lot in connection with
a use or activity permitted in the Residential Zones.
i. Construction signs are specifically prohibited from Residential Zones.
For purposes of this section construction signs shall mean signs which
include the name of persons and firms performing services, labor, or
supplying material to property where construction is actually in
progress and under a current building permit.
a. All commercial zones.
1. Any sign permitted in the Residential Zone shall be permitted in the
Commercial Zones.
2. Facade signs: Exterior signs identifying or advertising the names or
uses of the tenant's occupants of the premises may be affixed to the
building and shall occupy no more than 10% of the front facade
area of the building. Signs may be placed on all exposed sides of a
§ 21-30.1 BRIELLE CODE § 21-30.2
1:426
building providing they do not total more than the 10% maximum
limitation of the front facade.
3. Canopy signs. A building whose walkways along the front facade
are covered by a permanently installed rigid canopy or other
structural device shall be permitted to hang vertically from the
complete underside of said canopy one sign for each store in the
first floor of the building. The sign shall not exceed six square feet
in area and shall not be less than 10 feet above the walks. Such
signs may be illuminated, but shall not overhang any public rightof-
way.
4. Free-standing signs:
(a) One free-standing identification shall be permitted provided
the aggregate area of all sides of such sign in square feet shall
be in accordance with the following schedule:
Gross Floor Aggregate Sign Area
Under 5,000 25 square feet
5,001 to 15,000 50 square feet
15,001 to 30,000 75 square feet
30,001 to 50,000 100 square feet
50,001 to 100,000 150 square feet
(b) Any commercial building having over 100,000 square feet of
gross floor area and desiring a larger sign than 150 square feet
shall apply to the Planning Board for approval.
(c) Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 20 feet
measured from the ground level to the top-most portion of a
structure. Supporting frames for these signs shall be a
permanent material such as steel or concrete.
§ 21-30.2 GENERAL § 21-30.2
1:427

ARTICLE VI
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS
§ 21-31. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
§ 21-31.1. Requirements. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-29]
Off-street parking, unloading and service requirements of this section shall
apply and govern in all zones within the Municipality. Except as provided in
this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless
there is included with the plan for such building, improvement or use, a plot
plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking, unloading
and service purposes. A Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless
the required off-street parking, unloading, and service facilities have been
provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan.
§ 21-31.2. Maintenance. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
Duty to provide and maintain off-street parking and loading. No land shall
be used or occupied, no structure shall be designed, created, altered, used
or occupied, and no use shall be operated unless off-street parking and
loading facilities are provided in at least the amount and maintained in the
manner required by this section.
§ 21-31.3. Circulation. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
a. There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street parking
and loading space.
b. Roads, pedestrian walks and open spaces shall be properly related to
existing and proposed buildings appropriately landscaped.
c. Buildings, parking areas and vehicular circulation shall be arranged so
that pedestrian movement is not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular
traffic.
d. Materials and design of paving, lighting fixtures, retaining walls,
fences, curbs, benches, etc., shall be of good appearance and easily
maintained.
e. The location and design of pedestrian walks should emphasize desirable
views of new and existing development.
f. The maximum separation of private automobiles and service vehicles
shall be provided through the use of separate service lanes, where
reasonably possible.
g. Parking facilities shall be designed with careful regard to orderly
arrangement, topography, landscaping, and ease of access, and shall be
developed as an integral part of an overall sign design.
§ 21-31 GENERAL § 21-31.4
1:429
§ 21-31.4. Required Area for Each Parking Space. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-29; Amended 11-87]
Each automobile parking space shall not be less than nine feet wide, nor
less than 18 feet deep, exclusive of passageways. In addition, there shall be
provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a
public right-of-way. In the case of parallel parking, each space shall be not
less than nine feet wide, nor less than 22 feet long. Aisle space shall be not
less than 24 feet wide for 90° parking; not less than 16 feet wide for oneway
60° parking; and not less than 13 feet wide for one-way 45° parking.
§ 21-31.5. Drainage and Maintenance. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-29]
All off-street parking, off-street loading, and service facilities shall be
graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulation in a
safe manner while preventing damage to abutting properties and/or public
streets. Except for single- family uses, they shall be surfaced with asphaltic,
bituminous cement or other properly bound pavement which will assure a
surface resistant to erosion. Such drainage and materials shall be installed
as required by the Planning Board and as recommended by the Municipal
Engineer. All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of
the owners thereof, in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition.
§ 21-31.6. Separation from Walkways and Streets. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
All off-street parking, off-street loading, and service areas shall be
separated from walkways, sidewalks, streets or alleys by curbing or other
protective device where necessary as required by the Planning Board.
§ 21-31.7. Provide Walks Adjacent to Business Buildings. [Ord.
#255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-29; Amended 11-87]
A walkway, if provided, adjacent to a business building shall not be less
than four feet in width and shall be in addition to other requirements of
this section. In all locations where parked automobiles may overhang such
adjacent sidewalk, a minimum walk width of six feet shall be provided.
§ 21-31.8. Site Plan. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
Location and dimensions of pedestrian entrances, exits, walks and
walkways shall be indicated on submitted site plans.
§ 21-31.9. Connection to a Public Right-of-Way. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
Each off-street parking, loading or service area shall be connected to a
public street right-of-way by means of a driveway constructed in accordance
with at least the minimum standards required by this Chapter.
§ 21-31.4 BRIELLE CODE § 21-31.10
1:430
§ 21-31.10. Size of Driveways. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-29]
A driveway exclusive of curb return radii shall be not less than 10 feet in
width in all residential zones, and not less than 15 feet in all other zones. A
curb return radius for a driveway at its entrance to a public street shall be a
minimum of five feet for single-family residential lots and a minimum of 15
feet for all other uses. The maximum width of a driveway exclusive of curb
return radii shall not exceed 30 feet.
§ 21-31.11. Location of Curb Cuts. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-29]
At the intersection of streets, a curb cut, where required or installed, shall
be set back not less than 25 feet from the intersection of two curb lines in
all zones. Between the curb cuts for any two driveways serving the same
property there shall be at least 50 feet. Curb cuts shall be located at least
five feet from abutting property lines in all zones.
§ 21-31.12. Off-Street Parking Space Within Buildings. [Ord. #255;
Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
Garage space or space within building, in basements or on the roofs of
buildings may be used to meet the off-street parking requirements of this
Chapter, provided all requirements regarding this section are met.
§ 21-31.13. Pavement Markings and Signs. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-29]
Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and pavement
directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers,
directional arrows and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure
their maximum efficiency.
§ 21-31.14. Lighting. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
All parking areas, walkways thereto and appurtenant passageways and
driveways, serving commercial, public, office, industrial, multi-family and
other similar uses having off-street parking and loading areas and building
complexes requiring area lighting, shall be illuminated adequately during
the hours between sunset and sunrise when the use is in operation. The
lighting plan in and around the parking areas shall provide for non-glare,
color-corrected lights focused downward. The light intensity provided at
ground level shall be a minimum of three-tenths foot candle anywhere in the
area to be illuminated, shall average a minimum of five-tenths foot candle
over the entire area, and shall be provided by fixtures with a mounting
height not to be more than 20 feet measured from the ground level to
the centerline of the light source or the height of the building if attached,
whichever is lower, and spacing not to exceed five times the mounting
height. Any other outdoor lighting, such as building and sidewalk
illumination, driveways with no adjacent parking and ornamental light, shall
§ 21-31.10 GENERAL § 21-31.14
1:431
be shown on the lighting plan in sufficient detail to allow determination
of the effects to adjacent properties, traffic safety, and overhead sky glow.
The objective of these specifications is to minimize undesirable off-premises
effects. No light shall shine directly into windows or onto streets and
driveways in such manner as to interfere with or distract driver vision.
No multiple string lights shall be permitted in any zone to illuminate or
attract whether in parking areas, display areas, or yard areas. To achieve
these requirements, the intensity of such light sources, light shielding,
and similar characteristics shall be subject to site plan approval by the
Municipal Agency.
§ 21-31.15. Reductions of Off-Street Parking. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
Required off-street parking area shall not be reduced. No off-street parking
area shall be reduced in size or encroached upon by building, vehicle
storage, loading or unloading, or any other use where such reduction or
encroachment will reduce the off-street parking and loading spaces that are
required by these regulations.
§ 21-31.16. Parking on Same Lot. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-29]
Parking provided on same lot as main building. Off-street parking spaces for
all uses shall be located on the same lot as the main building to be served,
except as permitted in subsections 21-31.17 and 21-31.18 below.
§ 21-31.17. Joint Parking Facilities. [Ord. #255, Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-29]
The off-street parking requirements for two or more neighboring uses, may
be satisfied by the allocation of the required number of spaces for each
use in a common parking facility, provided that the number of off-street
parking spaces is not less than the sum of individual requirements; and
provided further, that there be compliance with all other provisions of these
regulations.
§ 21-31.18. Sharing of Parking Facilities. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-29]
Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing
the required facilities for any other use; except that 1/2 of the off-street
parking space required by any use whose peak attendance will be at night
or on Sundays, such as churches, theaters, and assembly halls, may be
assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays. This provision
will only apply with approval of the Municipal Agency.
§ 21-31.14 BRIELLE CODE § 21-31.19
1:432
§ 21-31.19. Computing Number of Employees. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
For the purpose of this section, the number of employees shall be computed
on the basis of the maximum number of persons to be employed on any one
shift taking into consideration day, night and seasonal variations.
§ 21-31.20. Fractional Spaces Required. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-29]
When units of measurements determining the number of required off-street
parking and off-street loading spaces result in the requirements of a
fractional space, any fraction up to and including 1/2 shall be disregarded.
Any units over 1/2 will require an additional space.
§ 21-31.21. Off-Street Parking and Loading Space Within a
Required Front Setback. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-29]
In any Commercial Zone, parking shall be permitted in the front yard
providing a five foot landscaped area is provided along the front and side lot
lines. Within that area, low shrubs, fences or any combination of screening
material shall be utilized to buffer those areas from public view. No parking
shall be permitted in the front yard in any residential zone except parking
may be permitted in the front yard if parked on a driveway; however, the
width of the driveway shall not exceed the following schedule:
Lot Width Maximum Paved Width
Up to 74 feet 10 feet
75 feet and over 20 feet
§ 21-31.22. Paving Location Restrictions. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-29; Amended 11-87]
Paving for parking, loading or access thereto, unless otherwise restricted,
except for entrance or exit drives crossing perpendicular to property lines,
shall not be permitted within five feet of any property line. No parking space
backing into an entrance or exit drive shall be closer than 20 feet from the
street right-of-way line.
§ 21-31.23. Other Uses Prohibited. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-29]
Other uses of off-street parking spaces prohibited. No required off-street
parking or loading area shall be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or
servicing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies.
§ 21-31.19 GENERAL § 21-31.24
1:433
§ 21-31.24. Parking Area Site Layout. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-29]
Parking areas shall be divided into lots separated by appropriate
landscaping where possible. In addition, driveways and internal roads shall
be separated from parking areas by curbed landscaped islands where
possible. Landscaping for parking areas, except for single-family
residences, shall be subject to approval as part of the submitted site
development plans.
§ 21-31.25. Shared Access. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-29]
Nothing in this Chapter is intended to prohibit the sharing of access by
adjacent uses provided the common facility is a service drive.
§ 21-32. OFF-STREET PARKING MINIMUM SPACES. [Ord. #255;
Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-30]
Off-street parking spaces for the storage or parking of passenger vehicles
of occupants, employees and patrons of main buildings and structures
hereafter erected or enlarged shall be provided and kept available in
amounts not less than specified in this section.
§ 21-32.1. Residential Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-30]
The minimum required number of parking spaces to be provided in
connection with residential uses in any given zone shall be in accordance
with the following regulations:
§ 21-32.2. Nonresidential Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-30]
The minimum required number of parking spaces to be provided in
connection with nonresidential uses in any given zone shall be in
accordance with the following regulations:
a. Single-family dwelling: Two spaces.
b. Apartments: Two spaces for each unit.
a. Auditorium, recreational establishment or other place of public
assembly (including public schools): One parking space for each three
fixed seats at capacity, or one space for each three memberships in a
swim club, or one parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor
area in cases where the capacity is not determined by the number of
fixed seats or swim club membership.
b. Bowling alley: Four parking spaces for each lane.
§ 21-31.24 BRIELLE CODE § 21-32.2
1:434
c. Clubs and yacht clubs: One parking space for each 100 square feet of
gross floor area.
d. Party boat and fishing boat facility: One parking space per two persons
of boat capacity.
e. Home occupation or home professional office: A minimum of four
parking spaces, including residential requirements.
f. Hospital: One parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
g. Hotel/motel: One parking space per room plus one parking space per
employee on maximum shift plus one parking space per 200 square feet
of gross floor area of meeting rooms, restaurant, and cocktail lounges.
h. Manufacturing or industrial establishment, wholesale establishment or
laboratory: One parking space for each employee employed at one time
on maximum shift.
i. Mortuary: One parking space for each 25 square feet of floor area
devoted to assembly rooms for services.
j. Office, office building (not including medical and dental): One parking
space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area.
k. Offices (medical and dental): One parking space for each 100 square
feet of gross floor area.
l. Retail home furnishing stores: One parking space for each 500 square
feet of gross floor area.
m. Restaurant or tavern (non-drive-in or non-fast food franchise): One
parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area.
n. Retail store, personal service or custom shop, or studio: One parking
space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area.
o. Automotive gasoline and service stations: Four parking spaces for each
repair bay plus one space for each employee on maximum shift.
p. Banks. One parking space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area,
or eight for each teller window, whichever is greater.
q. Police and fire stations and post offices: One space for each 250 square
feet of gross floor area.
r. Churches and synagogues: One space for each two fixed seats, or one
for each 72 inches of benches, at capacity, plus one parking space for
each 100 square feet of gross floor area for assembly and meeting
rooms.
s. Yacht clubs and marinas: One parking space per slip or boat plus one
parking space per 100 square feet of gross floor area of buildings.
§ 21-32.2 GENERAL § 21-32.2
1:435
§ 21-33. LOADING AND UNLOADING.
§ 21-33.1. General. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-30]
On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof,
erected and occupied for commercial, institutional or other uses similarly
involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise,
there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for offstreet
standing, turning, loading and unloading services in order to avoid
interference with public use of the streets, sidewalks, and other public
right-of-way.
§ 21-33.2. Size of Space. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-31]
All required space shall be at least 14 feet in width, 55 feet in length
and have a minimum vertical clearance of 15 feet. Additional space for
maneuvering, depending on the arrangement of the loading facilities, shall
be provided. Reductions in the space size may be made for certain uses as
determined by the Planning Board.
§ 21-33.3. Number of Spaces.
Loading and unloading otherwise adequately provided for, shall be provided
according to the following schedule:
Gross Floor/Area in Square Feet Spaces Required
0 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 50,000 2
50,001 to 75,000 3
75,001 to 100,000 4
Each additional 50,000 1 additional
§ 21-33.4. Location. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-31]
Loading and unloading areas shall be permitted only in the rear yard.
§ 21-33.5. Screening. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-31]
Above-grade loading facilities shall be screened from public view by a solid
fence or evergreen shrubs not less than six feet high.
t. Other uses not specifically listed: The same requirement for the most
similar listed use as determined by the building inspector.
u. Mixed Uses: The total requirement shall be the sum of the requirements
of the component uses computed separately.
§ 21-32.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-33.5
1:436
ARTICLE VII
LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
§ 21-34. PURPOSE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-32]
The intention of these requirements is to enhance the aesthetic and
environmental appeal and character of buildings and sites being developed
within the Municipality by insuring the compatibility of uses, thereby
maintaining the health, safety, and general welfare of the community while
preserving property values.
§ 21-35. GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR ALL ZONES.
§ 21-35.1. Landscape Area. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-33]
All areas in a development not used for construction of buildings, roads,
accessways, parking or sidewalks shall be fully landscaped in accordance
with these regulations.
§ 21-35.2. Site Considerations. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
89-33]
Natural site features such as: existing trees, streams, rock outcropping,
etc., shall be preserved wherever possible. Whenever such natural features
are absent or insufficient or have been destroyed during the development of
the site, additional new plantings of a sufficient size as determined by the
Planning Board shall be established to provide environmental protection to
beautify the buildings and grounds; and to provide privacy, shade and the
screening out of objectionable features created on the site.
§ 21-35.3. Design. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-33]
All landscape plans shall be drawn and signed by a Landscape Architect,
except for single and two family homes.
§ 21-35.4. Labeling. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-33]
All landscape plans shall have a schedule of the Latin and common name,
the quantity, the size, spacing, and method of planting of each plant
material.
§ 21-36. ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL AND
MULTI-FAMILY ZONES.
§ 21-36.1. Minimum Area. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-34]
A minimum landscaped area five feet wide shall be provided along all
property lines including public streets.
§ 21-34 GENERAL § 21-36.2
1:437
§ 21-36.2. Curb or Bumpers Required. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-34]
All buffers and landscaped areas shall be protected from adjacent parking
areas by curbs, or concrete, metal or wood bumpers at least six inches in
height and securely anchored into the ground
§ 21-36.3. Screening Required. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-34]
Service areas, parking areas, transformer compounds, and other strictly
utilitarian improvements, shall be screened as fully as practicable. In
general, it is intended that possible objectionable or unsightly features
within a given development shall be screened from passing traffic or
abutting residential properties.
§ 21-36.4. Repetition of Building Design. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-34]
In the case of a repetition of building designs, as in apartment house
development, care shall be exercised to avoid monotony in the planting
design by introducing sufficient variety in the planting layout to lend
interest and aesthetic appeal. By the same token, excessive variety shall be
avoided, and all shall be represented as a balance design with proper accent
in the right places.
§ 21-36.5. Trees. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-34]
All street trees and on-site deciduous shade trees shall be not less than
two-inch caliper, measured one foot above the root crown. A reasonable
and satisfactory number of trees, as determined by the Municipality, with a
caliper of not less than six inches, measured one foot above the root crown,
shall be included on site, where existing trees are not present or have not
been preserved.
§ 21-36.6. Evergreen. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-34]
A satisfactory amount of evergreen plant material shall be included in
the planting, this to be judged on an individual basis by the Municipality.
Evergreen trees shall not be less than six feet in height.
§ 21-36.7. Clearing and Grading Buffer Area. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-34]
Areas required for buffers shall not be cleared or graded prior to
development approval as outlined in the Land Use Procedures, Chapter 20
§ 21-36.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-36.8
1:438
§ 21-36.8. Retaining Walls. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-34]
Retaining walls shall not be permitted within buffer areas unless approved
as part of site plan approval.
§ 21-36.9. Multi-Family or Commercial Zone Abuts Residential
Zone. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-34]
In all zones where a multi-family, or commercial zone line abuts a singlefamily
residential zone, a fifty-foot buffer shall be established and
maintained.
§ 21-36.10. Multi-Family Zone Abuts Commercial Zone. [Ord. #255;
Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-34]
In all zones where a multi-family development zone line abuts an existing
commercial zone, a fifty-foot buffer must be established and maintained by
the multi-family developer, unless such a buffer is already established along
the common boundary of that zone.
§ 21-36.11. Commercial Zone Abuts a Multi-Family Zone. [Ord.
#255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-34]
In all zones where a commercial zone line abuts a multi-family residential
zone, a twenty-foot buffer must be established and maintained unless such
a buffer is already established and maintained along the common boundary
of that zone.
§ 21-36.12. Prohibited. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-34]
Off-street parking or loading shall not be permitted in any buffer area.
§ 21-37. LANDSCAPED AREA REQUIRED.
In calculating landscaped areas, the areas of plazas, open or enclosed
pedestrian shopping malls, sitting areas, pools and fountains shall be
included. Landscaped areas within and between parking areas shall also be
included.
§ 21-37.1. Required Area. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-35]
In all zones, a minimum of 20% of the site shall be devoted to landscaped
areas in addition to all required buffers.
§ 21-36.8 GENERAL § 21-37.1
1:439

ARTICLE VIII
FENCE AND HEDGE REGULATIONS
§ 21-38. PURPOSE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-36]
The intention of these requirements is to provide standards for the
protection of the health, safety and aesthetic values of adjacent property. A
fence over four feet in height shall require a building permit.
§ 21-39. INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-37]
At the intersection of two or more streets no wall, fence, hedge or other
structure shall be erected to a height in excess of three feet above curb
level, nor any other obstruction to vision shall be permitted within the
triangular area formed by the intersecting street lines at points which are
25 feet distant from the point of intersection, measured along the street
line. Trees whose branches are trimmed away to a height of at least 10 feet
above curb level shall be permitted.
§ 21-40. HEIGHT. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-38]
On any lot in any residence district, no wall or fence shall be erected or
altered so that said wall or fence shall be over six feet in height, except
tennis court fences which shall have a maximum height of 12 feet. Tennis
court fences shall be restricted to open mesh material.
§ 21-41. DANGEROUS. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-39]
No fence in a residential zone shall be erected of barbed wire, or electrified
or topped with metal spikes or constructed of any material or in any manner
which may be dangerous to persons or animals.
§ 21-42. TYPE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-40]
Solid architectural fences shall be required along all lot lines except the
street line for all non-residential lots where said property lines abut
residential zoning district lines. A wooden solid fence or similar fence easily
entered by emergency apparatus shall be permitted. Such architectural
fences may be made of any material which is aesthetically pleasing and
prevents the dissemination of odors, noise, debris, and sight across the
residential zoning boundary. Fences used for this purpose shall be not less
than six feet in height. Nothing in this section prevents the use of plant
materials along any lot line in addition to the fence requirement, but plant
materials cannot be substituted for the fence. Open chain link, chain link
with plastic slats, or chain link with redwood slats shall not be considered to
be an architecturally solid fence. A wall or fence which restricts the natural
flow of drainage or causes stagnant water conditions shall not be permitted.
The wall or fence shall be ordered removed or corrected by the owner upon
direction of the Building Inspector.
§ 21-38 GENERAL § 21-43
1:441
§ 21-43. MAINTENANCE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-41]
In any district, walls or fences erected shall be maintained in an
aesthetically pleasing manner and any failure to do so shall be subject to
the Building Inspector's order to repair or replace the wall or fence in order
to meet the requirements of this Chapter.
§ 21-44. SWIMMING POOLS. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-42]
There shall be a fence, not less than four feet high completely enclosing any
below-ground swimming pool and any other swimming pool of 100 square
feet of surface water area or more and which is less than four feet above
the ground. Each gate in a pool fence shall be capable of being locked when
not in use.
§ 21-45. FINISHED SIDE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-43]
The finished side of all fences shall be on the outside facing away from the
lot on which it is erected. The intent of this provision is for safety purposes
to prevent easy access from neighboring property.
§ 21-43 BRIELLE CODE § 21-45
1:442
ARTICLE IX
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§ 21-46. PURPOSE. [Ord. #255; Ord. 592; 1972 Code § 89-44]
As a condition to approval and as a condition to continuance of any business
or building, process, installation, production or other use in any District,
the applicant shall supply evidence, satisfactory to the Building Inspector
or to his designated representative, that the proposed building, process,
installation, production or other use will conform fully with all of the
applicable performance standards. As evidence of compliance, the Building
Inspector may require certification of tests by appropriate government
agencies or by recognized testing laboratories, any costs thereof to be
borne by the applicant. The Building Inspector may require that specific
operation procedures or methods be followed if the government agencies or
testing laboratories examining the proposed operation shall determine that
the use of such specific types of machinery, equipment, devices, procedures
or methods are required in order to assure compliance with the applicable
performance standards.
§ 21-47. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
§ 21-47.1. Prohibitions. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-45]
No use shall be established, maintained or conducted that will cause any of
the following:
§ 21-47.2. Examination by Municipality Required. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-45]
All applications shall be examined by the Municipality in regard to the
effect of the proposed use upon the public health of the residents and the
a. Dissemination of toxic or noxious smoke, fumes, gas, dust, odor, or any
other atmospheric pollutant into the air to such a degree as to be
detrimental to the health and welfare of residents in the area, as
determined by State, Regional and Local requirements.
b. Discharge of any waste material whatsoever on the site or into any
water course except in accordance with State, Regional and Local
requirements.
c. Dissemination of glare, vibration and/or noise beyond the immediate
site on which such use is conducted and in accordance with this
Chapter establishing noise performance and vibration standards.
d. Hazard by reason of fire, explosion, radiation or similar cause to
property in the same or adjacent districts or zones. Safeguards for the
health and safety of workers shall comply with all applicable
regulations and requirements of State Department of Labor and
Industry.
§ 21-46 GENERAL § 21-47.2
1:443
surrounding area in respect to any potential pollution of air resulting from
the dissemination of smoke, chemicals, odors or dust from the industrial
processes of the proposed use. A written report indicating the conformance
with or violation of the performance standards shall be submitted to the
Building Inspector.
§ 21-48. LIQUID WASTES. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-46]
No liquid wastes shall be discharged directly or indirectly into any water
course in the Municipality, except as herein provided. If the applicant
proposes to construct facilities for the treatment of waste, he shall supply
the following:
§ 21-49. STORAGE AND WASTE DISPOSAL. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-47]
No materials or waste shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or manner
that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor
shall any substance which can contaminate a stream, water course or
underground aquifer. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or
dust or which constitute a fire or explosion hazard, or which might be
edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored indoors
in appropriate containers adequate to eliminate such hazards.
§ 21-50. INDUSTRIAL WASTES. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; Code 1972
§ 89-48]
No industrial waste shall be discharged into the public sewage collection
and disposal system unless the Municipal Engineer and the appropriate
Sewerage Authority shall have first investigated the character and volume
of such waste and shall have certified in writing that it will accept the
discharge of such waste material into the system. The applicant shall
comply with any requirements of said authorities including the pre-treating
of such wastes, the installation of processing methods, separation or
screening of wastes, control of pH, and other methods of improving such
wastes prior to discharge, as a condition to acceptance by the said
authorities.
§ 21-51. ADDITIONAL STANDARDS AND REFERENCES. [Ord. #255;
Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-49]
In order to satisfy itself that the applicant will comply with all of the
applicable Performance Standards, the Planning Board or its designated
a. Certification in writing by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection that such proposed facilities are in compliance with
applicable State laws and regulations; and
b. Certification in writing by the Municipal Engineer approving the
installation of such facilities.
§ 21-47.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-51
1:444
representative may examine and refer to any or all of the available
standards, codes, regulations and requirements, including, but not
necessarily limited to:
a. Laws, regulations and codes administered by the New Jersey State
Department of Health.
b. Laws, regulations and codes administered by the New Jersey
Department of Labor and Industry.
c. State of New Jersey Uniform Building Code.
d. Applicable standards of the United States Public Health Service.
e. Applicable standards of the Bureau of Mines, United States Department
of the Interior.
f. Laws, regulations and codes administered by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection. If there is a conflict of the
foregoing with local codes, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 21-51 GENERAL § 21-51
1:445

ARTICLE X
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 21-52. APPROVAL REQUIRED. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-50]
A conditional use is a permitted use only as specified by this Chapter and
may be granted in accordance with the standards and specifications of this
section. No permit shall be issued for a conditional use unless an application
is submitted to and approved by the Planning Board. It shall be submitted
and distributed in the same manner as prescribed for all applications in the
Land Use Procedures, Chapter 20
§ 21-53. STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL.
The following standards and conditions are required to be met in order to
receive Planning Board approval for specific conditional uses as indicated:
§ 21-53.1. Government Buildings and Services. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-51]
Government building, such as Municipal buildings, libraries, and schools
shall provide the Planning Board with the following:
§ 21-53.2. Churches, Synagogues, Parish Houses, Similar Religious
Uses, Including Parochial and Private Schools. [Ord. #255; Ord.
#592; 1972 Code § 89-51; amended 8-27-2018 by Ord. No. 1080]
a. A set of plans, specifications and plot plan and a statement setting forth
the need and purpose of the installation.
b. Proof is furnished to the Planning Board that the proposed installation
in a specific location is necessary and convenient for the efficiency of
the public utility system or the satisfactory and convenient provision of
service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which the
particular use is to be located; that the design of any building in
connection with such facility conform to the general character of the
zone and will in no way adversely affect the safe and comfortable
enjoyment of property rights of the zone in which it is located; that
adequate and attractive fences and other safety devices will be
provided and that sufficient landscaping including shrubs, trees and
lawn are provided and will be periodically maintained.
c. All other requirements for the zone in which the use is to be located
shall apply.
d. Landscaping and buffer requirements as specified in Article VII of this
Chapter for Commercial and Multi-Family shall apply.
a. The required minimum lot area shall be three acres.
b. The required minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
§ 21-52 GENERAL § 21-53.2
1:447
§ 21-53.3. Eating Establishments (Drive-In or Fast Food). [Ord.
#255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-51]
c. The required minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet.
d. No principal building shall be located closer than 40 feet to any public
street or right-of-way and no closer than 40 feet to any rear or side
property line.
e. No accessory building or structure shall be permitted in any front yard
in the underlying zone, nor shall any accessory building or structure be
located closer than 20 feet to any rear or side property line.
f. The maximum lot coverage is 20%.
g. The maximum height of the structure is 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less.
h. A perimeter landscape buffer shall be required around the entire length
of the side and rear property lines. A minimum of 30 feet to all
residential uses must be provided.
i. Landscaping and screening shall be provided in accordance with Article
VII of this chapter for the zone in which the use is located.
j. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
Article VI of this chapter. Where parking areas are adjacent to a
residential use of zone, a twenty-foot-wide buffer strip, including fences
and shrubs, no less than six feet high shall be provided.
a. The minimum lot area shall be one acre.
b. The minimum lot frontage shall be 175 feet.
c. The minimum depth shall be 200 feet.
d. The minimum off-street parking shall be one space for each 50 square
feet of gross floor area.
e. All other requirements of the zone including fencing and landscaping
shall apply.
f. There shall be no access to rest rooms from the exterior of the building.
g. There shall be adequate trash receptacles outside the building for use
of patrons.
h. There shall be frequent collection of debris and trash from outside the
building so that trash does not blow off the property or make the
subject property unsightly.
i. The property shall be surrounded on three sides by a six-foot high solid
architectural fence, set back from the front property line no more than
25 feet.
§ 21-53.2 BRIELLE CODE § 21-53.3
1:448
§ 21-53.4. Cluster Residential Development. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-51]
The purpose of this section is to provide a method of development of
residential land which will nevertheless preserve desirable open spaces,
including flood plain areas, school sites, recreation and park area and lands
for other public purposes, by reducing the lot sizes without increasing the
number of lots permitted.
j. There shall be trash area completely surrounded by a six-foot high solid
architectural fence with front solid gates. All outside trash shall be
stored in this area and shall not be in public view over the fence height.
All similar accessory appurtenances such as propane tanks shall be
similarly enclosed.
a. A cluster residential development for single-family dwelling purposes
occupying 20 acres or more shall be a permitted use in an R-1 Zone.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow a development of this
type to exceed the number of lots which would be permissible under
normal development procedures.
b. The proposed development shall follow all applicable procedures,
standards and requirements of the Land Subdivision, Chapter 22
c. The number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined by
multiplying the number of acres times the permitted number of
dwelling units per acre in this Zone. The area of land set aside for
common open space or recreational use shall be included in
determining the number of dwelling units permitted. There shall be
dedicated for common use 25% of the gross acreage in the cluster
subdivision. This percentage shall not include streets or other paved
facilities.
d. At the discretion of the Planning Board, the subdivider may be allowed
to reduce the minimum lot frontage, minimum lot depth, and minimum
lot area in accordance with the provisions of this section. The Planning
Board shall, prior to reaching its determination, confer with other
interested Municipal Agencies as to the advisability of accepting the
lands offered to be donated.
e. A portion of the land to be donated for public purposes shall be at least
a usable, single, five acre tract.
f. All lands within a subdivision other than streets and building lots shall
be deeded to the municipality for public purposes or shall be deeded to
a legally created non-profit homeowners association, which deed shall
contain restrictions and covenants which shall run with the land and
shall restrict the use of the land to the purposes set forth in the
approval.
§ 21-53.3 GENERAL § 21-53.4
1:449
§ 21-53.5. Public Utility Installations. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-51]
Public utility uses and installations, above and below ground, such as
transmission lines, water shortage tanks, towers, pumping stations and
substations, shall provide the Planning Board with the following:
§ 21-53.6. Plant Nurseries, Nursery Stock Supply and Sales, Garden
Landscape Supplies. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-51]
g. Lands to be deeded for public purposes or deeded to a non-profit
homeowners association shall be located and approved by the Planning
Board which shall consider the suitability, physical condition, and
location of the lands in regard to its proposed uses and to the needs of
the Municipality in reaching its determination.
h. Should the subdivision consist of a number of development stages, the
Planning Board may require that acreage proportionate in size to the
stage being considered for final approval be donated to the Municipality
simultaneously with the granting of final subdivision approval for that
particular stage even though these lands may be located in a different
section of the overall development.
i. The Planning Board shall state the specific use or range of uses for
which the donated public lands will be used and this shall be included in
the resolution approving the subdivision.
a. A set of plans, specifications and plot plan, and a statement setting
forth the need and purpose of the installation.
b. Proof is furnished to the Planning Board that the proposed installation
in a specific location is necessary and convenient for the efficiency of
the public utility system or the satisfactory and convenient provision of
service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which the
particular use is to be located.
c. Further provided that the design of any building in connection with
such facility conform to the general character of the zone and will in no
way adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property
rights of the zone in which it is located; that adequate and attractive
fences and other safety devices will be provided and that sufficient
landscaping including shrubs, trees, and lawn are provided and will be
periodically maintained.
d. All other requirements for the zone in which the use is to be located
shall apply.
e. Landscaping and buffer requirements as specified in Article VII of this
Chapter for Commercial and Multi-Family shall apply.
a. With the exception of the landscape plants, shrubs, and trees, all
materials shall be contained within a building except that open storage
§ 21-53.4 BRIELLE CODE § 21-53.6
1:450
§ 21-53.7. Trailer and Mobile Home Sales, Recreation Equipment
Sales, Swimming Pool Sales, Boat and Marine Equipment Sales.
[Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-51]
§ 21-53.8. Automotive, Gasoline, Service and Repair, Sales and
Service and Sales Lot. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-51]
and sales areas may be maintained in a side or rear yard provided
that such open storage and sales areas are contiguous to the building
and are encircled by a fence of a design which is homogeneous to the
adjacent building.
b. A six-foot high solid fence shall be so designed as to screen all materials
and supplies, except plant materials, from public view.
c. Plant materials may be displayed openly in any yard except the front
yard.
d. All other requirements for the zone in which the use is located shall
apply.
a. All materials shall be contained within a building except that open
storage and sales areas may be maintained in a side or rear yard
provided that such open storage and sales areas are contiguous to the
building.
b. The minimum lot size shall be 40,000 square feet.
c. All outside displays shall be screened from adjacent residential
properties and zones by a six-foot high solid architectural fence.
d. All other requirements of the zone in which the use is located shall
apply.
a. In each of the above cases, the use is permitted subject to the following
requirements:
Lot Size
Minimum Lot
Frontage
Lot
Coverage
Automotive Gasoline
Station
20,000 square
feet
150 feet 15%
Automotive Service
Station
40,000 square
feet
200 feet 15%
Automotive Sales and
Service
80,000 square
feet
200 feet 25%
Automotive Sales Lot 10,000 square
feet
100 feet 15%
b. Setbacks. For the above uses, the front setbacks shall be not less than
40 feet. The side and rear setbacks shall be not less than 15 feet, except
§ 21-53.6 GENERAL § 21-53.8
1:451
where one of the yards adjoins a residential zone. Where a yard adjoins
a residential zone, the commercial use shall maintain not less than a
fifty-foot side or rear yard.
c. Canopies. A cantilevered cover or canopy may be permitted to extend
into the front yard provided it is at least 25 feet from any front property
line and 25 feet from any residence zone.
d. Curb cuts and driveways.
1. On a corner lot, a driveway shall be at least 25 feet from the street
intersection as measured along the property line.
2. Driveways shall be no less than 25 feet and no more than 30 feet
wide. The driveway shall be flared or slanted at the curb line to
facilitate auto ingress and egress.
3. Curb cuts shall be no less than 10 feet from any adjacent property
line.
4. Any two driveways giving access to a single street shall be
separated by a curbed island of at least 20 feet.
5. A raised curb of at least six inches in height shall be provided along
the street property lines, except for driveway openings.
6. There shall not be more than two curb cuts providing access to any
one street.
e. Signs.
1. Free-standing signs: One free-standing sign shall be permitted
provided the aggregate area of all sides of the sign shall not exceed
75 square feet.
2. Facade signs: Facade signs shall be allowed on front or side facades
so as not to exceed 15% of the square footage of the facade on
which it is located.
3. Other signs. Other signs that may be required by State or Federal
law shall be allowed, but no other advertising signs shall be
permitted.
4. All other sign requirements of this Chapter shall apply.
f. Lighting. All lighting shall be so designed, arranged and installed as to
reflect all light down and away adjoining properties and streets and
highways. No string of multiple lights shall be permitted.
g. Pavement. All parking, access and driveway areas shall be paved with a
permanent surface such as macadam with proper drainage so as not to
affect adjacent property owners.
§ 21-53.8 BRIELLE CODE § 21-53.8
1:452
h. Location of pumps (automotive service and gasoline stations only). All
pump islands shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any adjacent property
line and 20 feet from any public right-of-way.
i. Accessory buildings. All lifts, lubrication equipment, service pits and
goods for sale shall be enclosed within the service stations, with the
exception of those items directly related to the business, such as wiper
blades, oil, and tires, outdoor display of products for sale or rental shall
not be permitted. Accessory buildings shall not be permitted except for
the temporary storage of trash or garbage.
j. Accessory uses.
1. The sale or rental of cars, trucks, trailers, boats or any other
vehicles on the premises of an automotive gasoline or automotive
service station shall be prohibited.
2. The storage of cars, trucks, trailers, boats or any other vehicle not
being serviced or repaired on the premises of an automotive
gasoline station, automotive service station or automotive repair
garage shall be prohibited.
3. All other activities are prohibited, including trailer or motor vehicle
rental. Storage of any vehicle requiring body work, or which is
inoperable because of major repairs required, shall not be
permitted except at an automotive repair garage or automotive
sales and service.
4. The storage of inoperable vehicles, classified as junk cars or those
not currently registered with the State of New Jersey shall not be
permitted.
k. Trash and garbage. A solid enclosed area shall be provided for the
temporary storage of trash, garbage and unusable automotive parts.
Except for tires, all trash shall be stored in tight containers. The
enclosed area shall be designed so that the trash shall not be seen from
a public street or from adjoining properties.
l. Fuel tanks. Underground fuel storage tanks shall be placed at least 10
feet from any structure. Tanks having a capacity of 6,000 gallons or
more shall be at least 20 feet from any structure.
m. Service stations shall be subject to all other requirements of the zone in
which they are located, and all other laws of the Municipality.
n. Landscaping buffers and screening shall be provided as follows:
1. In all zones where the above automotive services are permitted as a
use by conditional use, the following minimum requirements shall
be met:
§ 21-53.8 GENERAL § 21-53.8
1:453
§ 21-53.9. Car Wash. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-51]
(a) A minimum landscaped area five feet wide shall be provided
along all property lines abutting public streets, except where
curb cuts are permitted.
(b) All buffers and landscaped areas shall be protected from
adjacent parking areas by curbs, or concrete, metal or wood
bumpers at least six inches in height and securely anchored
into the ground.
(c) Service areas and parking areas shall be screened from
abutting property. A minimum of a six foot, architecturally solid
fence shall be erected on all property lines except the front
property line.
(d) All street trees and on-site deciduous shade trees shall be not
less than two inches caliper measured one foot above the root
crown.
(e) A satisfactory amount of evergreen plant materials shall be
included in the planting, this to be judged on an individual
basis by the Municipality. Evergreen trees shall not be less
than six feet in height.
(f) Where an automotive use, as permitted above, abuts a
residential zone, except along a street line, a ten-foot buffer
must be established and maintained in addition to the solid
architectural fence. This buffer shall be attractively landscaped
with evergreen and deciduous shrubs.
(g) All landscaping shall be maintained in a manner satisfactory to
the Municipality at all times.
o. Parking. There shall be four spaces required per bay plus one space for
each employee on maximum work shift.
a. All other regulations for the district in which the use is to be located
shall be complied with except that the minimum lot area for a car wash
shall be not less than 20,000 square feet.
b. Such use shall provide adequate off-street automobile stacking area
which shall not be less than 20 spaces per bay. Such stacking system
shall in no way hinder or impair normal traffic flow on adjoining
property or public right-of-way.
c. Approval of the Municipal Engineer regarding utilities and drainage
and the Department of Health regarding the performance standards
shall be required.
§ 21-53.8 BRIELLE CODE § 21-53.10
1:454
§ 21-53.10. Quasi-Public Uses. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-51; amended 8-13-2018 by Ord. No. 1078]
Quasi-public uses such as clubs, social organizations, and other public
gathering places not publicly owned, not commercial in nature, and not
specifically listed in this section, shall adhere to the following:
§ 21-53.11. New and Used Car Sales. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-51]
a. The required minimum lot area shall be three acres.
b. The required minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
c. The required minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet.
d. No principal building shall be located closer than 40 feet to any public
street or right-of-way and no closer than 40 feet to any rear or side
property line.
e. No accessory building or structure shall be permitted in any front yard
in the underlying zone, nor shall any accessory building or structure be
located closer than 20 feet to any rear or side property line.
f. The maximum lot coverage is 20%.
g. The maximum height of the structure is 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet,
whichever is less.
h. A perimeter landscape buffer shall be required around the entire length
of the side and rear property lines. A minimum of 30 feet to all
residential uses must be provided.
i. Landscaping and screening shall be provided in accordance with Article
VII of this chapter for the zone in which the use is located.
j. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
Article VI of this chapter.
k. Where parking areas are adjacent to a residential use of zone, a twentyfoot-
wide buffer strip, including fences and shrubs, no less than six feet
high shall be provided.
a. All requirements of subsection 21-53.8 shall be required and adhered to
except as follows:
1. The sale or rental of cars and trucks shall be permitted. No lot in
the Borough of Brielle can be used solely for the storage, display, or
rental of vehicles. Such use shall be permitted as an accessory to a
new and used sales and service structure upon the same premises.
Said structure shall be a minimum of 3,000 square feet of gross
floor space in order to service customers.
§ 21-53.10 GENERAL § 21-53.11
1:455
§ 21-53.12. Cemeteries. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1982 Code § 89-51]
§ 21-53.13. Restaurants. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; Ord. #652; 1972
Code § 89-51]
Restaurants and luncheonettes may be permitted provided the Planning
Board, in its discretion, finds that the use and/or structures adhere to the
minimum standards of the C-2 Zone and the following:
§ 21-53.14. Hotels and Motels. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; Ord. #653;
1972 Code § 89-51]
Hotels and motels may be permitted provided the Planning Board, in its
discretion, finds that the use and structures adhere to the minimum
standards of the C-2 Zone, and the following:
2. The display of vehicles in the required front setback area shall not
be permitted.
a. The only uses permitted as a conditional use under this section are as
follows:
1. Plots or lots for the interment of dead human beings.
2. Avenues, walks, and grounds for trees or shrubs.
3. Cemetery administrative offices which may include sanitary
facilities for the convenience of all persons who visit grave sites.
4. A chapel to be used for cemetery-related services only.
b. A buffer of 15 feet against any property line not abutting a street line,
and five feet against any property line abutting a street line shall be
maintained and landscaped with evergreens and other trees and shrubs
as determined adequate by the Municipal Agency. No plots or lots for
interment shall be permitted in this buffer zone.
a. Any proposed restaurant and/or luncheonette shall be intended for the
use of sit-down patrons, or pedestrian patrons for off-premises
consumption. Drive-up facilities and facilities intended to serve patrons
for consumption in parked vehicles are prohibited.
b. No restaurant or luncheonette shall be permitted unless such
restaurant is operated in conjunction with a marine facility, such as a
marina or boat basin. Such restaurant or luncheonette facility shall be
operated simultaneously with a marine facility; shall be located on same
site and property as the marine facility; and shall be integrated in use
and design with the marine facility. Such marine facility shall provide as
a minimum, one docking berth per four seats, with a minimum of
twenty-five foot docking berths. Such required docking facilities shall
be provided based upon the cumulative total required for the various
uses of the site computed separately.
§ 21-53.11 BRIELLE CODE § 21-53.14
1:456
§ 21-53.15. Multi-Use Marine Complex. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; Ord.
#652; Ord. #653; 1972 Code § 89-51]
Multi-use marine complexes may be permitted provided the Planning Board,
in its discretion, finds that the use and structures adhere to the minimum
standards of the C-2 Zone and the following:
a. No hotel or motel shall be permitted unless such hotel or motel is
operated in conjunction with a marine facility, such as a marina or boat
basin. The hotel or motel shall be operated simultaneously with a
marine facility; shall be located on the same site and property as the
marine facility; and shall be integrated in use and design with the
marine facility. Such marine facility shall, as a minimum, provide one
docking berth per motel or hotel unit. Such required docking facilities
shall be provided based upon the cumulative total required for the
various uses of the site computed separately.
b. Minimum lot area - 22,500 square feet.
c. Minimum lot area per unit - 1,500 square feet.
d. Minimum number of units - 15.
e. Maximum lot coverage - 25%.
f. No additional parking shall be required for swimming pools, provided
that the pools are not open for use by the general public but are for use
of the guests at the hotel or motel.
a. Specific principal uses permitted as part of a multi-use marine complex
shall include two or more of the following uses.
1. Uses permitted in the C-2 Zone;
2. Restaurants, subject to the provisions of Article III, subsection
21-19.4 and Article X, subsection 21-53.13;
3. Hotels and motels subject to the provisions of Article III, subsection
21-19.4 and Article X, subsection 21-53.13;
4. Swimming pools, tennis courts, basketball courts, racquetball
courts and health club facilities intended for the use of residents of
the multi-use marine complex;
5. Multi-family residences in conjunction with a marine facility, where
such residences are part of an overall development or
redevelopment plan that includes such a marine facility and retail,
and/or service establishments otherwise permitted or conditionally
permitted in the C-2 Zone and further provided that:
(a) Where nonresidential uses and residences are to occupy space
in the same structure, the nonresidential use(s) shall be
located only on the first floor.
§ 21-53.14 GENERAL § 21-53.15
1:457
(b) The nonresidential uses permitted herewith, shall occupy not
less than 5,000 square feet of floor area and not less than 15%
of the total floor area of the development, whichever is greater.
(c) The overall development or redevelopment plan includes a
marine facility, that as a minimum, provides one docking berth
for each multi-family dwelling unit and one docking berth for
each hotel or motel unit proposed.
(d) The maximum residential density shall be 12 dwelling units per
acre, provided the nonresidential floor area of the development
does not exceed 20% of the total. Where the nonresidential
floor area is greater than 20% of the total floor area of the
development, the maximum residential density shall not
exceed 10 dwelling units per acre.
(e) The minimum gross habitable floor area of a multi-family
dwelling unit shall be in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 21-19.6g.
(f) Required parking and docking facilities shall be provided
based upon the cumulative total required for the various uses
of the site computed separately.
(g) No multi-family structure shall contain more than 14 dwelling
units.
(h) No townhouse structure shall contain more than eight dwelling
units.
b. The minimum lot size for a multi-use marine complex shall be two acres,
with a minimum lot width of 150 feet and a minimum lot depth of 150
feet.
c. The maximum lot coverage shall be 25%.
d. The minimum unoccupied open space shall be 25%.
e. The maximum nonresidential floor area ratio shall be 0.25.
f. Building length:
1. Unless determined by the Planning Board to be inappropriate,
unnecessary or undesirable, all proposed principal and accessory
buildings shall have the longest dimension of such buildings
oriented perpendicular to the water's edge and in no case shall any
building have a length of greater than 125 feet when viewed in
elevation from a point on the water's edge perpendicular to the
midpoint of the longest building dimension closest to and facing the
water's edge.
§ 21-53.15 BRIELLE CODE § 21-53.15
1:458
2. The configuration of structures may be any alignment that meets
the yard requirements and does not exceed the following overall or
component building lengths:
(a) Two hundred feet on one plane;
(b) Three hundred feet on any angle; and
(c) Four hundred feet along the centerline.
Any passageway between two structures which has a roof
attached to both structures shall be included in calculating
these lengths. Structures, as measured along the centerline,
shall provide one opening at ground level at least every 200
feet. This opening shall be a minimum of 15 feet in clear width
and a minimum of 10 feet in clear height and located so that
the floor level is at an elevation not more than eight inches
above or below the finished grade of the adjoining ground.
g. No dwelling structure unit shall contain a living area level lower than
the finished grade along the front of the structure.
h. Minimum distance between buildings:
1. The following minimum distances between buildings shall be
provided and shall to the maximum extent practicable remain
unbroken by visual obstructions for the purpose of establishing a
continuous visual corridor from the water's edge to the first
landward public roadway:
(a) Twenty-five feet where neither of the facing walls has windows.
(b) Forty feet where only one of the facing walls has windows.
(c) Sixty feet where both of the facing walls have windows.
i. Parking:
1. Off-street parking shall be provided based upon the cumulative
total required for the various uses computed separately.
2. The Planning Board may approve site plans for multi-use marine
complexes where the number of on-site parking spaces to be
provided is less than prescribed by this Chapter for the uses
proposed. The owner or developer shall submit a parking study and
analysis. The developer or owner may submit alternate proposals to
satisfy the parking needs for the proposed uses, which proposals
shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board and may
include but are not limited to the following:
(a) Proof that the number of on-site parking spaces proposed is
adequate; or
§ 21-53.15 GENERAL § 21-53.15
1:459
§ 21-53.16. Age Restricted Townhouse Development. [Ord. #915]
Age restricted townhouse developments may be permitted provided the
Planning Board, in its discretion, finds that the use and the structures
adhere to the minimum standards of the C-1A Zone and the following:
§ 21-53.17. Specialty Food Shop and/or Bakery. [Ord. #915]
A specialty food shop and/or bakery may be permitted provided the
Planning Board, in its discretion, finds that the use and the structures
adhere to the minimum standards of the C-1A Zone and the following:
(b) Proof that sufficient existing parking spaces are available
within reasonable walking distance which are either presently
under-utilized or utilized by uses which have different peak
hours. If such alternate parking spaces are on privately owned
property, submission of an agreement with the owner of said
property permitting the use of parking spaces will be required.
a. Six units per acre maximum.
Development standards:
1. Minimum lot size 80,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width 300 feet.
3. Minimum lot depth 200 feet.
4. Minimum front setback 45 feet.
5. Minimum side setback 25 feet.
6. Minimum rear setback 25 feet.
7. Maximum lot coverage 30%.
8. Maximum building height 35 feet.
9. Maximum number of building stories 21/2.
a. Development standards in accordance with zone requirements.
b. No on-site consumption of food by patrons.
c. No drive-through service for patrons.
d. No service areas for patrons.
e. All trash and recycling areas shall be fully enclosed, covered, and
buffered through appropriate landscape features.
§ 21-53.15 BRIELLE CODE § 21-53.17
1:460
ARTICLE XI
PERMITTED MODIFICATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS
§ 21-54. PURPOSE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-52]
The following modifications and exceptions to the limitations imposed by
the Chapter are permitted under the terms and specifications herein set
forth.
§ 21-55. HEIGHT. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-53]
The height limitations of this Chapter shall not apply to church spires,
belfries, cupolas, penthouses and domes not used for human occupancy;
nor chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, silos, barns, bulkheads, or
similar features, and necessary mechanical appurtenances usually carried
above the roof level. Such features, however, shall be erected only to such
height as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve. The
provisions of the Chapter shall not apply to prevent the erection above the
building height limit of a parapet wall or cornice for ornamental purposes
to screen mechanical appurtenances. Building mounted antennas shall not
exceed the height limits by more than 10 feet. Ground based antennas shall
conform to the height requirements.
§ 21-56. AREA.
§ 21-56.1. Single or Two-Family Dwelling. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-54]
A single or two-family dwelling may be constructed in a district, where
permitted, on any lot of nonconforming size shown on a recorded
subdivision plot or any lot of official record at the time of enactment of this
Chapter provided that the owner of such lot does not own any adjoining
lot or adjacent land. Improvements or additions may be made without
Municipal Agency approval, provided the improvement or addition does not
encroach on any front, rear or side yard setback requirements and meets all
other provisions of this Chapter. A building permit must be obtained.
§ 21-56.2. Substandard Size Lot. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-54]
Where the owner of a lot of substandard size owns adjacent lots or parcels
of land such lots or parcels shall be considered as a single lot and the area
and yard space provisions of this Chapter shall hold.
§ 21-54 GENERAL § 21-56.2
1:461

ARTICLE XII
NON-CONFORMING USES
§ 21-57. PURPOSE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-55]
Within the district established by this Chapter, or amendments that may
later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and uses of land and structures
which were lawful before this Chapter was passed or amended, but which
would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this
Chapter or future amendment. It is the intent of this Chapter to permit
these non-conformities to continue until they are removed, but not to
encourage their survival. Such uses are declared by this Chapter to be
incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the
intent of this Chapter that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon,
expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures
or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district, unless to make such use
or structure conform to minimum safe building standards.
§ 21-58. SIGNS. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-56]
A non-conforming use of a structure, a non-conforming use of land, or a nonconforming
use of a structure and land, shall not be extended or enlarged
after passage of this Chapter by the attachment on a building or premises
of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the
addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in
the district involved.
§ 21-59. CONSTRUCTION BEGUN. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-57]
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to require
a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on
which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date
of adoption or amendment of this Chapter and upon which actual building
construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby
defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent
position and fastened in a permanent manner according to architectural
and engineering design, except that where demolition or removal of an
existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding,
such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction,
provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the
building involved.
§ 21-60. NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES AND THEIR USE,
RESTORATION AND ABANDONMENT. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972
Code § 89-58]
Structures that are non-conforming according to this Chapter may be
continued so long as they remain otherwise lawful. Non-conforming
structures and their use, shall not be enlarged, expanded or altered except
§ 21-57 GENERAL § 21-60
1:463
to become more in conformity with this Chapter. Any replacement of a
non-conforming structure or use shall conform to this Chapter. Any nonconforming
use or structure existing at the time of the passage of this
chapter may be continued upon the lot or in the structure so occupied
and any such structure may be restored or repaired in the event of partial
destruction thereof. Change from one non-conforming use or another shall
not be allowed, except by approval of the Board of Adjustment.
§ 21-61. REVERSIONS. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-59]
No non-conforming use shall, if once changed into a conforming use, be
changed back into a non-conforming use.
§ 21-62. REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-60]
On any building devoted in whole or in part to any non-conforming use,
repairs and maintenance may be made. Nothing in this Chapter shall
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition, any wall, floor or
roof which has been declared unsafe by the Building Inspector.
§ 21-60 BRIELLE CODE § 21-62
1:464
ARTICLE XIII
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 21-63. BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-61]
It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or agent to construct, move,
alter or change the use of any building or use any land without first applying
for a permit.
The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the
Building Inspector of the Municipality. In no case shall a permit be granted
for the construction or alteration of any building where the proposed
construction, alteration or use thereof would be in violation of any provision
of this Chapter. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector or his duly
authorized assistants to cause any building, plans or premises to be
inspected or examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any
conditions found to exist in violation of any provision of this Chapter, and he
shall have the right to enter any building or premises during the daytime in
the course of his duties.
§ 21-63.1. Application to the Zoning Officer Prior to the Issuance of
a Construction Permit. [Ord. #957; Ord. #981]
a. An application shall be made to the Zoning Officer prior to the issuance
of a construction permit for the construction of a new building or
structure or any addition, expansion or alteration, including the
installation of a heating system, to an existing building or structure.
b. If the Zoning Officer determines that the application complies with the
provisions of Chapter 1 "Zoning" of the Code of the Borough of Brielle
and any other applicable laws, the Zoning Officer may issue a zoning
permit to the applicant. The applicant may then and only then requests
that the Construction Code Official issue a construction permit.
c. If the Zoning Officer makes a determination that an application does
not meet the provision of Chapter 21 "Zoning" or any other applicable
laws, the Zoning Officer shall issue a written denial of the application
and inform the applicant of the procedure to apply to the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment for relief of the provisions of Chapter 21
"Zoning".
d. Prior to the commencement of construction of a new building or
structure or the construction of an addition to an existing building or
structure an applicant shall provide the following to the Zoning Officer
for his review:
1. Plot Plan. A plot plan based on a survey that is no more than five
years old and which shall show all existing and proposed buildings
and structures on the property, and all flood elevation levels. After
a written determination is made by the Zoning Officer that the new
§ 21-63 GENERAL § 21-63.1
1:465
building or structure and/or proposed addition conforms with
applicable zoning requirements, the Zoning Officer shall issue a
zoning permit to the applicant. The applicant may then request the
Construction Official to issue a construction permit.
2. Grading Plan. A grading plan prepared by a licensed engineer, land
surveyor or architect shall be submitted for the construction of any
new building or structure or construction of an addition having a
foundation area in excess of 500 square feet to an existing building
or structure. The plan must demonstrate that surface water does
not flow onto neighboring properties and that the proposed grade
elevation will not negatively impact neighboring properties. The
grading plan shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Construction Official and/or the Borough Engineer. The grading
plan shall demonstrate compliance with all the provisions of
21-63A.6.
3. Foundation Location Survey. A foundation location survey prepared
by a licensed land surveyor or architect shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer prior to the commencement of any above grade level
construction of a new building or structure or the construction of
an addition having a foundation area in excess of 500 square feet to
an existing building or structure. After a determination is made by
the Zoning Officer that the new building or structure or an addition
to an existing building conforms with applicable zoning
requirements, the applicant may continue construction of all
elements above the foundation of the building or structure.
4. As-Built Survey. An "as-built" survey shall be submitted with an
application for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for new
construction of any building or structure or the construction of an
addition having a foundation area in excess of 500 square feet to an
existing building or structure. The "as-built" survey shall be
prepared by a licensed land surveyor or architect and shall show
the location of all buildings and structures and the existing finished
surface elevations at all lot corners, house corners and all other
locations necessary to show conformity with the grading plan.
5. Fees.
(a) Zoning Permits.
Fence/Landscaping Permits $25
Pool/Addition to a Principal
Structure/New Accessory
Structure
$40
Change of Use/New Principal
Structure
$75
(b) Grading Plan.
§ 21-63.1 BRIELLE CODE § 21-63.1
1:466
§ 21-63A. LAND DISTURBANCE PERMIT.
§ 21-63A.1. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. #930, § A]
The purpose of this section is to control the disturbance of land and related
changes in grades and elevations by requiring adequate provisions for
surface water retention, drainage and soil erosion in order to promote the
safety, public health, convenience and general welfare of the community.
§ 21-63A.2. Definitions. [Ord. #930, § A]
As used in this section:
APPLICANT — Shall mean a person, partnership, corporation or public
agency requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity.
EXCAVATION OR CUT — Shall mean any act by which soil or rock is cut
into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
LAND — Shall mean any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainage ways and areas not permanently covered by water, within the
Borough.
PERMIT — Shall mean a land disturbance permit issued by the Construction
Official to perform work in accord with this section.
SITE — Shall mean any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
STRIPPING — Shall mean any activity, which significantly disturbs
vegetated or otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and
grubbing operations.
§ 21-63A.3. Permit Required. [Ord. #930, § A]
No land or land area shall be disturbed by any person, partnership,
corporation, municipal corporation or other public agency within the
Borough unless prior thereto the applicant has obtained a valid land
disturbance permit issued by the Construction Official in accordance with
the requirements of this section.
§ 21-63A.4. Application Procedure. [Ord. #930, § A]
A valid land disturbance permit shall be obtained by the filing of an
application which shall be accompanied by a plot plan for the premises,
which plot plan shall contain:
Grading Plan
Review
$100
All of the foregoing fees can be combined based on the
nature of the work.
§ 21-63.1 GENERAL § 21-63A.4
1:467
§ 21-63A.5. Municipal Action on Application. [Ord. #930, § A]
Upon receipt of the application and plans as required hereunder, the
Construction Official and/or the Borough Engineer shall review same and
then issue or deny the permit, which may be with or without conditions.
§ 21-63A.6. Conditions of Permit. [Ord. #930, § A]
Permit holders shall comply with the following requirements.
§ 21-63A.7. General Design Standards. [Ord. #930, § A]
The following principles shall apply to all land disturbance permits:
a. The location and description of all existing natural and man-made
features on the site, including general topography, existing drainage
and water flow, proposed drainage and water flow and soil
characteristics and a copy of the soil conservation soil survey.
b. The location and description of proposed land disturbances, specifying
all changes contemplated.
a. Notify the Borough of Brielle Constructing Official in writing 72 hours
in advance of any land disturbance.
b. Install a stabilized construction entrance into the lot (50 feet by 30 feet
by six inches of IV2 inches to two inches clean stone).
c. Install an effective sediment barrier along the lower limits of
construction so soil will not be carried off the site by rainwater. A
continuous line of hay bales (dug in 4.0 inches and staked), or a silt
fence (dug in six inches on the bottom) shall be used and installed
according to the design plans of Illustration #1, Hay Bale Sediment
Barrier Installation, or Illustration #2, Silt Fence Construction and
Installation.27
d. Provide temporary stabilization of all exposed soils, not subject to
construction traffic. Temporary stabilization may be done in
nongrowing seasons with straw mulch, applied at a rate of 95-115 lbs/
1,000 square feet and held in place with a mulch binder.
e. During the growing season, temporary stabilization will require the soil
to be seeded with annual rye grass and mulched with 70-90-lbs/1,000
square feet of straw or hay.
f. Permanent stabilization requires a three seed mixture of "permanent"
or perennial seed types that are mulched and anchored.
g. Remove all lot debris from the street regularly and sweep the street
daily.
27.Editor's Note: The illustrations referred to herein may be found at the end of this chapter.
§ 21-63A.4 BRIELLE CODE § 21-63A.7
1:468
§ 21-63A.8. Fees. [Ord. #930, § A]
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $75.
However, any application hereunder which is made in conjunction with an
application for a building permit for new construction shall not require the
payment of any fee in addition to that fee paid for the construction permit.
§ 21-63A.9. Enforcing Officer; Inspections. [Ord. #930, § A]
The requirements of this section shall be enforced by the Construction
Official, who shall also inspect or require adequate inspection of the work.
If the Construction Official finds existing conditions not as stated in the
applicant's land disturbance permit or the site does not comply with all
requirements of this section, he/she may refuse to approve further work and
may seek other penalties as provided for.
§ 21-63A.10. Appeals. [Ord. #930, § A]
Appeals from decisions under this section may be made to the Borough
Council in writing within 10 days from the date of such decision. The
appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Borough Council within
30 days from the date of appeal.
§ 21-63A.11. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #930, § A]
a. Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be done
in a manner, which will minimize soil erosion.
b. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
c. Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff, resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions, during and after
development or disturbance.
d. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site whenever possible
to facilitate groundwater recharge.
e. Land disturbance shall be done in a manner that shall not cause a
change in slope which would result in the slope exceeding 10%.
a. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section or fails to
comply or adhere to the land disturbance permit shall be subject to an
action filed in the Superior Court for injunctive relief and/or damages
for the restoration or correction of the violation or violations.
b. In addition, any person who violates any of the provisions of this section
or fails to comply or adhere to the land disturbance permit granted
hereunder shall be liable, upon conviction of such punishable offense,
to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of the Code of the
Borough of Brielle.
§ 21-63A.7 GENERAL § 21-64
1:469
§ 21-64. FILING PLANS. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-62]
Applications for building permits shall be made in the manner prescribed in
the Building Code.
§ 21-65. PERMIT RECORDS. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-63]
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to keep a record of all
applications for permits and a record of all permits issued, with a notation
of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies
of all plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records
of his office and shall be available for the use of the Governing Body
and of other officials of the Municipality, the County, the State and the
public. Records shall not be removed except with the written consent of the
Building Inspector. The Building Inspector shall prepare a monthly report
for the Governing Body, summarizing for the period since his last previous
report all building permits and certificates issued by him and all complaints
of violations and the action taken by him consequent thereon. A copy of
each such report shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor at the same
time it is filed with the Governing Body.
§ 21-65A. AS BUILT/FOUNDATION SURVEY DRAWINGS. [Ord.
#910]
No construction above the foundation shall commence until as built/
foundation survey drawings of the foundation are submitted to and
approved by the Construction Official.
ILLUSTRATION #1
HAY BALE SEDIMENT BARRIER INSTALLATION
(Subsection 21-63A.6)
§ 21-64 BRIELLE CODE § 21-65A
1:470
ILLUSTRATION #2
SILT FENCE CONSTRUCTION AND INSTALLATION
(Subsection 21-63A.6)
§ 21-66. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-64]
No building shall be used or changed in use until a Certificate of Occupancy
shall have been issued by the Building Inspector stating that the building or
the proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of this Chapter.
a. A Certificate of Occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a building,
shall be applied for by the owner or his authorized agent coincident
with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within 10
days after the erection or structural alteration of such building, or part,
shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this
Chapter.
b. In case the Building Inspector shall decline to issue a Certificate of
Occupancy, his reasons for doing so shall be stated on one copy of the
application and that copy returned to the applicant.
c. A Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued to any owner or authorized
agent, who shall be held responsible for any violation of this Chapter on
the premises. A record of all Certificates shall be kept on file by the
Building Inspector and copies shall be furnished to any person having
an ownership interest in the building affected, or to the authorized
agent of such owner.
d. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any building legally
existing at the time of the enactment of this Chapter except where the
character or use of occupancy is changed.
e. A temporary Certificate of Occupancy may be issued if the Building
Inspector determines that the building is sufficiently completed to
insure the safety and health of the occupants. A temporary Certificate
of Occupancy shall not be in force for more than six months and cannot
be renewed.
f. Revocation. On the serving of notice of any violation of any of the
provisions or requirements with respect to any building or use thereof
§ 21-65A GENERAL § 21-66
1:471
or of land, as specified in this Chapter, the Certificate of Occupancy for
such use shall thereupon, without further action, be null and void. A
new Certificate of Occupancy shall be required for any further use of
such building or land.
g. Occupancy records. A monthly report of the Certificates of Occupancy
issued shall be filed with the Tax Assessor. A record of all Certificates of
Occupancy issued shall be kept in the office of the Building Inspector.
§ 21-66 BRIELLE CODE § 21-66
1:472
ARTICLE XIV
ADOPTION, CONFLICT, VIOLATIONS
§ 21-67. INTERPRETATION. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592; 1972 Code
§ 89-65]
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this Chapter, such
provisions shall be minimum standards adopted for promoting the health,
safety and general welfare of the Municipality.
§ 21-68. CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS. [Ord. #255; Ord. #592;
1972 Code § 89-66]
Whenever the requirements of this Chapter are in conflict with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations or ordinances,
the most restrictive or those imposing the higher standards shall govern.
§ 21-69. VIOLATIONS. [Ord. #255: Ord. #592; 1972 Code § 89-67]
Any owner or agent, and any person or corporation, who shall violate any of
the provisions of this Chapter or fail to comply therewith or with any of the
requirements thereof, or who shall erect, structurally alter, enlarge, rebuild,
or move any building or buildings or any structure, or who shall put into use
any lot or land in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and
approved hereunder, or who shall refuse reasonable opportunity to inspect
any premises and who shall fail to abate such violation or refusal within 10
days after written notice has been served upon him, either by mail, or by
personal service, shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty established
in Chapter 1, Section 1-5 of this Code.
§ 21-67 GENERAL § 21-69
1:473

ARTICLE XV
SCHEDULE OF AREA REQUIREMENTS28
28.Editor's Note: The Schedule of Area Requirements referred to herein is included as an
attachment to this Chapter.
GENERAL § 21-69
1:475
Chapter 22
(RESERVED)
Chapter 23
SITE PLAN REGULATIONS
§ 23-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 23-1.1. Title. [Ord. #466; Ord. #584; 1972 Code § 73-1]
The title by which this Chapter shall be known is "The Site Plan Regulations
of the Borough of Brielle".
§ 23-1.2. Purpose. [Ord. #466; Ord. #584; 1972 Code § 73-1]
The purpose of this Chapter is to promote the public health, safety, morals,
and general welfare; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other
natural and manmade disasters; to provide adequate light, air and open
space; to encourage the appropriate and effective expenditures of public
funds by the coordination of public development with land use policies;
to promote a desirable visual environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements; to promote the
conservation of open space and valuable natural resources and to prevent
urban sprawl and degradation of the environment through improper use
of land; to encourage coordination of the various public and private
procedures and activities shaping land development with a view of
lessening the cost of such development to the more efficient use of land; and
to encourage orderly development and design consistent with the purposes
and standards of the Zoning, Chapter 21 of the Code of the Borough.
§ 23-1.3. Procedure and Scope. [Ord. #466; Ord. #584; 1972 Code
§ 73-1]
All procedures for the filing and administration of site plans shall be as
stipulated in the Borough's Municipal Land Use Procedures, Chapter 20 of
the Code of the Borough.
§ 23-1.4. Definitions. [Ord. #466; Ord. #584; 1972 Code § 73-1]
The definitions as set forth in Chapter 20, Section 20-3, intended to be
utilized in conjunction with Chapters 20 through 23 inclusive, are hereby
adopted by reference, as though fully set forth herein.
§ 23-1.5. General Requirements and Conditions. [Ord. #804, § 2;
Ord. No. 833, § 2]
a. Except as hereinafter provided, no building permit shall be issued for
any building or structure or enlargement of any building or structure
§ 21-69 BRIELLE CODE § 23-1.5
1:476
for any commercial, industrial or office building; multiple-dwelling unit,
condominium project or cooperative housing project; church,
synagogue or place of worship; or fraternal, religious or social
recreation building or structure unless a site plan is first submitted
and approved by the Planning Board, and no certificate of occupancy
shall be given unless all construction conforms to the approved plan.
An abridged site plan, however, may be submitted for structures where
the Planning Board determines that the proposed structure does not
constitute any major change from the site or create any deleterious
effects on the surrounding area, provided that the following conditions
are met:
1. Improvements to a building involving an alteration to a building
shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of area, as measured from the
exterior dimensions of the addition.
2. The parking requirements set forth in Article VI of Chapter 21,
shall be complied with.
3. The proposed construction shall not alter any internal driveways or
fire lanes as depicted on any previously approved site plan.
4. There shall be no use or alteration of more than 10% of the existing
landscaping or any area designated for that purpose on a
previously approved site plan.
5. There shall be no intrusion or elimination of any existing buffer
area or area designated for that purpose on a previously approved
site plan.
6. There shall be no significant alteration of the existing drainage.
7. The work involved shall not negate any conditions of the resolution
of a previously approved site plan except as set forth above.
Further, existing site conditions must be in full compliance with any
previously approved plan.
8. No variance of any kind is required.
9. This Code and all other applicable ordinances of the Borough shall
be fully adhered to.
10. Proof shall be provided that no taxes or assessment for local
improvements are due or delinquent.
11. More than one application for an abridged site plan may be
submitted. However, subsequent additions shall not exceed a
cumulative total area of 1,000 square feet.
b. Prior to the issuance of a building permit pursuant to the conditions set
forth in paragraph a of this subsection, the applicant or property owner
shall be required to submit plans, application and an affidavit signed
under oath evidencing compliance with the above conditions set forth in
§ 23-1.5 GENERAL § 23-1.5
1:477
paragraph a of this subsection. These documents shall be submitted
to the Zoning Officer and the Secretary of the Planning Board. The
Planning Board and Zoning Officer shall review the submission within
60 days of the date on which it is received by its Secretary and shall
notify the applicant and/or property owner of any objections it may
have with respect to compliance with the conditions set forth above or
the issuance of the permit. No building permit shall be issued to the
applicant during this sixty-day review period unless authorized by the
Planning Board. Upon approval, the Zoning Officer shall be authorized
to issue a building permit, provided that the applicant has complied
with all other applicable ordinances of the Borough. In the event that
any objection is not filed within the sixty-day period aforesaid by the
Planning Board, the submission shall be deemed to have been approved
by the Planning Board.
c. Except as hereinafter provided, every change of use shall require a site
plan to be submitted and approved by the Planning Board. For the
purposes of this subsection, "use" shall be defined as a specific nature
or purpose for which a building is primarily occupied or maintained. An
applicant seeking a change of use may, however, be exempt from this
requirement, provided that the following conditions are met:
1. The proposed use is listed as a permitted use in the particular zone
and is otherwise a conforming use. Conditional uses may also be
eligible under this procedure, provided that all conditions of Article
X are met.
2. No variance of any kind is required by the proposed change of use.
3. The parking requirements set forth in Article VI of Chapter 11,
shall be complied with.
4. The new use does not require the relocation and/or alteration of
any existing internal driveways or fire lanes.
5. The new use will not increase operating hours.
6. The new use does not require additional screening or buffer areas.
7. The buffer or landscaping areas shall not be reduced or intruded
upon.
8. Notice shall be given to all property owners within 200 feet of the
proposed change of any and all permitted uses. Notice shall be in
writing and served either personally (signed and dated,
acknowledgement required), or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, upon the aforementioned property owners. Affidavit of
service together with the original certified list, certified mail
receipts and copy of the notice shall be submitted with the
application.
§ 23-1.5 BRIELLE CODE § 23-1.5
1:478
§ 23-1.6. Minor Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #804, § 2]
9. The Property Maintenance Code and all other applicable
ordinances of the Township of Brick shall be fully adhered to.
10. Proof is provided that no taxes or assessment for local
improvements are due or delinquent.
11. Existing site conditions must be in full compliance with any
previously approved plan.
d. Any applicant for a proposed change of use pursuant to the conditions
set forth in paragraph c above shall submit to the Zoning Officer and
Secretary of the Planning Board a sketch plat, application survey and
affidavit signed under oath evidencing compliance with the above
conditions set forth above in paragraph b of this subsection and/or any
other document or action as the Zoning Officer may request to
substantiate the applicant's claimed compliance. The Planning Board
shall review the submission within 60 days of the date on which it is
received by its Clerk and shall notify the Zoning Officer of any
objections it may have with respect to the claimed exemption from the
site plan requirements. No change of use permit shall be issued to the
applicant during this sixty-day review period unless authorized by the
Planning Board. Upon approval, the Zoning Officer shall be authorized
to issue a building permit provided that the applicant has complied with
all other applicable ordinances of the Borough. In the event that any
objection is not filed within the sixty-day period aforesaid by the
Planning Board, the submission shall be deemed to have been approved
by the Planning Board.
a. Conditions for Submittal. A minor site plan may be submitted for any
development which requires site plan approval, unless otherwise
exempted according to subsection 23-1.5 of this Chapter, and for which
the following conditions can be met:
1. Building additions are proposed which do not exceed 2,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
2. A change of use is proposed which is not exempt from site plan
approval pursuant to subsection 23- 1.5b of this Chapter.
3. No new drainage facilities are required or proposed.
b. Form and Content.
1. The title block shall conform to N.J.S.A. 45:8-36, N.J.A.C. 13:40-1
and N.J.A.C. 13:4-2 and be entitled "Minor Site Plan of Lot _____,
Block _____."
2. The date of the plan, along with all revisions, the scale and the
North point shall be noted.
§ 23-1.5 GENERAL § 23-1.6
1:479
3. The layout of the proposed or existing building or structure,
including preliminary architectural floor plans and elevations, shall
be included.
4. A key map, showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding areas and existing street intersections, shall be
included.
5. The names and addresses of record owners and applicants, if
different than owners, shall be noted.
6. Minor site plans shall be prepared by registered professional
engineers, registered architects, licensed land surveyors or
licensed professional planners registered in the State of New
Jersey. The signature and seal of the preparer of the plan shall be
contained on each sheet.
7. The location of all signs shall be included.
8. The plan size shall be 11 inches by 17 inches, 24 inches by 36
inches or 30 inches by 42 inches. An accepted scale of one inch
equals 10 feet, 20 feet, 30 feet, 40 feet or 50 feet shall be used.
9. All distances shall be given in feet and decimals of foot, and all
bearings shall be given to the nearest 30 seconds. The outbound
error of closure shall not exceed 1:10,000.
10. The names of all owners of record of all properties within 200 feet
and the blocks and parcel numbers of the property as shown on
latest tax records shall be included. In addition, all adjoining
structures should be indicated on the site plan.
11. Boundaries of the property, building or setback lines and lines of
the existing street, lot reservations, easements and areas dedicated
to public use, including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way,
should be included on a minor site plan.
12. A copy of any covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions that are
intended to cover all or any part of the tract shall be included.
13. A survey prepared by a licensed surveyor of the State of New Jersey
shall accompany the site plan and shall show the boundaries of the
parcel.
14. The dimensions of all existing and proposed parking areas shall be
given.
15. The proposed lighting, screening and landscaping shall be given.
16. Where additional parking area is proposed, sufficient existing and
proposed spot grades shall be submitted to ensure adequate
surface drainage.
§ 23-1.6 BRIELLE CODE § 23-2
1:480
§ 23-2. PRELIMINARY SITE PLAN.
§ 23-2.1. General Requirements. [Ord. #466; Ord. #584; 1972 Code
§ 73-2]
Each site plan submitted to the Administrative Officer shall provide for the
following:
a. The layout of the land development shall be consistent with, Zoning,
Chapter 21.
b. Streets within the land development shall be of sufficient width and
suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate prospective traffic
and to provide access for firefighting and emergency equipment to
buildings and coordinated so as to compose a convenient system
consistent with the circulation element of the Master Plan. No street
shall be required of a width greater than 50 feet within the right-of-way
lines unless said street constitutes an extension of an existing street of
a greater width or already has been shown on the Master Plan at a
greater width.
c. Adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage facilities and,
other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and
occupants.
d. Any area reserved for public use shall be of suitable size, shape and
location to serve its intended purpose.
e. Any open space to be set aside as a part of a residential cluster
permitted by this Chapter shall comply with those provisions and as
provided for the New Jersey Revised Statutes 40:55D-1, et seq.
f. Any area subject to flooding shall not be utilized for the location of any
building or structure. Such determinations shall be made by the
Municipal Engineer based on available data.
g. Adequate protection and conservation of soils through the submission
of an "Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan" to the Monmouth
County Soil Conservation District for review and approval to be
additionally approved by the Municipal Engineer for all site plans that
disturb 5,000 square feet of land or more.
h. Standards for the grading, improvement and construction of streets or
driveways and for any required walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights,
fire hydrants, and water, drainage, sewerage facilities and other
improvements found necessary shall be as provided to the developer by
the Municipal Engineer. Where certain utilities to be installed are under
other governmental or authority jurisdictions, the standards shall be
provided by those jurisdictions and shall be adhered to by the
developer. A letter approving the proposed installation and a statement
as to who will carry out the construction shall be required.
§ 23-2 GENERAL § 23-2.1
1:481
§ 23-2.2. Preliminary Site Plan Details. [Ord. #466; Ord. #584; 1972
Code § 73-3; Ord. #776]
Site plan details are primarily for the use of the Municipal Agency to
establish criteria required to make decisions and recommendations. The
following documents shall be provided for a preliminary site plan review. In
some circumstances, additional information beyond these may be required
of the applicant; if so, these should be carefully indicated by the Municipal
Agency as early in the proceedings as possible for the orderly presentation
of the application for approval. Surveys, the general plan, grading and
utility plans, landscaping plans, architectural plans and elevations may be
indicated on separate drawings and documents.
i. Any off-tract water, sewer, drainage, or street improvement, or
easements therefore, required as a result of land development shall be
paid for by the developer on a pro-rata basis at the discretion of the
Municipal Agency. The costs shall be determined in accordance with
Article VIII, Section 24-8 of Land Subdivision, Chapter 24.
j. All taxes and assessments against the site shall be paid prior to any
preliminary approval.
a. Site Plan Details.
1. Give title, key map location of development and the name and
address of record owner and/or development applicant, and site
planner preparing the site development plan.
2. Indicate proposed use or uses of the land and buildings.
3. Site plans should be presented at a scale no smaller than one inch
equals 50 feet, nor larger than one inch equals 20 inches; size of
sheets should not exceed 36 inches by 24 inches.
4. Scale and graphic scale.
5. North arrow, in same direction on all sheets.
6. Submit survey of the property prepared by a licensed surveyor of
New Jersey, showing boundaries of properties, line of all existing
streets and roads, easements, rights-of-way and areas dedicated to
public use within 200 feet of the development. Also indicate on this
sheet the north arrow, scale feet and graphic scale, name and
address and professional license number and seal of the person
who prepared the survey.
7. Give names of all owners of record of all adjacent properties with
lot and block numbers, parcel number, and tax map number within
200 feet of the property.
8. Show existing and proposed buildings with dimensions showing,
with first floor elevation, present and finished grade elevations at
§ 23-2.1 BRIELLE CODE § 23-2.2
1:482
all corners and entrances. Present buildings and structures to be
removed are to be indicated.
9. Submit topographic map to delineate existing contours at two foot
intervals, up to 10 feet beyond property lines, as well as proposed
grading and contours, wooded areas, trees (where six inches or
greater in diameter for the area to be disturbed) flood plains,
ponds, streams and drainage ditches, etc.
10. Indicate the location of all existing and proposed structures, i.e.,
walls, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways, etc., with grade
elevations for each structure.
11. Indicate existing zones of the development site and of any different
zones within 200 feet of the property.
12. The distance of the property line (measured along the centerline of
existing streets abutting the property) to the nearest intersection.
13. Show the boundaries of the property, building and setback lines,
lines of existing streets, lots, reservations, easements and areas
dedicated to public use.
14. Indicate locations of all utility structures and lines, existing and
proposed storm water drainage on-site and on-tract and from
buildings and structures, as well as telephone, power and light,
water, hydrant locations, sewer, gas, etc., whether privately or
publicly owned, with manholes, inlets, pipe sizes, grades, inverts
and directions of flow.
15. Show location, size and nature of the entire lot or lots in question;
of contiguous lots owned by the applicant or owner of record, or in
which the applicant has a direct interest even though only a portion
of the entire property is involved in site plan development. Provide
on a key map, if necessary.
16. Show all proposed easements and public and community areas.
17. Indicate all means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from the
site onto public streets, showing the size and location of driveways,
curb cuts and curbing, sight lines, and radii.
18. Show location and design of off-street parking areas, showing their
size, and the locations of internal circulation, traffic patterns,
parking space, aisles, driveways, curbing, barriers, and wearing
surface finishes and construction.
19. Show location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading and
unloading platforms and docks.
20. Indicating provisions for refuse and garbage disposal. Insure that
areas are not exposed to view, are unpolluting, covered from
weather and are secure from vandalism.
§ 23-2.2 GENERAL § 23-2.2
1:483
21. Show provisions for screening storage of equipment, attached or
separate from buildings.
22. Indicate all existing or proposed exterior lighting (free-standing
and/or on building) for size, nature of construction, lumens,
heights, area and direction of illumination, foot candles produced,
as well as time controls proposed for outdoor lighting and display.
23. Note all existing and proposed signs and their sizes; nature of
construction and location, height and orientation, including all
identification signs, traffic directional signs and arrows, free-
Standing and facade signs and time control for sign lighting, if any.
24. Indicate locations, dimensions and construction of off-site
sidewalks, on-site exits, walks and sidewalks. Provision should be
made for pedestrian safety, access ways and, where necessary, a
bicycle system and racking.
25. Show proposed screening, green areas, landscaping and fencing,
including a planting plan and schedule (sizes, types, number).
26. Show improvements to adjoining streets and roads, and traffic
control devices necessary in streets or highways. Acceleration and
deceleration lanes, paving, land dedication or acquisition for roads
should be shown.
27. Copies of any covenants and deed restrictions intended to cover
any of the development site should be submitted.
28. Submit elevations, sketches, renderings, or pictures of any new
buildings or structures.
29. Preliminary architectural floor plans and elevations should be
submitted, with the name, address, professional number and seal of
the architect.
30. Supply appropriate places for signatures and date of approval of
the chairman and secretary of the Municipal Agency.
31. In fire prevention, consideration must be shown for service lines,
hydrants, siamese connections, automatic sprinkler systems, fire
zones, "no parking" fire zones and pavement and wall signs.
32. Show dimensions of all of the above on the site plan so that scaling
will not be necessary.
33. Recyclable materials storage. For each site plan application for
commercial and industrial developments that utilize 1,000 square
feet or more of land, the applicant shall provide the Municipal
Agency with estimates of the quantity of mandated recyclable
materials (including but not limited to: newspaper, glass bottles,
aluminum cans, tin and bi-metal cans, high grade paper, and
corrugated cardboard) that will be generated by the development
§ 23-2.2 BRIELLE CODE § 23-2.2
1:484
§ 23-3. FINAL SITE PLAN.
§ 23-3.1. Final Site Plan Details Required. [Ord. #466; 1972 Code
§ 73-4]
Final site plan details are primarily a refinement of the preliminary details
by providing final engineering and architectural information which will be
classified as site plan construction details.
Whereas preliminary site plan data may have been tentative, the final data
shall be accurate.
Chapter 24
LAND SUBDIVISION
during each week. A separated storage area must be provided
to accommodate a one to four weeks accumulation of recyclable
material. The Municipal Agency may require the location of one
or more common storage areas at convenient locations within the
development.
a. Final site plan details.
1. All the data required on the preliminary site plan with complete
accuracy.
2. If any changes from the preliminary site plan have been made,
submit an approved preliminary site plan showing those changes
marked in red.
§ 23-2.2 GENERAL § 23-3.1
1:485

ARTICLE I
SHORT TITLE
§ 24-1. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-1]
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as: The Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the Borough of Brielle, County of Monmouth, New Jersey.
§ 24-1 GENERAL § 24-1
1:487

ARTICLE II
PURPOSE
§ 24-2. PURPOSE. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-2]
The purpose of this Chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
minimum standards to guide land subdivision in the Borough of Brielle,
County of Monmouth, in order to promote the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare of the municipality. It shall be
administered to insure the orderly growth and development, and
conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provisions for
circulation, utilities and services.
§ 24-2 GENERAL § 24-2
1:489

ARTICLE III
APPLICATION
§ 24-3. APPLICATION. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-3]
No owner or other person shall hereafter subdivide any land within the
Municipality without having obtained approval in accordance with this
Chapter.
§ 24-3 GENERAL § 24-3
1:491

ARTICLE IV
APPROVING AUTHORITY
§ 24-4. APPROVING AGENCY. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code
§ 75-4]
The approval provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the
Planning Board except where the Board of Adjustment is required to do so
in accordance with Land Use Procedures, Chapter 20.
§ 24-4 GENERAL § 24-4
1:493

ARTICLE V
DEFINITIONS
§ 24-5. DEFINITIONS. [New]
The Definitions as set forth in Chapter 20, Section 203, intended to be
utilized in conjunction with Chapters 20 through 23 inclusive, are hereby
adopted by reference as though fully set forth herein.
§ 24-5 GENERAL § 24-5
1:495

ARTICLE VI
ADMINISTRATION
§ 24-6. PLANNING BOARD; ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 24-6.1. Planning Board. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 76-6]
§ 24-6.2. Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972
Code § 75-6]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in lieu of the Planning Board,
administer the provisions of this Chapter subject to all other organizational
and operational procedures as stipulated in Land Use Procedures, Chapter
20, as per Section 20-5.13.
§ 24-6.3. Meetings; Hearings; Notices; Publication. [Ord. #231;
Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-6]
Meeting, hearing, notice, and publication requirements shall be the same
as referred to in Land Use Procedures, Chapter 20, except the sketch plat
shall not require hearings, notices, or publication.
a. The Planning Board shall administer the provisions of this Chapter
subject to all other organizational and operational procedures as
stipulated in Land Use Procedures, Chapter 20.
b. The Planning Board shall act on all subdivisions except those that
involve a use variance, or involve an area variance for more than one
lot.
§ 24-6 GENERAL § 24-6.3
1:497

ARTICLE VII
PROCEDURE
§ 24-7. MINOR AND MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 24-7.1. Submission. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-7]
§ 24-7.2. Minor Subdivision. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code
§ 75-7]
a. Any subdivider of land within the Borough, prior to subdividing or reresubdividing
land as defined in this Chapter, shall submit an
application for subdivision to the secretary of the Municipal Agency as
required by Land Use Procedures, Chapter 20 for the purposes of
classification and discussion.
a. Plat details. The minor subdivision plat shall be prepared to scale based
upon an accurate survey at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100
feet, to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet, and of a size to
comply with the New Jersey Map Filing Act and shall contain the
following details:
1. A key map showing the location of the land to be subdivided in
relation to the surrounding area.
2. A title block giving the name of the subdivision, the present owner
of the land, name and license number of person who prepared the
map, scale of the map, north arrow, and space for the signatures of
the secretary and chairman of the Municipal Agency. The designer
shall use an engineering scale.
3. A map of the entire tract of land being subdivided showing all
existing and proposed property lines, easements, rights-of-way,
street names, power lines, structures, streams, drainage facilities,
and wood areas within the area of the entire tract.
4. The name of all adjoining property owners and owners of property
directly across the street as disclosed by the most recent municipal
tax record.
5. Lot dimensions in feet.
6. Block and Lot numbers.
7. Required road dedication (if any).
8. Total tract to be subdivided in acres or square feet.
9. Number of lots after subdivision and their areas in acres if one acre
and over, and in square feet if under one acre.
10. Location and setback distances of existing structures.
§ 24-7 GENERAL § 24-7.2
1:499
§ 24-7.3. Major Subdivision. [Ord. #231; Ord. #503; Ord. #648;
1972 Code § 75-7; New]
11. The zoning district in which the property is located, and if the
proposed subdivision lies within more than one district, the most
accurate information available as to the measurements within each
district.
12. Building setback lines per the Zoning, Chapter 21.
13. The locations of water and sewer mains as appropriate.
14. Delineation of all flood plains and designating same as such.
15. A copy of any deeds which are to be filed with the County
Recording Officer. Deeds may be submitted at the time of signing of
the plat.
16. Location and widths of all existing and proposed streets on the
property to be subdivided and within 500 feet of the tract.
17. Topography including all existing topographical features such as
cliffs and swamps within the portion to be subdivided and within
200 feet thereof, showing the distance of any structure from any
new property line which would be established by the subdivision.
The contour interval shall be as follows:
Up to 10% 2 feet
Over 10% 5 feet
18. The location, width and direction of flow of all ponds, streams,
brooks, drainage ditches and culverts in the area to be subdivided
and within 500 feet of the subdivision and all swales, run-offs, or
pipes conducting road water to or from the subject property.
19. A sketch of how the remaining land will be developed, including
only roads and lots, regardless of whether there is any present or
future intent of further subdivision.
a. Sketch plat (optional).
1. Submission.
(a) The purpose of the sketch plat is to give the Municipal Agency
the opportunity to give the applicant advice prior to the
expenditure of funds for preliminary plans.
(b) A sketch plat is an optional submission, and if the subdivider
prefers, he may submit a preliminary plat for classification and
discussion without going through the sketch plat procedure.
(c) If the subdivider elects to submit a sketch plat, he shall submit
an application for a proposed subdivision as required by Land
§ 24-7.2 BRIELLE CODE § 24-7.3
1:500
Use Procedures, Chapter 20 for discussion purposes and shall
follow all submission procedures as for a minor subdivision.
(d) Sketch plats may be forwarded to the County Planning Board
for review. The forwarding of sketch plats is optional, but it
may save the subdivider time and expense by doing so.
(e) No public hearing shall be required; however, the applicant
may elect to have one if desired, and, if so, shall proceed as
specified in Land Use Procedures, Chapter 20.
(f) The Planning Board shall review the submission and render its
recommendation within 45 days of submission of a complete
application of a sketch plat to the secretary of the Municipal
Agency, or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Such review and recommendation is not
intended to be binding, and is for discussion and advisory
purposes only. The submission of a sketch plat shall not be
deemed to be a preliminary plat application, and therefore, the
time periods for a preliminary application do not commence.
(g) The secretary of the Municipal Agency shall notify, in the
writing, the person submitting the sketch plat of the
recommendation made by the Agency within 10 days of the
meeting at which the recommendation was made.
2. Sketch plat details. The sketch plat shall be prepared to scale based
on deed description, tax map, or similar reasonably accurate data
for the purposes of review and discussion by the Municipal Agency.
The plat shall contain the following data:
(a) A key map showing the location of the tract to be subdivided in
relation to the surrounding area.
(b) The tax map sheet, block, lot numbers.
(c) North arrow and scale.
(d) The name of the owner and all adjoining property owners and
owners of property directly across the street as disclosed by
the most recent municipal tax record.
(e) Scale of 100 feet or less to the inch to enable the entire tract to
be shown on one sheet.
(f) Total tract to be subdivided in acres or square feet.
(g) Number of lots after subdivision and their areas in acres if one
acre and over, and in square feet if under one acre.
(h) Location and names of all existing streets within 200 feet of the
tract.
§ 24-7.3 GENERAL § 24-7.3
1:501
(i) Location and widths of all proposed streets.
(j) Location in general of any streams on the site or within 200
feet of the subdivision.
(k) Location of existing structures on the site and their setbacks.
(l) Existing structures on adjoining lots, if the new property line
will create a zoning violation.
(m) The zoning district in which the tract is located.
(n) Any other data such as wooded areas and topographical
features such as cliffs and swamps within the portion to be
subdivided and within 200 feet thereof which the subdivider
feels would assist the Municipal Agency in evaluating and
classifying the subdivision. This shall be optional. The burden
shall be on the subdivider, if subsequent application for minor,
or preliminary approval shall disclose other data which would
require subdivision redesign or reclassification.
(o) A sketch of how the remaining land will be developed,
including only roads and lots, regardless of whether there is
any present or future intent of further subdivision.
b. Preliminary plat.
1. Submission.
(a) The subdivider shall submit an application for preliminary
approval of a proposed major subdivision to the secretary as
required by the Procedural Ordinance.
(b) Prior to granting approval of a preliminary plat, the applicant
shall furnish the Municipal Agency with the following
certifications:
(1) Certification from the Municipal Engineer approving
method of sewage disposal and water supply.
(2) Certification from the appropriate agency that water and
sewage service will be supplied.
(c) The Secretary of the Municipal Agency shall notify, in writing,
the person submitting the subdivision of the action taken by
the Agency within 10 days of the meeting at which the decision
was made.
(d) If the Board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, a notation
reflecting approval by the Municipal Agency, together with the
date, shall be made thereon and signed by the Chairman and
Secretary.
2. Preliminary plat details.
§ 24-7.3 BRIELLE CODE § 24-7.3
1:502
(a) The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn on
reproduced at a scale of not smaller than one inch equals 100
feet and shall contain a metes and bounds survey prepared by
a licensed New Jersey land surveyor, and all engineering work
shall be designed by a licensed New Jersey professional
engineer. The plat shall be designed in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
(b) The preliminary plat shall include the following information:
(1) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation
to the Municipality.
(2) The tract name, tax map sheet, block and lot number, date,
north arrow, graphic scale, and the following names and
addresses, together with consent to file:
(i) Name and address of subdivider.
(ii) Name, address and license number of the person who
prepared the map.
(iii) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the
land or his authorized agent, or that the owner has
given consent under an option agreement, giving
names and addresses of both.
(iv) Name and address of owners, as appears on the
Municipal tax records, of adjoining property and
property directly across the street or streets form the
property involved.
(3) Indicate on plan all trees six inches or more in diameter,
measuring two feet above ground level, in all areas to be
disturbed by grading or construction.
(4) Acreage of tract to be subdivided, to the nearest
hundredth of an acre.
(5) Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general
slope and natural drainage of the land to points extending
200 feet beyond the subdivision boundary; tentative cross
sections and profiles of all proposed new streets; contours
at five foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater,
two foot intervals for land of 3% to 10% slope, and one foot
intervals for less than 3% slope. Elevation datum to be sea
level only.
(6) The location of existing and proposed property line streets,
existing buildings, watercourses, railroad bridges,
culverts, drain pipes, and any natural features such as
wooded areas and rock formations.
§ 24-7.3 GENERAL § 24-7.3
1:503
(7) The area of each lot in acres if one acre and over, and in
square feet if under one acre.
(8) Minimum street setback line and side and rear yard
setback lines of each lot.
(9) A copy of any proposed protective covenants or deed
restriction applying to the land being subdivided shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat.
(10) A grading plan showing existing and final contours of each
lot.
(11) A soil erosion and sediment control plan as required by
this Section.
(12) Plans, profiles and cross sections of all proposed streets
and all other requirements on the "Road and Improvement
Ordinance". It is intended that these drawings as well as
others submitted in support of the preliminary plat be in
sufficient detail to permit construction directly from them.
(13) Plans and profiles of proposed utility layouts such as but
not limited to sewers, storm drains, water, gas and
electricity, showing feasible connections to existing or any
proposed utility systems.
(14) A sketch of the prospective future street system of the
included portion of an entire holding where a preliminary
plat covers only a part thereof.
(15) A soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be
submitted as part of the preliminary plat submission. Said
soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by
a licensed New Jersey professional engineer in accordance
with the "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control" of the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation District. Said soil erosion
and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the Soil
Conservation District for report and recommendation. The
Municipal Agency shall not act on the preliminary plat
until receipt of the Soil Conservation District report or
until 45 days have elapsed from the date of referral to said
District. Any fees or expenses involved in the review by
said District shall be the applicant's responsibility.
(i) The soil erosion and sediment control plan shall be for
the portion of the tract being disturbed and shall
contain the following:
I. Plans and specifications of soil erosion and
sediment control measures in accordance with
§ 24-7.3 BRIELLE CODE § 24-7.3
1:504
the "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control" of the Soil Conservation
District. Said measures shall apply to all features
of construction on the site, including street and
utility installations as well as protection of
individual lots and said measures shall be
instituted to prevent or control soil erosion and
sedimentation during the various stages of
development.
II. A timing schedule indicating the anticipated
starting and completion dates of the development
sequences and the time of exposure of each are a
priority to the completion of effective erosion and
sediment control measures.
(ii) The following principles, where applicable in the soil
erosion and sediment control plan, shall be included:
I. Stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other
development shall be done in such a way that will
minimize soil erosion.
II. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be
retained, protected and supplemented.
III. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure
shall be kept to a practical minimum.
IV. Temporary seedings and/or mulching shall be
used to protect exposed critical areas during
development.
V. Provisions shall be made to accommodate the
increased run-off caused by changed soil and
surface conditions during and after development.
VI. Diversions, sediment basins, and so forth, shall be
constructed prior to any on-tract grading or
disturbance of existing surface material.
(iii) Upon receipt of the report from the Soil Conservation
District, the Municipal Agency shall require
incorporation of such soil erosion and sediment
control measures as it deems appropriate as a
condition of approval of the preliminary and final
plats.
(16) Drainage calculations showing existing and expected flows
after development, a color-coded drainage map, plans to
control flow to keep velocities below 4 f.p.s. in swales and
outfalls and to intercept flows when they reach 5 c.f.s.
§ 24-7.3 GENERAL § 24-7.3
1:505
(17) A copy of a traffic report, if required by the Planning
Board, shall be submitted together with the application.
(18) Environmental impact statement.
(i) Concurrent with the filing of the preliminary plats, if
required by the Planning Board, the subdivider shall
also file five copies of an environmental impact
statement prepared by a licensed professional planner
or engineer which shall:
I. Describe all of the probable effects, including onsite,
on-tract, off-site and off-tract, of the proposed
development upon:
A. Natural resources of all kinds, including plant
and wildlife.
B. Hydrologic conditions and existing surface
and stormwater drainage patterns.
C. Soil erosion and sedimentation.
D. Water quality with reference to standards
established by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
E. Air quality with reference to standards
established by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
F. Noise.
G. Potable water supply.
H. Sanitary sewage disposal.
I. Traffic volume and flow.
J. Municipal services required to serve the
proposed developments.
K. Municipal services required to serve the
health, safety and welfare of the public.
II. Discuss alternative proposals for the proposed
development which will reduce or eliminate any
adverse on-site or off-site environmental effects.
III. Discuss the steps proposed to be taken before,
during and after the development to minimize any
adverse on-site or off-site or off-tract
environmental effects which cannot be avoided.
§ 24-7.3 BRIELLE CODE § 24-7.3
1:506
(ii) The Planning Board shall forward two copies of every
environmental impact statement to the Borough
Environmental Commission, which may furnish
comments thereon to the Planning Board within 45
days of their receipt thereof.
(iii) Before scheduling a public hearing, the Planning
Board may require revision or supplementation of the
preliminary plat and accompanying plans.
(iv) The Planning Board may select among alternative
proposals in the environmental impact statement and
may establish conditions considered necessary to
eliminate or minimize any temporary or permanent
adverse on-site or off-site environmental effects of the
proposed development.
c. Final plat.
1. Submission.
(a) The subdivider shall submit an application for final approval of
a proposed major subdivision within three years of the date of
approval of the preliminary plat.
(b) The submission shall be made to the Municipal Agency as
required by Land Use Procedures, Chapter 20.
(c) Prior to final approval, the Municipal Agency shall have
received the following:
(1) A letter from the Municipal Engineer stating that the
required improvements have been installed to his
satisfaction in accordance with applicable Municipal
specifications.
(2) A letter from the applicant's engineer stating that the final
plat conforms to the preliminary plat, as submitted and
approved.
(3) "As Built" plans and profiles of all utilities, including two
original tracings and two black or blue and white prints
shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk who will forward
one set of originals and prints to the Municipal Engineer.
(4) A letter from the Municipal Engineer stating the amount of
a maintenance guarantee and the items to be covered by
same.
2. Plat details.
(a) The final plat shall conform in design to the preliminary plat
and shall show or be accompanied by the following:
§ 24-7.3 GENERAL § 24-7.3
1:507
(1) Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner
and subdivider, graphic scale, north arrow; and name,
address, signature and seal of person who prepared the
map.
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street
names, easements, and other rights-of-way, park areas, or
land to be reserved or dedicated for public use, all lot lines
and other site lines, watercourse, with accurate
dimensions, including bearings and distances, and curve
information consisting of the following minimum data:
(i) Central angle.
(ii) Radii.
(iii) Arc, and accurate dimensions to the actual street
intersections, as projected.
(iv) Chord hearing and distance.
(3) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or
dedicated to public use shall be designated, and the
proposed use of sites other than residential shall be noted.
(4) Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each
block shall be numbered in conformity with the Municipal
Tax Map, as determined by the Municipal Tax Assessor.
(5) Minimum building setback line son all lots and other sites.
(6) Location and description of all monuments whether found
set or to be set.
(7) Names of owners of adjoining lands, and of the land
directly across the street or streets from property involved
as appears on the municipal tax records.
d. As-built plans.
1. Submission. The subdivider shall submit the as-built plans for
approval to the Govern Body as required in Land Use Procedures,
Chapter 20, subsection 207.6a.5.(b).
2. Details. The as-built plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn or
reproduced at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 50 feet. The
as-built shall include, on separate sheets, plans and profiles of the
storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system and water main system
installed as a result of the subdivision, based upon actual field
measurements of the facilities as constructed, performed, drawn
and certified by a New Jersey professional engineer or land
surveyor. In the case of a site plan, the as-built plan should also
include a set of the originally approved final site plan with all
§ 24-7.3 BRIELLE CODE § 24-7.3
1:508
deviations marked in red. An additional certificate should also be
added to this set of plans certifying that all information depicted
in these plans is based upon actual field measurements of the
improvements constructed, performed, drawn and certified by a
New Jersey professional engineer or land surveyor. Information
required on the as-built utility plans shall include as a minimum the
following:
(a) Storm sewer system. The size and type of pipe; accurate
location of manholes, catch basins, inlets, discharge points or
other structures within the streets of easements; distance and
slope of pipe between structures; invert elevation of pipe at
structure and elevation of top of structure; location of any
drainage ditches; and location and description of any other
drainage facility or improvements required by the subdivision.
The street right-of-way, pavement area, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, radius at intersections, and centerline elevation at
fifty foot intervals shall also be shown on this plan.
(b) Sanitary sewer system. Size and type of pipe; accurate location
of manholes, cleanouts or other structures within the streets or
easements; distance and slopes of pipe between structures;
invert elevation of pipe at structures and elevation of top of
structure; location of wye from downstream manhole; location
of house connection where it crosses the curb measured from
the downstream manhole or other permanent type
structures(s); and the length of house connection and invert
elevation at the end of the depth to the invert below the top of
the curb. The street right-of-way; pavement area, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, radius at intersection and centerline
elevation at fifty foot intervals shall also be shown on the plan.
(c) Water main system. Size and type of pipe; accurate location of
valves, hydrants, blowoffs, meter pits, 45° bends, 90° bends,
tee connections, and tie-in point to existing system; the
distance of the pipe off the face of the curb or the location
within an easement; the depth of the water main below the
finished surface of the street; and the location and description
of any other water supply facilities. The street right-of-way,
pavement area, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, radius at
intersections and centerline elevation at forty foot intervals
shall be shown on this plan.
(d) If any of the improvements required to be shown on the as-built
plans are not installed at the time of final approval, the plans
shall be revised by the subdivider's engineer or land surveyor
at his expense to show their locations prior to the release of the
developer from any performance or maintenance guarantee
which the Borough holds for the subdivision or site plan.
§ 24-7.3 GENERAL § 24-7.3
1:509

ARTICLE VIII
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 24-8. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 24-8.1. Required. [Ord. #583; Ord. #231; 1972 Code § 75-8]
Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed all
improvements required by this Chapter. All improvements shall be subject
to approval and inspection by the Municipal Engineer.
§ 24-8.2. Inspection and Report by Municipal Engineer. [Ord. #231;
Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-8]
When all of the required improvements have been completed, the obligor
shall notify the Governing Body in writing, by certified mail addressed in
care of the Municipal Clerk of the completion of the improvements and shall
send a copy thereof to the Municipal Engineer. Thereupon the Municipal
Engineer shall inspect all of the improvements and shall file a detailed
report, in writing, with the Governing Body, indicating either approval,
partial approval or rejection of the improvements with a statement of
reasons for any rejection. If partial approval is indicated, the cost of the
improvements rejected shall be set forth.
§ 24-8.3. Time for Action. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-8]
The Governing Body shall either approve or reject the improvements, on
the basis of the report of the Municipal Engineer and shall notify the
obligor in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of the report and
the action of the approving authority with relation thereto, not later than
65 days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the completion of
the improvements. Failure of the Governing Body to send or provide such
notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute
approval of the improvements.
§ 24-8.4. Rejection of Improvements. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972
Code § 75-8]
If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the approving
authority shall require the obligor to complete such improvements and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
§ 24-8.5. Right to Appeal. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75.8]
Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the obligor
to contest by legal proceedings any determination of the Governing Body or
the Municipal Engineer.
§ 24-8 GENERAL § 24-8.6
1:511
§ 24-8.6. Maintenance Guarantee. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972
Code § 75-8]
Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with the Governing
Body for a period not to exceed two years after final acceptance of the
improvement, in an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the
improvement. In the event that other governmental agencies or public
utilities automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a maintenance guarantee to another
governmental agency, no maintenance guarantee shall be required by the
municipality for such utilities or improvements.
§ 24-8.7. Required Improvements. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1975
Code § 75-8; Ord. #776]
a. Streets, pavement, curbs and gutters.
1. Street improvement specifications.
(a) All streets shall be not less than 50 feet wide between property
lines and shall be not less than 36 feet wide between curblines.
(b) All streets shall be curbed or curbed and guttered on both
sides.
(c) All curbs shall be not less than 16 inches deep and six inches in
width at the top and eight inches wide at the bottom and shall
be constructed of a minimum concrete mixture of one part
cement, two parts washed sand and three parts washed gravel
or other suitable aggregate.
(d) The longitudinal grade of proposed streets shall not be less
than 0.40% and shall not exceed 10%, and streets with a
longitudinal grade of 4% or more shall be provided with
concrete gutters a minimum of six inches thick and two feet
wide adjacent to the curb. All streets shall have a crown of not
less than nine inches.
(e) The minimum requirement for the construction of streets shall
be not less than four inches compacted thickness of bituminous
stabilized base course with a surface course of one and 1 1/2
inches compacted thickness of bituminous concrete, Type
FABC-1. The bituminous stabilized based course shall be plant
mixed and shall be constructed in layers of not more than 2 1/2
inches compacted thickness, and shall be prepared and
constructed in accordance with Division 3, Section 2A, New
Jersey State Highway Department Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction (1961), as amended and
supplemented. Surface course shall be constructed in
accordance with Division 3, Section 10, of the specifications.
Before construction of the base course, all curbs, utility mains
and connections shall have been installed. Each course shall be
§ 24-8.6 BRIELLE CODE § 24-8.7
1:512
inspected and approved by the Borough, through its
designated representative, before any additional course shall
be constructed. If the inspector shall determine, either before
or during construction, that specific conditions in any area
require street construction of more than the minimum
requirements herein described, then such additional
requirements shall be deemed to be the minimum
requirements for such construction.
(f) Where subbase conditions of proposed streets are wet, springy
or of such nature that surfacing would be inadvisable without
first treating the subbase, the treatment of the subbase shall
be made in the following manner:
(1) The street shall be excavated to a depth that shall be a
minimum of 12 inches below the proposed finished grade.
(2) Sand gravel shall be placed to a depth which, after
thorough rolling, shall be not less than six inches.
(3) After the subbase material has been properly placed and
compacted, the street surfacing material as described
heretofore shall be spread thereon.
(g) All streets shall be provided with catch basins and pipes where
the same may be necessary for proper surface drainage. The
requirements of this section shall not be satisfied by
construction of dry wells. Catch basins shall be designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Department of
Transportation's standard plans and specifications. Frames
and grates shall be Campbell Foundry Co. Pattern No. 2541 or
No. 2548 stream flow grating with eight inch curb face or
equal. A concrete apron 24 inches in width and six inches thick,
composed of 3,000 pound concrete, measured 28 days after
installation, shall be constructed around catch basins. Storm
drain pipes shall be reinforced concrete hard pipe, extra
strength, conforming to ASTM specifications C-76-60 Class IV.
(h) All streets shall have water mains not less than six inches in
diameter installed therein for the entire length thereof.
(i) At any point on a road where a proposed intersection is shown
on a plat, and where the subdivider plans further development
of such intersecting roads, the intersection road shall be
curbed and surface-treated in accordance with the
requirements hereinabove set forth in this section, for a
distance equal to the depth of the lots shown on said plat,
adjoining the proposed intersected street.
b. Storm drains and culverts. Where storm drains or culverts are required
on-site or off-site, all streets shall be provided with sufficient catch
basins, storm sewers, culverts, water detention basins and other
§ 24-8.7 GENERAL § 24-8.7
1:513
drainage appurtenances for the proper drainage of the area in the light
of existing and future conditions. All such facilities shall be constructed
in accordance with the standards and requirements of good
engineering practice or such other specifications as may be required by
the Municipal Engineer where special circumstances so require.
c. Monuments. Monuments shall be of the size and shape and shall be
installed as required by the New Jersey Map Filing Law.
d. Street name signs. Street name signs shall be placed at all street
intersections within the subdivision. Such signs shall be of a type and
shall be installed in accordance with standards adopted by the
Governing Body. Signs shall be placed two per intersection on the near
right hand corner as viewed from the street which is expected to carry
the greatest traffic through the intersection. If both streets are
expected to carry equal traffic, the locations shall be as approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
e. Utility installations. All utility lines and necessary appurtenances,
including but not limited to electric transmission and electric, gas and
water distribution, communications, street lighting and cable
television, shall be installed underground within easements or
dedicated public rights-of-ways. All power and telephone underground
lines shall be confined to a five foot easement within the street R.O.W.
immediately adjacent to one of the street R.O.W. lines. Any additional
easement width required shall be located on the abutting private
property. The subdivider shall arrange with the serving utility for the
underground installation of the utilities supply lines and service
connections in accordance with the provisions of the applicable
Standard Terms and Conditions of the Tariff as the same are then on file
with the State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners and
shall submit to the Planning Board prior to the granting of approval a
written instrument from each serving utility which shall evidence full
compliance with the provisions of this Section; provided, however, that
lots in subdivisions which abut existing easements or public rights-ofway
where overhead utility lines have theretofore been installed may be
supplied with service from such overhead lines if no new utility poles
are required. In any event, all new building service connections shall be
installed underground.
Wherever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way an
appropriate utility easement of not less than 25 feet in width shall be
provided.
f. Street lighting. Street lighting shall be installed by the developer if it is
determined by the Municipal Agency that such lighting is necessary for
public safety. Street lights shall be of a type approved by resolution of
the Governing Body and by the electric utility company serving the
proposed subdivision; and located so as to provide a minimum lighting
level of 0.5 horizontal foot candles on all collector and arterial streets.
The subdivider shall provide for initial installation of any street lights;
§ 24-8.7 BRIELLE CODE § 24-8.7
1:514
the locations to be approved by the Municipal Agency. After final
acceptance, operation and maintenance costs shall be the responsibility
of the municipality.
g. Top soil protection. Top soil which shall be removed in the course of
regrading a subdivision shall not be used as spoil. No top soil shall be
removed from the subdivision site until such top soil shall be
redistributed as to provide at least six inches of cover on areas to be
used as building sites from which top soil was removed and shall be
stabilized by seeding or planting. Any excess top soil may be removed
from the site only with the written approval of the Municipal Engineer.
h. Shade trees.
1. The removal of existing trees shall not be permitted in any
subdivision except in the location of structures or unless it can be
shown that grading or construction requires removal. The
Municipal Agency may compel the subdivider or developer at his
sole expense to retain a qualified Forester or Certified Tree
Surgeon to report to the Board as to what measures are necessary
to preserve existing trees.
2. Street shade trees shall be required within a subdivision and the
developer shall submit a planting plan prepared by a Landscape
Architect showing the proposed location, size, botanical and
common names of all trees and shall conform to all requirements as
set forth in this section. All planting plans shall be approved by the
Planning Board in collaboration with the Environmental
Commission.
3. Trees shall be nursery grown stock not less than 2 1/2 inch caliper,
as measured one foot above the root ball.
4. Shade trees shall be installed between the street right-of-way line
and the curb, 25 feet from any existing or proposed street light or
street intersection.
5. The developer shall plant, maintain for one year, and replace
(where necessary) all shade trees. Trees shall be selected from the
following list and spaced as specified.
Approved Street Trees Spacing On-Center
Ginkgo biloba (male only) - Ginkgo 30 feet
Carpinus caroliniano - American
Hornbeam
20 feet
Carpinus betulas - European Hornbeam 20 feet
Cornus florida - Flowering White Dogwood 25 feet
Cornus florida rubra - Flowering Pink
Dogwood
25 feet
§ 24-8.7 GENERAL § 24-8.7
1:515
Approved Street Trees Spacing On-Center
Cornus Kousa - Japanese Dogwood 25 feet
Prunus subhirtella automnalis - Autumn
Higan Cherry
25 feet
Acer platanoides - Norway Maple 50 feet
Prunus serrulata "Kwanzan" - Kwanzan
Cherry
25 feet
Prunus subhirtella - Higan Cherry 25 feet
Quercus rubra - Red Oak 50 feet
Quercus alba Coccinea - Scarlet Oak 50 feet
Sophora japonica Regent - Regent Scholar
Tree
20 feet
Koelreuteria paniculata - Goldenrain-Tree 25 feet
Prunus cerasifera - Purple-leaved Plum 20 feet
Tilia tomentosa - Silver Linden 30 feet
Tilia americana - American Linden 40 feet
Quercus acutissima - Sawtooth Oak 50 feet
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis
"Shademaster" - Thornless Honeylocust
50 feet
Amelanchier canadensis - Downy
Shadblow
25 feet
Pyrus calleryana "Bradford" - Bradford
Callery Pear
25 feet
Tilia cordata - Littleleaf Linden 35 feet
Fraxinus pennsylvanica - Green Ash 40 feet
Quercus palustris - Pin Oak 50 feet
i. Sanitary sewers.
1. Where a public sanitary sewer system is available on-site, each lot
within a subdivision shall be provided with sewage disposal
facilities by the required extension of sewer mains and connections
thereto, the costs thereof to be borne solely by the subdivider.
2. Where a pubic sanitary sewer system is not available "on" or "offsite,"
the Municipal Agency may require the extension of an offtract
sanitary sewer system. Installation and cost provisions shall
be as determined and approved by the municipality.
3. All such installation of sewer mains and connections shall be
constructed in accordance with the specifications and
requirements of the Municipal Engineer.
§ 24-8.7 BRIELLE CODE § 24-8.7
1:516
j. Water supply.
1. Where a public water system is available on-site or off-site, each lot
within a subdivision shall be provided with public water facilities by
the required extension of water mains and connections thereto, the
costs thereof to be borne solely by the subdivider. All installations
of public water supply shall be subject to the approval of the
Municipal Engineer.
2. Where a public water system is not available "on" or "off-site," the
Municipal Agency may require the extension of an off-tract water
system, the installation and cost to be determined by the Municipal
Agency.
3. All such installation of mains and connections shall be constructed
in accordance with the specifications and requirements of the
Municipal Engineer.
k. Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed in all subdivisions. Fire
hydrants shall be of the type approved by the local fire district in
accordance with the recommendations of the Fire Insurance Rating
Organization of New Jersey and shall be placed and installed in
accordance with the standards of the fire district. Such installation shall
be subject to the inspection and approval of the Fire Chief and the
Municipal Engineer.
l. Traffic. Stop signs as directed by the Township Police.
m. Recyclable materials storage. Materials designated in the Borough of
Brielle Recycling Ordinance No. 72129, shall be separated from other
solid waste by the generator and a storage area for recyclable material
shall be provided as follows:
1. For each subdivision application for single family units, the
applicant shall provide a storage area of at least 12 square feet
within each dwelling unit to accommodate a four week
accumulation of mandated recyclables (including but not limited to:
newspaper, glass bottles, aluminum cans, tin and bi-metal cans).
The storage area may be located in the laundry room, garage,
basement or kitchen.
2. For each subdivision application for multi-family units, the
applicant shall provide a storage area of at least three square feet
within each dwelling unit to accommodate a one week
accumulation of mandated recyclables (including but not limited to:
newspaper, glass bottles, aluminum cans, tin and bi-metal cans).
The storage area may be located in the laundry room, garage, or
kitchen. Unless recyclables are collected on a weekly basis from
each dwelling unit, one or more common storage areas must be
provided at convenient locations within the development.
29.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 721 is codified in Chapter 16 as Section 16-3.
§ 24-8.7 GENERAL § 24-8.8
1:517
§ 24-8.8. Off-Tract Improvements. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972
Code § 75-8]
a. General. Prior to the granting of final approval the subdivider shall have
installed or made cash payments toward the ultimate installation of offtract
improvements and in accordance with the standards and
conditions governing on-tract improvements. Those off-tract
improvements which are made necessary by construction or
improvements within the subdivision or development, shall be required
in accordance with this Article. Off-tract improvements herein shall
include, but not be limited to, installation of new improvements and
extension and modifications of the existing improvements.
b. Estimate of cost and benefits. If an off-tract improvement is required,
the Municipal Agency shall, with the aid of the Municipal Engineer and
such other persons as have pertinent information or expertise,
estimate:
1. The cost of the improvement; and
2. The amount by which all properties to be serviced thereby
including the subdivider's property, will be specially benefited
therefrom.
c. Manner of construction. When the estimates are received the Municipal
Council shall then decide whether the off-tract improvement is to be
constructed:
1. By the Municipality as a general improvement; or
2. By the Municipality as a local improvement; or
3. At a later date and monies to be held in escrow.
d. Amount of contribution. When the amount of contribution has been
determined, the subdivider may be required to provide, as a condition
for final approval of the subdivision, a cash deposit to the Municipality
of one of the following amounts:
1. If the improvement is to be constructed by the Municipality as a
general improvement, an amount equal to the difference between
the estimated cost of the improvement and the estimated total
amount, if less, by which all properties to be serviced thereby
including the subdivision property, will be specially benefited by
the off-tract improvement.
2. If the improvement is to be constructed by the Municipality as a
local improvement, then in addition to the amount referred to in
(1), the estimated amount by which the subdivision will be specially
benefited by the off-tract improvement; or
§ 24-8.8 BRIELLE CODE § 24-8.8
1:518
3. If the improvement is to be constructed by the subdivider, an
amount equal to the estimated cost of the off-tract improvement,
less an offset for benefits to properties other than the subdivision.
e. Allocation of costs. The allocation of costs shall be determined in
accordance with the following:
1. The Municipal Agency may consider the total cost of the off-tract
improvements, the benefits conferred upon the subdivision, the
needs created by the subdivision, population and land use
projections for the general areas of the subdivision and other areas
to be served by the off-tract improvements, the estimated times of
construction of off-tract improvements, and the condition and
periods of usefulness. The Municipal Agency may further consider
the criteria set forth below.
(a) Road, curb and sidewalk improvements may be based upon the
anticipated increase of traffic counts, existing and projected
traffic patterns, quality of roads and sidewalks in the area, and
other factors related to the need created by the subdivision
and anticipated benefit thereto.
(b) Drainage facilities may be based upon the percentage
relationship between the subdivision acreage and the acreage
of the total drainage basins involved.
(c) Sewerage facilities may be based upon the proportion that the
subdivision's total anticipated volume of sewage effluent bears
to the existing capacity of existing and projected sewage
disposal facilities, including but not limited to lines and other
appurtenances leading to and servicing the subdivision. The
Municipal Agency may also consider types of effluent and
particular problems requiring special equipment or added
costs for treatment.
(d) Water supply and distribution facilities may be based upon the
added facilities required by the total anticipated water use
requirements of the subdivision.
f. Payment of allocated cost.
1. The estimated cost of the off-tract improvement allocated to the
subdivider shall be paid by the subdivider, if deposited in cash, to
the Municipal Clerk, who shall ensure that it only be used for the
off-tract improvements for which they are deposited or
improvements serving the same or similar purpose.
2. If the subdivider shall deem that any of the amounts so estimated
by the Municipal Agency are unreasonable, it may challenge them
and seek to have them revoked in appropriate proceedings brought
to compel subdivision approval.
§ 24-8.8 GENERAL § 24-8.8
1:519
3. If the subdivider and the Municipality cannot agree with respect to
the subdivider's appropriate share of the actual cost of the off-tract
improvement and the off-tract improvement is constructed as a
local improvement, the dispute shall be decided in an appropriate
judicial proceeding or proceedings.
g. Assessment of properties. Upon receipt from the subdivider of its
allocated share of the costs of the off-tract improvements, the
Municipality may adopt a local improvement assessment ordinance for
the purpose of construction and installation of the off-tract
improvements based upon the actual cost thereof. Any portion of the
cost of the improvements not defrayed by a deposit by a subdivider may
be assessed against benefiting property owners by the Municipality.
Any assessments for benefits conferred made against the subdivider or
its successors in interest shall be first offset by a pro-rata share credit
of the allocated costs previously deposited with the Municipal Clerk
pertaining thereto.
h. Credit for work performed. In the event the subdivider, with the
Municipality's consent, decides to install and construct the off-tract
improvement, or any portion thereof, the certified cost shall be treated
as a credit against any assessment for that particular off-tract
improvement, or portion thereof, as if the subdivider had deposited its
apportioned cost with the Municipal Clerk.
i. Design. Should the subdivider and the Municipality enter into a
contract for the construction and erection of the off-tract improvements
to be done by the subdivider, the subdivider shall observe all
requirements and principles of the land subdivision and other
ordinances, in the design of such improvements.
§ 24-8.8 BRIELLE CODE § 24-8.8
1:520
ARTICLE IX
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 24-9. DESIGN STANDARDS REQUIRED.
§ 24-9.1. General. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-9]
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof:
§ 24-9.2. Streets. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-9]
a. The subdivision shall conform to the Master Plan and Zoning, Chapter
21 and shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon.
The street widths, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an officially adopted Master Plan shall be
adhered to in the approval of subdivision plats.
a. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan shall be such
as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets.
b. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through or heavy
traffic.
c. Marginal access. In subdivisions that abut arterial streets and such
other streets or portions of streets as the Municipal Agency may
designate on the Master Plan, the Agency may require provision for
marginal access roads, reverse frontage lots with buffer strips for
planting or other design methods for the purpose of separating through
and local traffic.
d. Right-of-way width. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot
line to lot line and shall not be less than 50 feet and shall be increased if
a greater width is shown on the Master Plan.
e. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed in the Governing Body under conditions
approved by the Municipal Agency.
f. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to width as shown on the Master Plan or the street width requirements
of this Ordinance shall dedicate additional width along either one or
both sides of said road.
If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the required extra width
shall be conveyed to the municipality.
g. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 8%. Grades on
other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a minimum
grade of less than 1%.
§ 24-9 GENERAL § 24-9.2
1:521
§ 24-9.3. Blocks. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-9]
§ 24-9.4. Lots. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583; 1972 Code § 75-9]
h. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible, and
in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curb line and have a radius of not less than 25
feet.
i. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
j. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on all streets.
k. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
l. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves and shall
provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
m. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 600 feet in length, and shall have a
turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than 50 feet to the rightof-
way line. The tangent whenever possible should be to the right side
the street. If a dead end street is of temporary nature, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension
of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties.
n. All street names shall be approved by the Municipal Agency. No street
shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate in name or
sound as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
o. Where a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building
lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future
streets and logical subdivisions.
p. Street design and location shall include provisions for street access to
adjoining property as required by the Municipal Agency.
a. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning,
Chapter 21 and to provide for convenient access, circulation control
and safety of street traffic.
b. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
a. Dimensions. Lot dimensions and area shall be not less than the
requirements of the Zoning, Chapter 21.
§ 24-9.2 BRIELLE CODE § 24-9.4
1:522
§ 24-9.5. Public Use and Service Areas. [Ord. #231; Ord. #583;
1972 Code 75-9]
§ 24-10. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT.
§ 24-10.1. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6; Ord. #975,
§ 24-9.6]
b. Side Lines. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles
to straight streets and radial to curved streets, including cul-de-sacs.
c. Frontage. Each lot must front upon a dedicated street.
d. Setbacks. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of
existing streets, lots shall begin at such extra width line and all
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
e. Suitability. All lots shall be suitable for their intended uses and, where
necessary, increased in size to compensate for conditions, such as
percolation rates, steep slopes, rock formations and flood conditions.
Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use, the Municipal Agency may withhold approval of such lots.
a. Easements. Easements along rear property lines or elsewhere for utility
installation may be required. Such easements shall be at least 25 feet
wide and located in consultation with the authorities or Municipal
Departments concerned.
b. Drainage Easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage way, channel or street, there shall be provided a
storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourse and such further width
or construction or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.
c. Natural Features. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and
views shall be preserved whenever possible in designing any
subdivision containing such features.
a. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural Best Management Practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
§ 24-9.4 GENERAL § 24-10.1
1:523
§ 24-10.2. Definitions. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.1; Ord. 975, § 24-9.6.1]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this section its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Shall mean those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — Shall mean the geographic depiction of the
boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and
CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — Shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in subsection 24-10.2.
c. Applicability.
1. This section shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Brielle.
d. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this section are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This section
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 24-10.1 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.2
1:524
CORE — Shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Shall mean an agency designated by the
Monmouth County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county
review agency may either be:
A County planning agency; or a County water resource association created
under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Shall mean a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
lands, development shall mean: any activity that requires a State permit;
any activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — Shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Shall mean an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using
§ 24-10.2 GENERAL § 24-10.2
1:525
the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered with
a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any "development" that provides
for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Borough of Brielle.
NODE — Shall mean an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities, which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — Shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, the Borough of Brielle, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the
State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both
hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — Shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Shall mean the lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
§ 24-10.2 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.2
1:526
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Shall mean an area delineated on the State
Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is
intended to be the focus for much of the State's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Shall mean the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Shall mean water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — Shall mean the time it takes for runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the
point of interest within a watershed.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Shall mean the sum of dissolved and
undissolved solids and particulate matter of a buoyancy and/or specific
gravity that prohibits their settling in runoff.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— Shall mean a neighborhood given priority access to State resources
through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — Shall mean a zone designated by the
New Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Shall mean previously developed
portions of areas:
§ 24-10.2 GENERAL § 24-10.2
1:527
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — Shall mean an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 24-10.3. General Standards. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.2; Ord. #975,
§ 24-9.6.2]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(a)
(b) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(c) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(d)
a. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in subsection 24-10.4. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design.
If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this section apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
3. For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21, the RSIS shall
apply in addition to this subsection except to the extent the RSIS
are superseded by this subsection or alternative standards
applicable under a regional stormwater management plan or Water
Quality Management Plan adopted in accordance with the rules of
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 24-10.2 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.4
1:528
§ 24-10.4. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major
Development. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.3; Ord. #975, § 24-9.6.3]
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with subsection 24-10.3.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150.
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of subsection 24-10.4f and g.
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of subsection 24-10.4f and g may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of subsection 24-10.4f and g to the
maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of subsection 24-10.4f and g existing structures currently in use,
such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under subsection 24-10.4d,3 above
within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that
would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
§ 24-10.4 GENERAL § 24-10.4
1:529
requirements of subsection 24-10.4f and g, that were not
achievable on site.
e. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsection
24-10.4f and g, shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at subsection
24-10.4e into the design. The applicant shall identify the
nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project.
If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in subsection
24-10.4e,2 below into the design of a particular project, the
applicant shall identify the strategy considered and provide a basis
for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post-construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
§ 24-10.4 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.4
1:530
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy subsection 24-10.4e,3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under subsection 24-10.4e,2(i)(2)
above shall comply with the following standard to control passage
of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" shall
mean sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see subsection
24-10.4e,3(c) below:
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is
no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
§ 24-10.4 GENERAL § 24-10.4
1:531
(c) This standard shall not apply under the following conditions or
situations:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection 24-10.4g,1 are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in subsection 24-10.4g,1;
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in subsection 24-10.4f
and g shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the Monmouth County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 24-10.4f and g, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
f. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
§ 24-10.4 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.4
1:532
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at subsection 24-10.4, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post-construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within an urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to paragraph (3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" shall mean any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
§ 24-10.4 GENERAL § 24-10.4
1:533
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; byproducts; industrial machinery and
fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents that are
related to process, manufacturing, or other industrial
activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at subsection 24-10.4, complete
one of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts of existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinances in the drainage area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
100-year storm events are 50, 75 and 80%, respectively, of
the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The percentages
apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff that
is attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed. The
percentages shall not be applied to post-construction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the
§ 24-10.4 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.4
1:534
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2), and (3)
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at subsection 24-10.2 shall be
submitted to the Freehold Soil Conservation District for review and
approval in accordance with the requirements of this section and
any applicable Freehold Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of
this section, "agricultural development" shall mean land uses
normally associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock
for sale. Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
g. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
§ 24-10.4 GENERAL § 24-10.4
1:535
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 24-10.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual
and other sources of technical guidance are listed in subsection
24-10.7. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of
any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal
rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
§ 24-10.4 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.4
1:536
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B — (AxB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
50-90
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the sub areas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in subsection 24-10.4f and g.
§ 24-10.4 GENERAL § 24-10.4
1:537
6. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
7. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas have been established for the protection of water
quality, aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply
significance, and exceptional fisheries significance of those
established Category One waters. These areas shall be designated
and protected as follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph (1) above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this paragraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow
through the special water resource protection area and shall
comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the
"Standards For Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 24-10.4 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.4
1:538
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to subsection 24-10.4g,7 has been approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
paragraph g,7 shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in subsection 24-10.4g,7(a)(1)
above. In no case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow
the reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to
less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway
subject to this subsection.
§ 24-10.4 GENERAL § 24-10.4
1:539
§ 24-10.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater
Recharge. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.4; Ord. #975, § 24-9.6.4]
(e) This subsection does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at subsection 24-10.5a,1(a) and the
Rational and Modified Rational Methods at subsection
24-10.5a,1(b). A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land
cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of
the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition
has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years
without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than
one land cover has existed on the site during the five years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In
addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good
hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use
type is cultivation).
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
§ 24-10.4 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.5
1:540
§ 24-10.6. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.5; Ord. #975, § 24-9.6.5]
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Groundwater Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
c. Design of stormwater conduit systems shall utilize the Sandy Hook,
twenty-five-year rainfall.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
§ 24-10.5 GENERAL § 24-10.6
1:541
§ 24-10.7. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.6;
Ord. #975, § 24-9.6.6]
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of subsection 24-10.8b.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
subsection 24-10.8.
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by
subsection 24-10.4 of this section.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of subsection 24-10.4 of this section, provided the New Jersey
Corporation verifies the pollutant removal rates for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at paragraphs 1 and 2 below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
§ 24-10.6 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.7
1:542
§ 24-10.8. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.7; Ord. #975, § 24-9.6.7]
3. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
the Freehold Soil Conservation District located at 4000 Kozloski
Road, P.O. Box 5033, Freehold, New Jersey, 07728, Phone:
732-683-8500, Fax: 732-683-9140, Email: info@freeholdscd.org.
The telephone number of each Soil Conservation District may be
obtained from the State Soil Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330,
Trenton, New Jersey, 08625; (609) 292-5540.
4. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service; phone: 732-932-9306.
a. This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
b. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
§ 24-10.7 GENERAL § 24-10.8
1:543
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
3. For purposes of this paragraph, escape provisions shall mean the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
subsection 24-10.8c. a free-standing outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See subsection 24-10.8d for an illustration of safety
ledges in a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
c. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency that the variance or exemption
will not constitute a threat to public safety.
d. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
§ 24-10.8 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.8
1:544
§ 24-10.9. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.8; Ord. #975, § 24-9.6.8]
a. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this section, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at subsection 24-10.9c as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
3. The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
subsection 24-10.9c of this section.
b. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this section.
c. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
§ 24-10.8 GENERAL § 24-10.9
1:545
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams, waterways that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with their
appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious
or vegetative surfaces, existing manmade structures, roads,
bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and
manmade features not otherwise shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and manmade features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of areas of
impervious surface including, but not limited to existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions shall also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of subsection
24-10.3 through sections subsection 24-10.6 are being met. The
focus of this plan shall be to describe how the site is being
developed to meet the objective of controlling groundwater
recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at
the source by land management and source controls whenever
possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
§ 24-10.9 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.9
1:546
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in subsection 24-10.4.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of subsection 24-10.4.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in subsection 24-10.9c,1 through c,6 of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
9. Site Plan Checklist. Major development applications shall require
the applicant shall complete and submit a copy of the Site
Conditions Checklist, which can be found immediately following
this subsection.
Brielle Borough - Site Plan Checklist
In addition to the prescribed information in subsection 24-10.9
Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan, Part C
- Checklist Requirements, the following elements should be
considered and presented as appropriate and in combinations
sufficient to adequately indicate the existing site conditions and
that of the surrounding environs:
§ 24-10.9 GENERAL § 24-10.9
1:547
Yes No
Not
Applicable
Hydrology
Perennial or intermittent streams as shown on the USGS 7.5
Minute Quadrangle Maps and as indicated in the Soil Survey
of Monmouth County, New Jersey
Special water resource protection areas along all waters
designated Category 1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and perennial/
intermittent streams that drain into/upstream of the
Category 1 waters as shown on the USGS Quad Maps Soil
Survey
Wetlands, NJDEP Linear Non-Tidal Wetlands, Marshlands
and NJDEP Letter of Interpretation findings FEMA Q3 Flood
Data 100-Year-Floodplains and Floodways
Boundaries and Buffers
Appropriate buffers to streams, rivers, wetlands,
marshlands, ponds, lakes and other water bodies as specified
in pertinent "ordinances, rules, regulations, statutes or other
provisions of law imposed by local, County, State or Federal
agencies"
Existing and proposed bearing and distances of property
lines
Existing and proposed conservation, maintenance,
construction, reconstruction, sight, utility, drainage and
right-of-way easements and dedications
Vegetation and Landscaping
Pervious and vegetated surfaces, i.e. woodlands, grasslands
and other significant natural features
Native and invasive stands of vegetation
Vegetated habitat for Threatened and Endangered Species
Geology and Soils
Steep slopes (10% or greater)
Colloidal soils
Highly erodible soils, with an erodibility factor (K) of 0.40 or
greater
Seasonal high water table
Soils subject to dynamic compaction and compacted soil
Shrink swell potential
Deeply fractured bedrock
Hardpans and plough pans
§ 24-10.9 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.9
1:548
§ 24-10.10. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.9; Ord.
#975, § 24-9.6.9]
Yes No
Not
Applicable
Existing Manmade Structures and Activities
Existing buildings and significant permanent manmade
features
Roads by classification, parking areas and other impervious
surfaces
Bridges and culverts
Utilities, sub-surface and above ground mining/quarry
operations and blasting areas
Acid or other hazardous runoff
Areas of fill and buried debris
Wellheads and associated groundwater withdrawals
Pipes, discharges and BMPs of existing stormwater utilities
Groundwater mounding
Septic systems and wells of adjacent lots
Leaking sanitary lines
Previous land use (agricultural, industrial, commercial)
a. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in subsection 24- 10.10c shall comply
with the requirements of subsection 24-10.10b and c.
b. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
§ 24-10.9 GENERAL § 24-10.10
1:549
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the municipality in a residential development or project.
Responsibility for facilities located in commercial or development
sites shall be the owner of the site. A named individual shall be
responsible for the safety and maintenance of said facility. The
posting of a two-year maintenance guarantee in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall be required for all facilities not dedicated
to the municipality or other public agency.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 24-10.10b,2 above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on subsection
24-10.10b,7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the
maintenance plan must be undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 24-10.10b,2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 24-10.10b,2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of
the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and
the deed as needed, and submit such changes for approval by the
Borough Engineer.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 24-10.10b,2 above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by subsection 24-10.10b, 6
and 7 within 10 days of such a request.
9. The requirements of subsection 24-10.10b, 3 and 4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
§ 24-10.10 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.10
1:550
§ 24-10.11. Penalties. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.10; Ord. #975,
§ 24-9.6.10]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure, or land in violation of this section shall be
subject to the following penalties:
Failure to comply with any provisions of this section shall be considered
a violation of the Coded Ordinances of Brielle Borough and shall be
punishable by a fine of $1,000 or 90 days in jail, or both. Each day of
such violations continuance shall be considered as a separate offense and
shall be separately punishable. These penalties shall not be in the exclusive
remedy available, and nothing in this section shall prevent an applicant
from obtaining injunctive relief.
§ 24-10.12. Effective Date. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.11; Ord. #975,
§ 24-9.6.11]
This section shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the County
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the section by the County
review agency if the County review agency should fail to act.
§ 24-10.13. Severability. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.12; Ord. #975,
§ 24-9.6.12]
If the provisions of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this
section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section,
subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this section.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
c. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 24-10.10 GENERAL § 24-10.14
1:551
§ 24-10.14. Fees. [Ord. #969, § 24-9.6.13; Ord. #975, § 24-9.6.13]
All subdivision and site plan review fees associated with this section shall
be provided by the applicant as adopted by the Borough of Brielle within
Section 20-6.7, Fees, of this Code.
§ 24-10.15. Refuse Containers/Dumpsters. [Ord. No. 1009]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to require dumpsters and
other refuse containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to
be covered at all times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or
otherwise discharge of liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the
containers to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated
by the Borough of Brielle and/or the waters of the State so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by
Borough of Brielle or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters,
trash cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries,
all springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 24-10.14 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.15
1:552
§ 24-10.16. Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting. [Ord. #1009]
c. Prohibited Conduct. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased,
or operated, a refuse container or dumpster must ensure that such
container or dumpster is covered at all times and shall prevent refuse
from spilling out or overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak
or otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Brielle.
d. Exceptions to Prohibition.
1. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
2. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
3. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
4. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
associated with industrial activity under a valid NJPDES permit.
5. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to require the retrofitting of
existing storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving,
repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on
private property, to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such
as plastic bottles, cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Brielle so
as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches,
manmade channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by
Borough of Brielle or other public body, and is designed and used for
collecting and conveying stormwater.
§ 24-10.15 GENERAL § 24-10.16
1:553
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used
to collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate
inlet, curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries,
all springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
c. Prohibited Conduct. No person in control of private property (except a
residential lot with one single-family house) shall authorize the
repaving, repairing (excluding the repair of individual potholes),
resurfacing (including top coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion
or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface
that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that
property unless the storm drain inlet either:
1. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
2. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in paragraph d
below prior to the completion of the project.
d. Design Standard. Storm drain inlets identified in paragraph c above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard see paragraph d,3 below.
1. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion)
of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch
grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
§ 24-10.16 BRIELLE CODE § 24-10.16
1:554
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
2. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than seven square inches, or be no greater than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
3. This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
(b) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch
basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery
of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
(1) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
(2) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars; or
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
e. Enforcement. This subsection and subsection 24-10.15 shall be
enforced by the Police Department, Engineer, Code Enforcement
Officer, and/or Superintendent of Public Works of the Borough of
Brielle.
f. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions
of this subsection and subsection 24-10.15 shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed $1,250 for each storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to
meet the design standard.
§ 24-10.16 GENERAL § 24-10.16
1:555
Chapter 25
COMMERCIAL AND PERSONAL EARTH TERMINAL
ANTENNAS
§ 25-1. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. #718, § 1]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Earth Terminal
Antenna Ordinance of the Borough".
§ 25-2. PURPOSE. [Ord. #718, § 2]
This Chapter is enacted by the Governing Body to provide rules and
regulations, standards and procedures for the construction, placement and
operation of earth terminal antennas within the Borough, the regulation
of which is necessary and essential to promote the public health, safety
and welfare of the community to promote a desirable visual environment
and good civic design and arrangements; to secure safety to the public
from technological man-made electronic devices; to ensure the orderly
installation of such equipment; and to provide sufficient space in
appropriate locations for such residential and commercial use of antennas
according to recognized environmental safety requirements to meet the
needs of all New Jersey citizens.
§ 25-3. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #718, § 3]
As used in this Chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth herein as follows:
APPLICANT — Shall mean and be defined as the one filing the application.
The person filing such application shall be responsible for all facets of
compliance with the Chapter.
COMMERCIAL EARTH TERMINAL — Shall mean an earth terminal,
including all accessory buildings for housing only such equipment as is
necessary for the direct transmission or reception or electromagnetic
energy signals through the earth transmission of electromagnetic energy
from a satellite and employed for commercial use.
EARTH TERMINAL ANTENNA OR EARTH TERMINAL — Shall mean any
apparatus or device, commonly known as an earth terminal antenna, earth
terminal, earth station, satellite communications antenna, satellite antenna,
microwave dish antenna, or dish antenna, and including as part of such
apparatus or device the main reflector, subreflector, feed, amplifier and
support structure, which is designed for the purpose of transmitting and/
or receiving microwave, television, radio, satellite or other electromagnetic
energy signals into or from space, but does not include conventional
television, radio and amateur radio antennas.
HEIGHT — Shall mean the vertical distance measured from the ground level
of the area on which the earth terminal is located and up to and including
the highest point of the earth terminal, when extended to its fullest height.
§ 24-10.16 BRIELLE CODE § 25-3
1:556
MAIN REFLECTOR — Shall mean that part of an earth terminal, commonly
known as a dish, which, absent any protective covering, is dish shaped,
parabolic, spherical or conical in configuration and designed for the
reception and/or transmission of electromagnetic energy.
PERSONAL EARTH TERMINAL — Shall mean an earth terminal intended
solely for the reception of radio and/or television signals from a satellite
being employed for private noncommercial use only.
§ 25-4. COMMERCIAL EARTH TERMINALS.
§ 25-4.1. Permitted Districts. [Ord. #718, § 4]
Commercial earth terminals shall be permitted in Commercial Zones only,
as an accessory use subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 25-4.2. Application. [Ord. #718, § 4]
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct and operate a
commercial earth terminal shall, prior to such construction and operation,
submit an application to the Planning Board which shall consist of the
following:
a. A site plan showing.
1. The proposed commercial earth terminal, protective fencing, and
existing and proposed plantings or other barriers to provide
protection and screening;
2. The height of the proposed commercial earth terminal and
protective fencing and the diameter of the main reflector;
3. The name and address of the applicant and owner of the property
on which the commercial earth terminal is to be located;
4. The tax lot and block numbers and the property lines of the
property as disclosed on the Borough Tax Map;
5. All existing buildings and structures and all accessory buildings
and structures on the property;
6. The tax lot and block numbers and the property lines of all
properties as disclosed on the Borough Tax Map within 200 feet
from the property; and
7. Such other information as is required by the Site Plan Ordinance of
the Borough of Brielle.
b. A statement certified by the applicant which sets forth the range of
azimuth and elevation angles within which the proposed commercial
earth terminal may be operated and the maintenance program which
will be observed by the applicant with respect to the proposed
§ 25-3 GENERAL § 25-4.2
1:557
§ 25-4.3. Design Standards. [Ord. #718, § 4]
All commercial earth terminals shall fully comply with the following design
standards:
commercial earth terminal, and which states that the proposed
commercial earth terminal fully complies with all applicable Federal
and State statutes, regulations and requirements, and has attached
thereto copies of any license or approval for the construction,
placement or operation of the proposed commercial earth terminal
required by any Federal or State agency having jurisdiction. If the earth
station is not in operation for 14 consecutive days the applicant shall
conduct the mandatory requirements and file the statement.
c. A statement certified by a qualified engineer which sets forth the
maximum anticipated effective radiated power and the antenna pattern
of the proposed commercial earth terminal, which contains a structural
engineering analysis of the proposed commercial earth terminal, and
which states that the proposed commercial earth terminal fully
complies with the Design Standards applicable to commercial earth
terminals as set forth in this Chapter;
d. A copy of the applicable portion of the Borough Tax Map on which are
identified all buildings within the Borough that are within 15° in all
directions of the centerline of the main beam of the antenna pattern of
any proposed commercial earth terminal intended for the transmission
of electromagnetic energy for all spatial orientations in which the earth
terminal may be operated, or a statement that no buildings are within
15° of the centerline of such beam, either of which buildings which are
so identified shall be notified in writing by personal service of certified
mail of the proposed installation as part of the requirements for the
Public Hearing on the application, proof of which shall be filed with the
Planning Board; and
e. A statement from the Construction Official of the Borough that the
proposed commercial earth terminal complies with all applicable
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough.
a. A commercial earth terminal shall only be located in a rear or side yard,
shall not be closer to any property line than the height of the
commercial earth terminal, and shall not be located in a buffer area;
b. A commercial earth terminal shall not violate the rear or side yard setback
requirements applicable to the principal building within the
particular district as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance;
c. The commercial earth terminal support shall be erected only on the
ground on a secure foundation;
d. The height of a commercial earth terminal shall not exceed 40 feet;
§ 25-4.2 BRIELLE CODE § 25-4.3
1:558
e. The main reflector of a commercial earth terminal shall not exceed a
diameter of 12 meters;
f. All wiring or connecting cables between the commercial earth terminal
and the principal building on the property shall be buried underground;
g. Any accessory building of the commercial earth terminal used for
housing equipment necessary for the operation of the commercial earth
terminal shall not be greater than one story, shall not exceed a building
height of 12 feet and shall not exceed 150 square feet in area;
h. A commercial earth terminal shall be surrounded by a non-climbable
fence or other suitable barrier of a minimum height of six feet designed
to prevent access to the earth terminal and may be equipped with
appropriate lighting and an alarm system which shall not be offensive to
surrounding properties;
i. A commercial earth terminal shall be so located and shall be effectively
screened from view by natural plants, trees or other suitable sight
barrier, which shall be maintained in good condition, in order to
minimize the noise and visibility of the commercial earth terminal from
any adjacent property and public street, as approved by the Planning
Board;
j. Only one earth terminal shall be permitted on the applicant's property;
k. A commercial earth terminal shall be accessory to the principal building
and incidental to the use of the principal building, and the applicant
shall be the principal user of the commercial earth terminal.
l. The reception or transmission of electrical signals to or from a
commercial earth terminal to or from an offsite ground location shall
only be through underground or aerial wire, cable or fibre optic
facilities. Terrestrial microwave communication directly between earth
terminals or via passive reflectors, is prohibited; and
m. The construction and operation of a commercial earth terminal shall
fully comply with all applicable Federal and State statutes, regulations
and requirements, including those pertaining to safety levels of radio
frequency electromagnetic fields with respect to human exposure. In
the absence of Federal or State regulation pertaining to safety levels of
radio frequency electromagnetic fields with respect to non-occupational
human exposure, the levels of electromagnetic energy emitted by the
commercial earth terminal as measured at the top of the protective
fence surrounding the earth terminal and at any point accessible to the
public shall be no more than one-tenth of the applicable safety levels as
set forth in the American National Standard Institute "Safety Levels
with Respect to Human Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic
Fields, 300 kHz to 100 GHz", ANSI C95.1-1982.
§ 25-4.3 GENERAL § 25-4.4
1:559
§ 25-4.4. Testing Requirements. [Ord. #718, § 4A]
An applicant receiving final approval for the construction, placement and
operation of a commercial earth terminal which transmits electromagnetic
energy shall not operate it, except for testing purposes, until the applicant
conducts actual field measurements of the levels of electromagnetic energy
emitted by the commercial earth terminal at the points specified below and
files a statement with the Planning Board and Construction Official of the
Borough certifying that the measured levels do not exceed the safety levels
specified in subsection 25-4.3m.
All such measurements shall be made with the commercial earth terminal
operating at the maximum Federal Communication Commission approved
power level or shall be scaled to correspond to the maximum Federal
Communication Commission approved power level. These measurements
shall be made with a measuring device having a sensitivity adequate to
measure levels of electromagnetic energy, at the frequency of operation,
equal to one-hundredth of the applicable safety levels set forth in ANSI
C95.1-1982, and shall be taken in at least the following locations:
§ 25-4.5. Report Filing Requirements. [Ord. #718, § 4B]
In addition, an applicant receiving final approval for the installation and
maintenance of an earth terminal shall thereafter, on a continuing and
timely basis, file with the Construction Official of the Borough, within 10
a. The top of the protective fence surrounding the commercial earth
terminal at a point directly under the centerline of the main beam of the
antenna pattern of the commercial earth terminal and the top of this
fence at points every 5° from the centerline of the beam up to 45° and
then at points every 15° up to 90° in either direction;
b. The property line of the applicant's property at a point directly beneath
the centerline of such beam;
c. The occupied space nearest the centerline of such beam of any building
identified as being within 15° of the centerline of such beam, if
requested by the property owner; and
d. The roof peak or highest accessible point of all buildings on the
applicant's property at a point closest to the centerline of such beam.
If the direction of the main reflector of such commercial earth terminal
is subsequently changed or the Federal Communication Commission
approved power level is increased, the applicant shall again conduct
such actual field measurements and file a statement with the Planning
Board and Construction Official of the Borough certifying that the
measured levels do not exceed the safety levels specified in subsection
25-4.3m and that the commercial earth terminal is in compliance with
all applicable Federal and State statutes, regulations and requirements,
within 14 days of such change of direction or increase in approved
power level.
§ 25-4.4 BRIELLE CODE § 25-4.5
1:560
days of their submission, copies of such periodic government report as are
required to be filed with Federal and State Agencies.
§ 25-5. PERSONAL EARTH TERMINALS.
§ 25-5.1. Permitted Districts. [Ord. #718, § 5-1]
Personal earth terminals shall be permitted in all Residential Zones as
an accessory use subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
§ 25-5.2. Application. [Ord. #718, § 5-2]
Any person desiring to construct and operate a personal earth terminal
shall, prior to such construction and operation, submit an application to the
Planning Board which shall consist of the following:
a. A site plan showing:
1. The proposed personal earth terminal, existing and proposed
plantings and fencing or other barriers to provide protection and
screening;
2. The height of the proposed personal earth terminal and the
diameter of the main reflector;
3. The name and address of the applicant and owner of the property
on which the personal earth terminal is to be located;
4. The tax lot and block numbers and the property lines of the
property as disclosed on the Borough Tax Map;
5. All existing buildings and structures and all accessory buildings
and structures on the property;
6. The tax lot and block numbers and the property lines of all
properties as disclosed on the Borough Tax Map within 200 feet
from the property; and
7. Such other information as is required by the Site Plan Ordinance of
the Borough, unless waived by the Planning Board.
b. A statement certified by the applicant that the proposed personal dish
antenna fully complied with the Design Standards applicable to
personal earth terminals as set forth in this Chapter, that the proposed
personal earth terminal fully complies with all applicable Federal and
State statutes, regulations and requirements, and which has attached
thereto copies of any license or approval for the construction,
placement or operation of the proposed personal earth terminal
required by any Federal or State agency having jurisdiction;
c. A statement by the Construction Official of the Borough that the
proposed personal earth terminal complies with all applicable
§ 25-4.5 GENERAL § 25-5.2
1:561
§ 25-5.3. Design Standards. [Ord. #718, § 5-3]
All personal earth terminals shall fully comply with the following standards:
§ 25-6. FEES. [Ord. #718, § 6]
In addition to any fees required of the applicant for site plan review, the
applicant shall deposit the sum of $100 with the Borough Clerk to cover
the cost of review services provided by the Construction Official, Borough
Engineer, Borough Attorney, Planning Board Attorney or other borough
personnel. Any unused portion of the deposit shall be returned to the
applicant. If the cost of review services exceeds the amount of deposit,
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Brielle. The
applicant should be defined as the one filing the application. The person
filing such application shall be responsible for all facts of compliance
with the Chapter. If the earth station is not in operation for 14
consecutive days the applicant shall conduct the mandatory
requirements and file the statement.
a. A personal earth terminal shall only be located in a rear yard, shall not
be closer to any property line than the height of the antenna, and may
not be located in a buffer area;
b. The personal earth terminal shall not violate the yard set-back
requirements applicable to accessory structures within the particular
district as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
c. A personal earth terminal shall be erected only on the ground in a
secure fashion;
d. The height of a personal earth terminal shall not exceed eight feet;
e. The main reflector of a personal earth terminal shall not exceed a
diameter of seven feet;
f. All wiring or connecting cables between the personal earth terminal
and the principal building shall be buried underground;
g. A personal earth terminal shall be so located and shall be effectively
screened from view by natural plants, trees or other suitable sight
barrier, which shall be maintained in good condition, in order to
minimize the noise and visibility of the personal earth terminal from any
adjacent property and or public street, as approved by the Planning
Board;
h. Only one earth terminal shall be permitted on the applicant's property;
and
i. A personal earth terminal shall only be used by residents of the
principal building on the applicant's property. Any connection, by cable
or otherwise, to adjacent properties shall constitute a violation of yard
and set-back requirements.
§ 25-5.2 BRIELLE CODE § 25-6
1:562
sufficient additional funds shall be deposited before any building permit
shall be issued.
§ 25-7. PENALTIES. [Ord. #718, § 7]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter
shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by
imprisonment in the County jail for a term not exceeding 30 days or both,
for each offense. Each day that a violation occurs or is committed shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 25-8. APPROVAL. [Ord. #718, § 8]
The Planning Board shall grant final approval on applications for the
construction and operation of commercial or personal earth terminals upon
a finding that the proposed installation fully conforms to all requirements
set forth in this chapter as well as other applicable provisions of the Zoning
Chapter of the Borough.
§ 25-9. MODIFICATION. [Ord. #718, § 9]
An applicant receiving final approval for the construction, placement and
operation of an earth terminal shall not subsequently modify or alter the
structure of the earth terminal, except to change the direction of its main
reflector, without the approval of the Planning Board pursuant to an
application as set forth in this chapter.
§ 25-10. EXCEPTIONS. [Ord. #718, § 10]
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to earth terminals having
main reflectors not exceeding seven feet in diameter which are solely used
for public law enforcement and/or public safety purposes.
§ 25-11. ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. [Ord. #718, § 11]
The Construction Official of the Borough is hereby designated as the public
officer charged with the enforcement of the terms of this Chapter. All
complaints for alleged violation of any of the terms of this Chapter shall be
submitted in writing to the Construction Official.
Chapter 26
OFFICIAL MAP
§ 26-1. OFFICIAL MAP ESTABLISHED.
§ 25-6 GENERAL § 26-1.1
1:563
§ 26-1.1. Official Map Established; Where Filed. [Ord. #515; 1972
Code § 23-1]
There is hereby established as the Official Map of the Borough of Brielle, in
the County of Monmouth, pursuant to the Official Map and Building Permit
Act (1953) as amended, the map entitled "Official Map of Borough of Brielle,
Monmouth County, New Jersey, 1955", prepared by Claude W. Birdsall, as
revised December 1974 by Thomas W. Birdsall, Borough Engineer, which
map is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk where it is open to public
inspection.30
§ 26-1.2. Effect of Establishment. [Ord. #515; 1972 Code § 23-2]
From the date this section takes effect, the provisions of the Official Map
shall be controlling in all matters relating to or affected by the Official Map
and Building Permit Act (1953) hereinabove referred to.
§ 26-1.3. Legislative Purpose. [Ord. #515; 1972 Code § 23-3]
The establishment of the Official Map is hereby declared to be for the
purpose of conserving and promoting the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
Chapter 27
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 27-1. REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENDABLE ITEMS IN
CONNECTION WITH HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
§ 27-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #822, § I]
As used in this section:
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Shall mean any items used to extinguish any
fire or stop or contain any leak or spill involving any hazardous material
which cannot be replenished without cost after that particular fire, leak or
spill. These include but are not restricted to fire fighting foam, chemical
extinguishing agents, absorbent materials, sand, recovery drums, and
specialized protective equipment to include but not restricted to acid suits,
acid gloves, goggles, and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Shall mean any material solid, liquid or gas
listed as such under the National Fire Protection Association's "Guide of
Hazardous Materials" or the New Jersey Department of Transportation
"Guide Book".
VEHICLE — Shall mean any motorized equipment, registered or
unregistered, including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles,
trucks, tractor trailers, construction equipment and farm machinery.
30.Editor's Note: A copy of the Official Map is also included in this Chapter.
§ 26-1.1 BRIELLE CODE § 27-1.1
1:564
VESSEL — Shall mean any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to
hold or contain or carry or store any hazardous material.
§ 27-1.2. Purpose. [Ord. #822, § II]
This section provides for the reimbursement for or the replacement of the
specialized and sometimes non-reusable equipment required by State and
Federal regulations to be made available in the Borough in case of fire,
leakage or spillage involving any hazardous material. This section entitles
the Borough of Brielle to reimbursement for any expendable items used by
the Borough or any of its agencies in extinguishing any fire, stopping or
containing any leak or controlling any spill of hazardous materials.
§ 27-1.3. Parties Responsible for Reimbursement. [Ord. #822, § III]
Reimbursement to the Borough for any expendable items used, shall be
made by the following parties:
§ 27-1.4. Reimbursement for Services of Recovery Company, Towing
Company or Technical Assistance. [Ord. #822, § IV]
Any person or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill involving a
hazardous material must provide reimbursement for services rendered by
any recovery company, towing company or other technical assistance called
for by the Borough of Brielle or its agencies to handle such an incident.
§ 27-1.5. Period for Payment. [Ord. #822, § V]
a. The owner or operator of any vehicle responsible for any fire, leak or
spill of hazardous material.
b. The owner or person responsible for any vessel containing hazardous
material involved in any fire, leak or spill on public or private property
whether stationary or in transit, whether accidental or through
negligence.
c. The owner or person responsible for any property from which any leak
or spill of hazardous material emanates, whether accidental or through
negligence.
d. Any person responsible for any fire, leak or spill of hazardous material
on public or private property whether accidental or through negligence.
a. Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill of
hazardous materials shall reimburse the Borough of Brielle or its
agencies or the full price of any expendable items used to extinguish
such a fire, stop or contain such a leak or spill within a period of 30 days
after receipt of a bill for such items from the Borough of Brielle or its
agencies.
b. Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill of
hazardous materials shall reimburse the Borough of Brielle or its
§ 27-1.1 GENERAL § 27-1.5
1:565
§ 27-1.6. Penalties. [Ord. #822, § VI]
Any person, owner or company responsible for any fire, leak or spill of
hazardous materials who fails to reimburse the Borough of Brielle or its
agencies within the time set forth in this advance shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $500 per day or by imprisonment for a
period of not more than six months or both.
Board of Health
Chapter BH1
(RESERVED)
Chapter BH2
ANIMALS
§ BH2-1. PIT BULL DOGS.
§ BH2-1.1. Legislative Intent. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
This section is intended to utilize the authority and powers of the Borough
in order to secure for the citizens of this Borough the protection of their
health, safety and welfare. It is intended to be applicable to dogs which
are commonly referred to as "pit bulls" and which are defined in subsection
BH2-1.2. This section is designed to regulate these pit bull dogs and to
ensure responsible handling by their owners through registration,
confinement, and liability insurance. The unique history, nature and
characteristic of pit bull dogs have been determined to require the special
regulations and provisions contained within this section which the Board of
Health finds reasonable and necessary.
§ BH2-1.2. Definition of Pit Bull Dog. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
agencies for the full price of any services of recovery companies, towing
companies or technical assistance rendered through the
extinguishment of such a fire, stop or contain such a leak or spill within
a period 30 days after receipt of a bill for such services from the
Borough of Brielle or its agencies.
a. The term "pit bull dog" as used within this section shall refer to any dog
which exhibits those distinguishing characteristics which:
1. Substantially conform to the standards established by the
American Kennel Club for American Staffordshire Terriers or
Staffordshire Bull Terriers; or
2. Substantially conform to the standards established by the United
Kennel Club for American Pit Pull Terriers.
§ 27-1.5 BRIELLE CODE § BH2-1.2
1:566
§ BH2-1.3. Liability Insurance or Other Evidence of Financial
Responsibility Required to be Maintained by Owners of Pit Bull
Dogs. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
§ BH2-1.4. Confinement of Pit Bull Dogs. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
3. Have the appearance and characteristics of being predominantly of
the breeds of dogs known as Staffordshire Bull Terriers, American
Pit Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier.
a. In order to protect the public and to afford relief from the severe harm
and injury which is likely to result from a pit bull dog attack, every
owner of a pit bull dog shall at all times provide evidence of financial
responsibility and ability to respond in damages to and include the
amount of $300,000 for bodily injury to or death of any person or
persons or for damage to property owned by person which may result
from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such dog.
b. Proof of ability to respond in damages shall be given annually by filing
with the Health Officer a certificate of insurance from an insurance
company authorized to do business in the state stating that the owner is
and will be insured against liability to respond in such damages, or by
posting with the Board of Health a surety bond conditioned upon the
payment of such damages during the period of such registration or
other equivalent evidence of financial responsibility such as a personal
bond secured by a mortgage in real property or security interest in
personal property.
c. The liability insurance, referenced in paragraph a of this section, which
may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision naming the Borough of Brielle as an additional insured for the
sole purpose of being notified by the insurance companies of any
cancellation, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy.
a. Because of the pit bull dog's inbred propensity to attack other animals,
and because of the danger posed to humans and animals alike by a pit
bull dog, when running loose or while running together in a pack
situation, pit bull dogs must at all times be securely confined indoors, or
confined in a securely and totally enclosed and locked pen, with either a
top or with sides six feet high. Such structure must have a secure
bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen
must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures
erected to house pit bull dogs, must comply with all zoning and building
regulations of the Borough. All such structures must be adequately
lighted and ventilated and kept in clean and sanitary condition. The
owner of a pit bull dog shall securely lock the enclosure to prevent the
entry of the general public and to preclude the release or escape of a pit
bull dog by an unknowing child or other person.
b. At any time that a pit bull dog is not confined as required in paragraph a
above, the dog shall be muzzled in such a manner as to prevent it from
§ BH2-1.2 GENERAL § BH2-1.4
1:567
§ BH2-1.5. Registration of Pit Bull Dogs. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
biting or injuring any person or animal, and kept on a leash or tether
having a minimum tensile strength sufficient to restrict the pit bull
dog's movements to a radius of no more than three feet from the owner
and under the direct attendance and supervision of the owner.
c. No person under the age of 18 years shall own, control, attempt to
control or walk a pit bull dog. Any person violating this section may be
charged with an act of delinquency if so permitted by state law.
d. No owner, handler or harborer of a pit bull dog shall allow, permit or
suffer a person under the age of 18 years to control, attempt to control
or walk such animal.
e. An exception to this section is provided for any pit bull dog in
attendance at, and participating in, any lawful dog show, contest or
exhibition sponsored by a dog club, association, society, or similar
organization.
f. An exception to this section is provided for any pit bull dog when the
dog is actually engaged in the sport of hunting in authorized areas and
supervised by a competent person.
g. The owner of any dog subject to this section shall prominently display,
in a conspicuous manner, a "Beware of Dog-Pit Bull" sign on their
premises. The sign shall be visible and legible from 50 feet of the
enclosure required pursuant to paragraph a of this section. In addition,
a similar sign, as required, is to be posted on the enclosure of such an
animal.
a. In order to assure that owners of pit bull dogs are in compliance with
the requirements of this section, and to assist in assuring compliance,
every owner of a pit bull dog in the Borough of Brielle shall annually
register the dog with the Board of Health of the Borough of Brielle. The
registration shall include the following:
Name, address and telephone number of the dog's owner; the address
where the dog is harbored, if different from the owner's address; a
complete identification of the dog including the dog's sex, color, and
any other distinguishing physical characteristics; proof of rabies
vaccination; and proof of the liability insurance or other evidence of
financial responsibility required pursuant to this section.
b. Pit bulls residing in the Borough at the time of passage of this section
must be registered with the Board of Health by the owners within 10
days of passage of this section.
c. A person registering a dog pursuant to this section shall pay to the
Borough the sum of $700 for the licensing of each dog, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-31, as well as the additional sums fixed under N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.3. The fees collected under this provision shall be deposited in
§ BH2-1.4 BRIELLE CODE § BH2-1.5
1:568
§ BH2-1.6. Enforcement. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of all Borough of Brielle law
enforcement officers to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ BH2-1.7. Notice of Keeping of Pit Bull Dog. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
Upon the written complaint of any person that a person owns or is keeping
or harboring a pit bull dog on premises in the Borough, the Board of Health
Officer may cause the matter to be investigated and if after investigation,
the facts indicate that such person, named in the complaint, is in fact the
owner or is keeping any pit bull dog in the Borough and has not registered
under this section, he shall send written notice to such person, requiring
such person to either apply for a registration under this section or remove
the animal from the Borough limits within three days of the date of the
notice.
§ BH2-1.8. Severability. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this section
or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this section
which can be given effect without the invalid provisions or application.
§ BH2-1.9. Nuisance, Injunction. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
Any violation of this section is declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any
other relief provided by this section, the Borough Attorney may apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to prohibit the continuation
of any violation of this section. Such application for relief may include
seeking a temporary restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent
injunction.
a special account as required by N.J.S.A. 4:19-35, to be used by the
Borough of Brielle to administer and enforce the provisions of N.J.S.A.
4:19-17 through 37, which govern the regulation of potentially
dangerous or vicious dogs.
d. Newly acquired pit bull dogs shall be registered with the Board of
Health no later than 72 hours after acquisition.
e. The registration of a dog prior to and after the effective date of this
Chapter as a pit bull or any of the dogs listed in subsection BH2-1.1
shall constitute prima facie evidence the animal is subject to the
regulations and provisions of this section.
f. Identification Photographs. All owners, keepers or harborers of
registered pit bill dogs must, within 10 days of the effective date of this
section, provide to the Board of Health two color photographs, two
different poses, of the animal, clearly showing the color and
approximate size of the animal.
§ BH2-1.5 GENERAL § BH2-1.10
1:569
§ BH2-1.10. Penalties. [Ord. #BH:854, § 1]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
for each and every violation be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5. This section shall not be deemed to be violated unless the
alleged violator knew, or should have known after a reasonable inquiry, that
the dog which is the subject of the alleged violation is a pit bull dog under
the provisions of this section.
§ BH2-2. WILD AND DOMESTIC ANIMALS, REGULATIONS.31
§ BH2-2.1. Maximum Number of Dogs and/or Cats. [Ord. #BH:836;
Ord #BH:853]
Effective August 16, 1995, the maximum number of dogs and/or cats, as
defined by this chapter, shall be established at a combination of three
dogs and/or cats per family group. Said animals must be licensed and any
combination in excess of the maximum shall be prohibited and may not be
sheltered or kept by a single family group.
§ BH2-2.2. Exception to Maximum Number. [Ord. #BH:836]
Any licensed animal in excess of the maximum whose harboring, sheltering
or keeping, predates the effective date of this section shall be exempted
from the provisions of this section for the duration of said animal's natural
life span.
§ BH2-2.3. Exceptions: Litters of Pups and Kittens. [Ord. #BH:836;
Ord. #BH:853]
The maximum imposed by this section shall not apply to litters of pups
or kittens and said litters may be sheltered for a period of three calendar
months from the date of birth. No household may shelter more than one
litter of kittens or pups per calendar year.
§ BH2-2.4. Prohibition of Wild and Domestic Animals.32 [New; Ord.
#BH:853]
No person shall be allowed to keep anywhere in the Borough limits any bat
or pigeon or any other wild or domestic animals that shall produce noise or
odors which may be obnoxious or offensive to inhabitants of the Borough or
part thereof.
§ BH2-3. PERMITTING THE MANAGER CARE OF FREE ROAMING
CATS.
31.Editor's Note: This Ordinance shall not apply to any duly licensed commercial
establishments such as pet stores or licensed animal shelters.
32.Editor's Note: For additional regulations see Chapter 5, Section 5-6 of the Revised General
Ordinances.
§ BH2-1.10 BRIELLE CODE § BH2-3.1
1:570
§ BH2-3.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 1071-2018]
WHEREAS, the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Brielle is aware of the
problems in the Borough caused by a large feral cat population; and
WHEREAS, there are no facilities in the Borough of Brielle or the County of
Monmouth to address issues created by feral cats; and
WHEREAS, the population of feral cats has been increasing in the Borough;
and
WHEREAS, communities throughout the United States have determined
that the practice of trapping and euthanizing feral cats is not effective in
reducing their numbers; and
WHEREAS, a present goal of Trap-Neuter-Return (TNR) is to decrease the
number of cats in the environment and thereby reduce feral cat predation
on wildlife; and
WHEREAS, programs for the managed care of feral cat colonies that include
trapping, neutering and returning such cats to their habitats have proven to
be effective in reducing the number of feral cats and is more humane than
trapping and euthanizing;
WHEREAS, TNR programs are beneficial to communities and the public
health because cats in managed colonies are vaccinated against rabies,
which has positive public consequences and are spayed or neutered,
thereby controlling the population; and
WHEREAS, the Mayor and Council deems it in the public interest to amend
its ordinances in order to meet these stated goals.
§ BH2-3.2. Study and Review. [Ord. No. 1071-2018]
Not later than December 31, 2018, the Borough of Brielle shall study
the effectiveness of the TNR program and review the continuance of this
Ordinance No. 1071-2018. This Ordinance however shall continue as
provided until specifically rescinded or amended.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
1006 CAP, Special 14
1007 4-11-2011 LOSAP, 2-17 14
§ BH2-3.1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:571
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
1008 Bond, Special 14
1009 5-23-2011 Land Use amendments — Refuse
containers, dumpsters, private
storm drain inlet retrofitting,
24-10.15, 24-10.16
14
1010 6-13-2011 LOSAP, 2-17 14
1011 6-27-2011 Land Use Fees — Fees, 20-6.7 14
1012 8-22-2011 Swimming Pools, 10-2 14
1013 11-14-2011 Prohibited discharges and
connections, 15-2.6
14
1014 11-14-2011 Land Use, Alternate Members/
Planning Board, 20-4.1
14
1015 Salary, Special 14
1016 2-27-2012 Land Use, Exempt Signs, 21-24.1 14
1017 2-13-2012 Definition of family, Housing
standards-definitions, 9-2.8; Land
Use Procedures-definitions, 20-3
14
1018 Bond, Special 14
1019 3-12-2012 CAP, Special 14
1020 4-9-2012 Construction Code permit fees,
9-1.3
15
1021 4-23-2012 Parks and Recreation-fees and
definitions, 13-1.3
15
1022 5-14-2012 Bond, Special 15
1023 12-10-2012 Salary, Special 15
1024 3-25-2013 Flood damage prevention, Chapter
19
15
1025 Bond, Special 15
1026 CAP Bank, Special 15
1027 5-13-2013 Emergency appropriation, Special 15
1028 Bond, Special 15
1029 10-23-2013 Salary, Special 15
1030 2-10-2014 Pedestrian crossings, 7-36 15
1031 3-10-2014 Bond, Special 15
1032 3-24-2014 CAP Bank, Special 15
1033 Bond, Special 15
1034 5-12-2014 Land use fees, 20-6.7 15
§ DL-1 BRIELLE CODE § DL-1
1:572
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
1035 5-12-2014 Peddlers-"Do Not Knock" List, 4-6.3 15
1036 8-11-2014 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-14 15
1037 10-27-2014 Water rates, 15-3.9 15
1038 10-27-2014 No left turn, 7-25.1 15
1039-201412-8-2014 Salary, Special 16
1040-20151-26-2015 Bond, Special 16
1041-20152-23-2015 Amends Ch. 2, Administration; 2-6,
Police Department
16
1042-20155-11-2015 Bond, Special 16
1043-20153-23-2015 Amends Ch. 2, Administration; 2-17;
LOSAP Schedule
16
1044-20153-23-2015 CAP, Special 16
1045-20155-11-2015 Bond, Special 16
1046-20156-22-2015 Amends Ch. 3, Police Regulations;
3-13, Special events
16
1047-201512-14-2015 Amends Ch. 3, Police Regulations;
Outside public entertainment,
3-16.5
16
1048-2015 Salaries, Special 16
1049-20163-28-2016 Amends Ch. 4 General Licensing;
creates Article VI Dealers in
Precious Metals and Other
Secondhand Goods, 4-11.1 —
4-11.11
17
1050-20164-11-2016 CAP Bank, Special 17
1051-20164-25-2016 Bond, Special 17
1052-20167-11-2016 Amends Ch. 20 Land Use
Procedures; 20-6.7 Escrow Fees,
Provisions Applicable to the
Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment
17
1053-201611-28-2016 Bond, Special 17
1054-201612-12-2016 Salary, Special 17
1055-201612-12-2016 Amends Ch. 3 Police Regulations;
3-1.8 Noise Prohibited; General
Prohibitions; 3-1.9 Specific
Prohibitions-Nuisance
17
1056-201612-27-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Vehicles and Traffic;
7-25.1 Left Turn Prohibition
17
§ DL-1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:573
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
1057-20173-27-2017 CAP Bank, Special 17
1058-20173-27-2017 Amends Ch. 4 General Licensing;
creates 4-3.8 Canvassing and
Soliciting for Real Estate
17
1059-20174-10-2017 Bond, Special 17
1060-20175-22-2017 Amends Ch. 5 Animal Control;
creates 5-9 Prohibition to Ban the
Sale of Dogs and Cats from Pet
Shops, 5-9.1, 5-9.2
17
1061-20175-22-2017 Amends Ch. 3 Police Regulations;
3-1.9 Specific Prohibition, Owners
and/or Operators of Public
Entertainment
17
1062-20179-11-2017 Amends Ch. 13 Parks and
Recreational Facilities; adds 13-4.5b
Nienstedt Island, Dogs Prohibited;
adds 13-5 Municipal Easements and
Right-of-Way; 13-5.1 — 13-5.4
17
1063-20179-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Vehicles and Traffic;
7-17 Parking of Commercial Vehicles
Prohibited During Certain Hours
17
1064-201710-23-2017 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; 2-2.3
Duties of the Municipal Clerk
17
1065-201711-27-2017 Salary, Special 17
1066-20182-12-2018 Amends Ch. 15 Sewer and Water;
15-3.5 Pipe Specifications;
Inspections; 15-3.9 Water Rates
Dates
17
1067-20183-12-2018 Amends Ch. 21 Zoning; adds
21-9.28 Marijuana Manufacture,
Growth or Cultivation Prohibited in
All Zones
17
1068-20183-26-2018 Amends Ch. 15 Sewer and Water;
15-3.6 Owner Responsibility for
Pipes and Fixtures; Repairs
17
1069-20183-26-2018 CAP Bank, Special 17
1070-20184-23-2018 Bond, Special 17
1071-20184-23-2018 Amends Board of Health; adds
BH2-3 Permitting the Managed Care
of Free Roaming Cats; BH2-3.1;
BH2-3.2
17
§ DL-1 BRIELLE CODE § DL-1
1:574
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
1072-20185-14-2018 Amends Ch. 4 General Licensing;
4-1.1 Definitions; 4-3.4 Prerequisites
for Licenses for Certain Sales
17
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1073 6-11-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 7 18
1074 7-9-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 7 18
1075 7-9-2018 Bond NCM 18
1076 7-23-2018 Land Use Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 20 18
1077 7-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 21 18
1078 8-13-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 21 18
1079 8-13-2018 Parks and Recreational
Facilities Amendment
Ch. 13 18
1080 8-27-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 21 18
1081 11-26-2018 Salaries NCM 18
1082 2-11-2019 Fire Prevention and
Safety Amendment
Ch. 14 18
1083 3-11-2019 Fire Prevention and
Safety Amendment
Ch. 14 18
1084 3-11-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 18
1085 5-13-2019 Bond NCM 18
1086 6-24-2019 Bond NCM 18
1087 7-15-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 18
1088 12-16-2019 Salaries NCM 18
1089 12-16-2019 Sewer and Water
Amendment
Ch. 15 18
1090 2-20-2020 Building and Housing
Amendment
Ch. 9 18
§ DL-1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:575