Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Borough Council
[Adopted 1-3-1994 as Ord. No. 1993:663]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Borough of Closter of
a general and permanent nature adopted by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Closter, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and
sections by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1
through 200, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as the "Code of the Borough of Closter," hereinafter
known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Borough Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Borough of
Closter by impressing thereon the Seal of the Borough, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Borough, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Closter" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Borough of Closter, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by
the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Mayor
and Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough of
Closter to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or any
part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more of
the following: a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 CLOSTER CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to July 14, 1993.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Mayor and Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code).1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-14B, the following chapters, articles and sections were
amended, added or adopted: Ch. 1, Art. II; §§ 3-5G, 5-1, 5-3, 9-2, 18-1, 18-4B(2) and 26-2A;
Ch. 30, Art. I; §§ 35-14, 35-21A, 35-25A(2), 35-30C, D and E, 35-31, 35-32, 35-33E, 35-35,
35-41, 38-2, 48-9J, 50-25A, 52-6, 59-14, 65-4, 65-9G, 65-10, 65-12B, 65-13, 67-3, 67-4,
67-5, 67-11, 67-13, 69-4B, 69-9, 71-1, 71-8, 71-18, 71-28, 75-4D, 75-12C, 75-18B, 79-4,
81-5, 89-3, 92-3, 92-4 and 92-7; Ch. 95; §§ 100-3, 100-8, 103-3, 106-3, 106-12A, 106-13A,
106-15, 106-16, 108-2F, 108-7, 110-4, 112-5, 116-5, 116-9, 120-4, 125-6, 127-1C(1) and
(2), 127-1D, 127-3, 127-4, 127-7B and C, 127-9, 127-17, 127-22, 132-4, 134-8, 142-4,
145-5, 145-13, 147-20A, 162-7, 162-11, 164-2, 164-3D, 164-4, 164-15E, 164-18, 167-13,
167-16, 169-9, 169-13, 169-15, 169-22A, 169-30, 169-31, 171-4, 171-8, 171-10, 171-12,
171-13, 171-17, 171-30, 171-40, 171-42, 173-4, 173-5D, 173-13A, 173-15B, 173-19A,
173-20A(1)(d), 173-23A, 173-24E(2), 173-30A(1)(d), 173-35B(2), 173-35D, 173-46D, F and
G, 173-55B, 173-68E, 173-69A and D, 173-74, 173-76A, 176-1, 176-2B, 176-13, 180-3,
183-22, 183-72, 185-3, 185-5, 189-7, 200-58, 200-78, 200-79, 200-87A, 200-93 and 200-94;
and Ch. A301. Also, throughout the Code, the term "Municipal Magistrate" was amended
to "Municipal Judge," the term "Municipal Court Clerk" was amended to "Municipal Court
Administrator" and the term "Dog Warden" was amended to "Animal Control Officer."
§ 1-13 CLOSTER CODE § 1-14
1:6
ARTICLE II
Violations and Penalties
[Adopted 10-20-1980 as Ord. No. 1980:392; amended in its entirety
11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:878]
§ 1-15. Violations and penalties.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute or
otherwise expressly provided for in the Code of the Borough of Closter,
any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of any provision
contained in the Code of the Borough of Closter shall be liable to one or
more of the following: a fine not exceeding $2,000 (except for violation
of housing or zoning codes, which shall carry a fine not exceeding
$1,250); imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day that such a
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable hereunder. [Amended
6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006:970]
B. Any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance within one year
of the date of a previous violation of the same ordinance and who was
fined for the previous violation. may, at the discretion of the court, be
sentenced to an additional fine as a repeat offender according to the
following schedule:
(1) Penalty for conviction of second offense: up to double the fine
imposed for the violation so that the maximum penalty for a second
offense shall not exceed two times the fine imposed by the court.
(2) Penalty for conviction of third offense: up to triple the fine imposed
for the violation so that the maximum penalty for a third offense
shall not exceed three times the fine imposed by the court.
(3) Penalty for additional convictions: additional penalties shall he
imposed by the court to the extent permissible by law.
C. The additional fine imposed by the court shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of the
ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for
the violation of the ordinance.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 43. Personnel policies — See Ch. 48.
§ 3-1. Position created.
The position of Borough Administrator of the Borough of Closter is hereby
created, and the employment of a qualified person for that position is
hereby authorized.
§ 3-2. Appointment; term; qualifications.
The Borough Administrator shall qualify, be appointed and serve a term of
office in accordance herewith.
A. The Borough Administrator shall be appointed pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 and need not be a resident of the
Borough.
B. The term of the Borough Administrator appointed after the adoption of
this chapter shall be at the pleasure of the governing body.
C. Suspension and removal.
(1) The Borough Administrator may be suspended without pay by the
Council at any time pending a hearing. He or she may be removed
from office by the Council for just cause, upon 30 days' written
notice after adoption of a resolution setting forth the reasons for
removal. Such resolution shall be adopted by a two-thirds ( 2/3)
vote of the Borough Council.
(2) The Borough Administrator, upon receipt of a resolution of removal
properly approved, may reply within 10 days of receipt and request
a public hearing. A public hearing, if any, shall be held not earlier
than 15 days nor later than 30 days after the request is received by
the Borough Council. The findings of the hearing and decision of
removal shall be by written resolution approved by a two-thirds ( 2/
3) vote of the Borough Council.
(3) If the Borough Administrator is restored to his or her position, he or
she shall be entitled to any compensation lost by reason of his or
her suspension.
D. The Borough Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of
administrative qualifications with special regard to education and
§ 1-15 CLOSTER CODE § 3-2
1:8
§ 3-3. Absence or disability.
During any approved absence or disability of the Borough Administrator,
an officer or employee of the Borough may be appointed by the Borough
Council to temporarily perform the duties and responsibilities of the
position.
§ 3-4. Compensation.
The compensation of the Borough Administrator shall be fixed by the
Borough Council in a Salary Ordinance of the Borough.2
§ 3-5. Duties and responsibilities. [Amended 6-9-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:378; 5-8-1985 by Ord. No. 1985:507; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663; 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:856; 6-14-2017 by Ord. No.
2017:1225]
The Borough Administrator is responsible for ensuring that the business
of the Borough is effectively and efficiently carried out and that daily
operations run smoothly. The responsibilities and duties of the
Administrator are outlined with more specificity in the job description which
is kept on file in the Borough. However, additional duties may be assigned
by the Mayor and Council. Moreover, issues that arise which are outside
the scope of the Administrator’s duties must be brought to the Mayor and
Counsel for a final decision.
§ 3-6. Consistency with law.
Nothing herein shall derogate from or authorize the Borough Administrator
to exercise the powers and duties of elected officials of the Borough and of
the boards and agencies thereof established pursuant to law.
Chapter 5
ASSESSMENT, BOARD OF
§ 5-1. Establishment; purpose; composition.3
There is hereby created and established in and for the Borough of Closter,
in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey, a Board of Assessment,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-22 et seq., the amendments thereto and
supplements thereof, to make all assessments for benefits accruing from
local improvements under Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes
of the State of New Jersey. Said Board shall be known as the "Assessment
training in business and government affairs and experience therein.
[Amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1176]
2. Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 3-2 ASSESSMENT, BOARD OF § 5-1
5:9
Board of the Borough of Closter" and shall consist of three (3) members to
be appointed as hereinafter in this chapter provided.
§ 5-2. Powers and duties; regulating authority.
The Assessment Board created and established by § 5-1 of this chapter shall
have all the powers to make assessments for benefits accruing for local
improvements under Chapter 56 of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes of the
State of New Jersey, pursuant to and as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:56-21 et seq.,
the amendments thereto and supplements thereof, and said Board shall be
subject to all restrictions and regulations and the performance of all duties
provided in said statutes.
§ 5-3. Appointment of members; qualifications.4
The members of the Assessment Board created and established by this
chapter shall be appointed pursuant to and in accordance with the
procedures provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:60-1 et seq. Such members shall be
discreet freeholders and residents of the Borough of Closter.
§ 5-4. Term of office; vacancies.
The term of each member of said Assessment Board shall be for one (1)
year, commencing January 1 of the year in which he or she is appointed,
and until his or her successor shall have qualified. Notwithstanding the
preceding sentence, the members of said Board at the time that the cost of
a local improvement is certified to said Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-24
shall, if not otherwise disqualified, remain the Assessment Board for making
the assessments with respect to any such local improvement until final
action with respect thereto has been taken by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Closter. All vacancies shall be filled in the manner of original
appointments for the unexpired term only.
§ 5-5. Conflict of interest.
A member of said Assessment Board shall in no way be interested in any
local improvement for which said Board is to make assessments. In the
event that any member of said Board is disqualified from acting with respect
to a particular local improvement by reason of his or her interest therein,
some other suitable person shall be appointed in the manner provided in
§ 5-3 of this chapter for making the assessments with respect to such local
improvement.
§ 5-6. Compensation.
The members of said Assessment Board shall receive such reasonable
compensation for their services as the Borough Council of the Borough of
Closter may, by resolution, fix and determine and upon the presentation
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 5-1 CLOSTER CODE § 5-6
5:10
of proper vouchers therefor. In determining the amount of any such
compensation, the Borough Council shall consider the nature of the local
improvement for which assessments have been made, the complexity of
making such assessments, the hearings held by said Board, the time spent
in viewing the lands and premises involved and any other factors as relate
to the nature and extent of the services performed by the members of said
Board.
Chapter 9
CLAIMS AND BILLS
§ 9-1. Bill of items. [Amended 12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:910]
Any person claiming payment of moneys from the Borough of Closter shall
first present a detailed bill of items or demand for which payment is
claimed, with the certification of the party claiming payment that it is
correct. The Borough Council may, by resolution, require an affidavit in lieu
of said certification, and the Chief Financial Officer or Borough Treasurer
may take such affidavit without cost.
§ 9-2. Certification of claim. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
No moneys of the Borough of Closter shall be paid out for any claim unless
it carries the certification of some officer or duly designated employee of
the borough, having knowledge of the facts, that the goods or services for
which payment is claimed have been received by or the services rendered
to the borough. The certification required by this section shall be made by
a person other than the person claiming payment. The Borough Council
shall, by resolution, designate department heads authorized to make the
certification required by this section.
§ 9-3. Claims submitted upon voucher forms or procurement card
statements. [Amended 12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:910]
A. Claims submitted in writing upon voucher forms authorized or
approved by the Borough Council shall specify particularly how the bill
or demand is made up, including the quantities of goods or the scope of
the services delivered or rendered and the dates when such goods were
delivered or services rendered.
B. Disbursements made by procurement card shall appear on computergenerated
paper monthly statements from the approved financial
institution issuing said procurement card, indicating the name of the
vendor, the date and amount of purchase, and the balance of the
procurement card account. Procurement card statements shall also be
available via the internet to the Chief Financial Officer and all persons
designated to oversee the use of such procurement cards.
§ 5-6 CLAIMS AND BILLS § 9-4
9:11
§ 9-4. Reimbursement for borough officials and employees.
Claims by borough officials and employees for reimbursement of necessary
and actual traveling expenses and for reasonable subsistence, lodging and
necessary incidental expenses incurred in connection with borough
business shall be paid when such business and expenses have been
authorized or ratified by the Borough Council. In addition to the other
requirements of this chapter, claims for reimbursement of such expenses
shall, when available, be supported by itemized and receipted bills, which
shall be attached to and submitted with the voucher claiming payment.
§ 9-5. Review of submitted vouchers. [Amended 12-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003:910]
Vouchers claiming payment shall be presented to the Chief Financial
Officer. It shall be the duty of the Chief Financial Officer or such other
officer or employee designated by resolution of the Borough Council to
review such vouchers and determine whether such vouchers are proper
in form and content. It shall be the further duty of the Chief Financial
Officer or the Chief Financial Officer's designee to determine that a proper
certification and signature of an officer or duly designated employee of
the borough appears on such vouchers pursuant to § 9-2 of this article.
Improperly submitted vouchers shall be returned by the Chief Financial
Officer or the Chief Financial Officer's designee to the claimant for
compliance with this article.
§ 9-6. Approval or disapproval of vouchers. [Amended 12-22-2003
by Ord. No. 2003:910]
Properly submitted vouchers and documents in support thereof shall be
forwarded by the Chief Financial Officer or Chief Financial Officer's
designee to the committee of the Borough Council which has jurisdiction of
the subject matter of the claim. Such committee shall review and consider
the claim and shall approve or disapprove the same. Such committee shall
then forward the voucher and supporting documents to the Finance
Committee of the Borough Council, which shall review and consider the
claim and shall approve or disapprove of the same. In the event that any
such committee disapproves of a claim, a statement to such effect, together
with the reasons for such disapproval, shall be made on a separate writing
and shall be attached to the voucher. When there is no committee which is
responsible for the subject matter of the claim or when there is any doubt
as to the proper committee which has jurisdiction thereof, such claim shall
be forwarded directly to the Finance Committee.
§ 9-7. Rejection of claim; hearing. [Amended 12-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003:910]
Each claim shall be considered by the Borough Council which shall, by
resolution, approve of reject the claim. When any claim is rejected by the
Borough Council, the reasons for such rejection shall be recorded in the
§ 9-4 CLOSTER CODE § 9-7
9:12
minutes of the meeting at which such action was taken, and the claim shall
be returned to the Chief Financial Officer or the Chief Financial Officer's
designee with such instructions as the Borough Council may determine.
The Chief Financial Officer or the Chief Financial Officer's designee shall
notify the claimant of such rejection by certified mail sent within five days
after action of the Borough Council. Upon written request of the claimant
submitted to the Chief Financial Officer within 10 days after receipt of
notice of the rejection of the claim (or such additional time as the Borough
Council may allow), the claimant shall be afforded a public hearing on such
claim, said hearing to be held not later than the second regular meeting
of the Borough Council held following receipt of the claimant's request
therefor.
§ 9-8. Mayor's signature.
Except in the case of veto, it shall be the duty of the Mayor to sign
the approving resolution or schedule of claims approved by the Borough
Council, and the Mayor's signature on any such approving resolution or
schedule of claims shall signify that he or she has examined the same and
has officially approved the claims covered thereby for payment.
§ 9-9. Records, register.
The action of the Borough Council in approving or rejecting claims shall
be recorded in the official minutes of its proceedings. Each claim approved
for payment shall be tabulated and listed in such minutes or in a separate
register of approved claims maintained by the Borough Clerk, and such
minutes and register shall be open to inspection by the public.
§ 9-10. Statement and date of approval. [Amended 12-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003:910]
The Chief Financial Officer or Chief Financial Officer's designee or such
other officer or employee designated by resolution of the Borough Council
shall indicate on the voucher for each claim which has been approved that
such claim has been approved for payment and the date of such approval.
§ 9-11. Manner of payment. [Amended 12-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003:910]
A. Payment by check. After the Chief Financial Officer or the Chief
Financial Officer's designee has certified that a claim has been
approved, he or she shall forward such claim to the Borough Treasurer,
who shall thereupon prepare the necessary checks for the payment
thereof, unless payment is to be made in accordance with Subsection B
hereof. Any such check, drawn on the Borough Treasurer or other such
custodian of Borough funds, shall be signed by the Mayor and shall be
countersigned by the Borough Treasurer. The Borough Treasurer shall
record such checks for the payment of claims in proper books of
§ 9-7 CLAIMS AND BILLS § 9-11
9:13
account of the Borough maintained therefor and shall thereafter mail
or otherwise distribute such checks to the claimants.
B. Payment by procurement card. Payment for goods provided and
services rendered to the Borough may be made by procurement card in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:309A-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
40A:5-16.
(1) Policies and procedures governing the use of procurement cards.
The Chief Financial Officer, with the advice of the Mayor and
Council, shall establish policies and procedures governing the use
of procurement cards by persons authorized to use such
procurement cards. A copy of said policies and procedures shall be
given to each officer and employee whose duties include the use,
supervision of the use or reconciliation of the use of procurement
cards.
(2) Persons authorized to use procurement cards. In accordance with
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:30-9A.4(a)(3), the Borough
Administrator, with the advice and consent of the Chief Financial
Officer, will identify those officers or employees who will benefit
from the use of procurement cards and shall establish limits by
amount, period (time) and category of usage permissible. The Chief
Financial Officer shall designate an individual to conduct
supervisory reviews of procurement card use by those persons
authorized to use procurement cards.
(3) Permitted uses.
(a) Procurement cards may be used only to pay for goods and
services provided to the Borough as governed by N.J.A.C.
5:309A-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40A:5-16. Specific purposes for
the use of procurement cards shall be authorized by resolution
of the Mayor and Council, except for those uses listed in
§ 9-11B(3)(b).
(b) Procurement cards may be used by authorized personnel
without prior approval by resolution of the Mayor and Council
for the following: office supplies with individual value of less
than $300, membership dues, publication or subscriptions,
auto parts and supplies with individual values of less than
$150, parts and repairs necessary for the comfortable
occupancy of the municipal building not to exceed $500, and
payment of the Borough's utility bills.
(c) Personal use of procurement cards is prohibited. Procurement
cards shall not be used for transactions exceeding 15% of the
Borough's bid threshold.
§ 9-11 CLOSTER CODE § 9-12
9:14
§ 9-12. Interpretation.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to authorize
the payment of any claim for which available funds for the payment thereof
have not been appropriated in the local budget of the Borough of Closter for
the current year or for a prior year or otherwise made available according
to law.
Chapter 10
CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 43. Purchasing Agent — See Ch. 53.
§ 9-12 CLAIMS AND BILLS § 9-12
9:15

ARTICLE I
Political Contributions by Contractors
[Adopted 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1005]
§ 10-1. Awarding public contracts to certain contributors
prohibited.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
municipality or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract to procure services, including banking
services/relationships or insurance coverage services, from any
professional business entity, if that entity has solicited or made any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to a campaign committee of any Borough of Closter
Mayor or Council candidate or holder of the public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract or to any Borough
of Closter or Bergen County party committee organized to provide
monetary support to Closter municipal candidates or to any political
action committee (PAC) that is organized for the primary purpose of
promoting or supporting Borough of Closter municipal candidates or
municipal officeholders in excess of the thresholds specified in
Subsection D within one calendar year immediately preceding the date
of the contract or agreement.
B. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to, any contract or agreement with the municipality or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for the
rendition of professional, banking or insurance coverage services or
any other no-bid consultants shall knowingly solicit or make any
contribution, in excess of the limits set forth in Subsection D below, of
money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind contributions, to
any Borough of Closter Mayor or Council candidate or holder of the
public office having ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract
or to any Borough of Closter or Bergen County party committee
organized to provide monetary support to Closter municipal candidates
or to any PAC that is organized for the primary purpose of promoting or
supporting Borough of Closter municipal candidates or municipal
officeholders between the time of first communications between that
business entity and the Borough regarding a specific professional
services agreement and the later of the termination of negotiations or
the completion of the contract or agreement.
C. For purposes of this article, a "professional business entity" seeking a
public contract means an individual, including the individual's spouse,
if any, and any child living at home; person; firm; corporation;
professional corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The
definition of a "business entity" includes all principals who own 10% or
more of the equity in the corporation or business trust, partners and
§ 10-1 CLAIMS AND BILLS § 10-1
9:17
§ 10-2. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any municipal
candidate for Mayor or Council or municipal or county party committee
or PAC referenced in this article shall be deemed to require application of
§ 10-1A of this article nor shall an agreement for property, goods or services
of any kind whatsoever be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was
made by the professional business entity prior to the effective date of this
article.
§ 10-3. Contribution statement by professional business entity
required; continuing duty to report.
officers in the aggregate employed by the entity, as well as any
subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
D. Any individual meeting the definition of "professional business entity"
under this section may annually contribute a maximum of $300 each for
any purpose to any candidate for Mayor or Council or $300 each to the
Borough of Closter or Bergen County party committee organized to
provide monetary support to Closter municipal candidates, or to a PAC
referenced in this article, without triggering the effect of § 10-1A of this
article. However, any group of individuals meeting the definition of
"professional business entity" under this section, including such
principals, partners and officers of the entity in the aggregate, may not
annually contribute for any purpose in excess of $2,400 to all Borough
of Closter Mayor or Council candidates, and officeholders with ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract, and all Borough of Closter
or Bergen County political parties and PACs referenced in this article
combined, without triggering the effect of § 10-1A of this article.
E. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be:
(1) The Borough of Closter Council, if the contract requires approval or
appropriation from the Council.
(2) The Mayor of the Borough of Closter, if the contract requires
approval of the Mayor, or if a public officer who is responsible for
the award of a contract is appointed by the Mayor.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services,
including banking or insurance coverage services, with any
professional business entity, the Borough or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement
from the professional business entity, made under penalty of perjury,
that the bidder or offeror has not made a contribution in violation of
§ 10-1 of this article.
§ 10-1 CLOSTER CODE § 10-3
9:18
§ 10-4. Return of excess contributions.
A professional business entity or Borough candidate or officeholder or
municipal or county party PAC referenced in this article may cure a violation
of § 10-1 of this article if, within 30 days after the general election, the
professional business entity notifies the Borough Council, in writing, and
seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the Borough
candidate or municipal or county political party or PAC referenced in this
article.
§ 10-5. Violations and penalties.
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this article that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this subsection
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
Borough and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
A. All Borough of Closter professional service agreements shall provide
that it shall be a breach of the terms of the government contract for a
professional business entity as defined in § 10-1C to violate § 10-1B or
to knowingly conceal or misrepresent contributions given or received
or to make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution.
B. Any professional business entity as defined in § 10-1C and D who
knowingly fails to reveal a contribution made in violation of this article
or who knowingly makes or solicits contributions through
intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the
source of the contribution shall be disqualified from eligibility for future
Borough of Closter contracts for a period of four calendar years from
the date of the violation.
§ 10-3 CLAIMS AND BILLS § 10-5
9:19
Chapter 11
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 10-5 CLOSTER CODE § 10-5
11:20
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 11-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq.,5 as amended and
supplemented, there is hereby established within the Borough of Closter a
Municipal Court which shall be henceforth known as the "Municipal Court
of the Borough of Closter."
§ 11-2. Seal.
The Municipal Court shall have a Seal which shall bear the impression of
the name of the Court.
5. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 was repealed by L. 1993, c. 293, § 6. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1
et seq.
§ 11-1 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 11-2
11:21

ARTICLE II
Municipal Judge
[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
§ 11-3. Appointment; term.
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court who shall be known as the
"Municipal Judge." He or she shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Borough Council. The Municipal Judge shall serve
for a term of three (3) years from the date of his or her appointment and
until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 11-4. Qualifications.
The person appointed as Municipal Judge shall have the following
qualifications:
§ 11-5. Duties.
The Municipal Judge shall at all times conform his or her activities to the
Code of Judicial Conduct and shall perform those functions and duties and
possess those powers and jurisdiction as shall be provided by law.
§ 11-6. Restrictions on practice of law.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 et seq.,6 no Municipal Judge
for the Borough of Closter shall practice law in any Municipal Court in the
County of Bergen or upon appeals from such Courts.
§ 11-7. Compensation.
The Municipal Judge shall be compensated by an annual salary which shall
be fixed and paid in the manner provided by ordinance adopted by the
Borough Council and which shall be in lieu of any and all other fees, costs
and allowances.7
§ 11-8. Designation of Temporary Judge.
Whenever the Municipal Judge shall be unable to sit, he or she may
designate any other Judge of any Municipal Court or an attorney at law
to sit for him or her temporarily and hold the Municipal Court. Any such
designation shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:8-10.8
A. He or she shall be an attorney at law and a resident of the State of New
Jersey, but he or she need not be a resident of the Borough of Closter.
B. He or she shall be a person who is qualified under law and the Court
rules to hold the office of Municipal Judge.
6. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1 was repealed by L. 1993, c. 293, § 6. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1
et seq.
7. Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 11-3 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 11-8
11:23
8. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:8-10 was repealed by L. 1993, c. 293, § 6. See now N.J.S.A.
2B:12-6.
§ 11-8 CLOSTER CODE § 11-8
11:24
ARTICLE III
Administrator and Deputy Clerks
[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
§ 11-9. Appointment and term of Administrator.
There shall be an Administrator of the Municipal Court who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The
Municipal Court Administrator shall serve for a term of one (1) year from
the date of his or her appointment and until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified.
§ 11-10. Qualifications of Administrator. [Amended 2-25-1981 by
Ord. No. 1981:402]
The person appointed as Municipal Court Administrator need not be a
resident of the Borough of Closter and shall not be disqualified from holding
said office by reason of his or her holding any other office or employment
within the Borough of Closter.
§ 11-11. Compensation of Administrator.
The Municipal Court Administrator shall be compensated by an annual
salary which shall be fixed and paid in the manner provided by ordinance
adopted by the Borough Council.9
§ 11-12. Appointment, term and compensation of Deputy Clerks.
The Municipal Court shall also have such Deputy Clerks as may be required.
The Deputy Clerks shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council. The Deputy Clerks shall serve for a term of
one (1) year from the date of their appointments and until their successors
are appointed and qualified. The Deputy Clerks shall be compensated by
an annual salary which shall be fixed and paid in the manner provided by
ordinance adopted by the Borough Council.10
§ 11-13. Duties.
The Administrator or Deputy Clerks of the Municipal Court shall attend
the sessions of the Municipal Court and the examinations, trials and
proceedings had therein. He or she shall perform such other duties and
services pertaining to the Court and the business thereof as the Court may
require.
9. Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
10.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 11-9 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 11-13
11:25

ARTICLE IV
Municipal Prosecutor
§ 11-14. Appointment; term.
There shall be a Prosecutor of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. The
Municipal Prosecutor shall serve for a term of one (1) year from the date of
appointment and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 11-15. Qualifications.
The person appointed as Municipal Prosecutor shall have the following
qualifications: He or she shall be an attorney at law and a resident of the
State of New Jersey, but he or she need not be a resident of the Borough of
Closter.
§ 11-16. Compensation.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall be compensated by an annual salary which
shall be fixed and paid in the manner provided by ordinance adopted by the
Borough Council and which shall be in lieu of any and all other fees, costs
and allowances.11
§ 11-17. Duties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
The Municipal Prosecutor shall prosecute on behalf of the Borough of
Closter any case to be tried before the Municipal Judge of the Borough of
Closter whenever requested by the governing body, the Borough Attorney,
the Chief of Police or the Municipal Judge. The Municipal Prosecutor shall
perform such other legal duties as may be assigned to him or her by the
governing body, the Borough Attorney or the Municipal Judge.
11.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 11-14 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 11-17
11:27

ARTICLE V
Public Defender
§ 11-18. Appointment; term.
There shall be a Public Defender of the Municipal Court who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council. The Municipal Public Defender shall serve for a term of one (1)
year from the date of appointment and until his or her successor is
appointed and qualified.
§ 11-19. Qualifications.
The person appointed as Municipal Public Defender shall have the following
qualifications: He or she shall be an attorney at law and a resident of the
State of New Jersey, but he or she need not be a resident of the Borough of
Closter.
§ 11-20. Compensation.
The Municipal Public Defender shall be compensated by an annual salary
which shall be fixed and paid in the manner provided by ordinance adopted
by the Borough Council and which shall be in lieu of any and all other fees,
costs and allowances.12
§ 11-21. Duties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
The Municipal Public Defender shall defend those cases as are assigned to
him or her by the Municipal Judge, and the Municipal Public Defender shall
perform such other legal duties as may be assigned to him or her by the
governing body, the Borough Attorney or the Municipal Judge.
§ 11-22. Application fee for Public Defender. [Added 8-24-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994:676]
In the event that a person appearing before the Municipal Court of the
Borough of Closter applies for representation by the Municipal Public
Defender, it shall be a requirement for such appointment that any such
person applying for representation by a Municipal Public Defender shall pay
an application fee as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, to the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Closter. The Municipal Court may waive
any required application fee, in whole or in part, if the Court determines, in
its discretion, that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden
to the person seeking representation.
12.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 11-18 COURT, MUNICIPAL § 11-22
11:29
Chapter 12
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 12-1. Title.
This chapter shall hereafter be known and cited as "Defense and
Indemnification of Municipal Officials."
§ 12-2. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide for the defense of civil
actions against and the indemnification of the Borough's municipal officials,
as permitted by this chapter and N.J.S.A. 59:10-1 et seq.
§ 12-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning set forth:
CLAIM — Any report, formal or informal, of a demand for compensation for
damages for injuries allegedly caused by the civil wrong(s) of a municipal
official of the Borough of Closter as defined herein. The term shall include,
but shall not be limited to, all demands for damages before any court
or agency for bodily injury, property damage and violation of civil or
constitutional rights, including inverse condemnation and causes of action
arising out of alleged violation of any state or federal statute.
INDEMNIFICATION — The reasonable and customary costs incurred in
legal defense of actions covered under this chapter and all sums which
the municipal official would be legally obligated to pay as damages or in
settlement of any claims against the municipal official for matters arising
from or related to such actions, whether the claim is presented during the
period of the municipal official's period of official service with the Borough
or thereafter, and shall include the payment of salary or wages for any
municipal official who, by reason of an indemnified claim, is absent from his
or her Borough work station for the purpose of attending legal proceedings
or other business in connection therewith and the Borough of Closter would
otherwise be responsible for payment of the municipal official's salary or
wages. The term shall not include sums which the municipal official would
be legally obligated to pay in the nature of exemplary or punitive damages.
In the event the municipal official is being sued for such damages, the
Borough shall not indemnify said official with respect to same but shall, to
the extent allowed by law, defend said official in said action and defray the
costs of said defense.
INSURANCE — Coverage afforded by insurance policies of any and every
kind, whether the premium paid by the Borough, the municipal official or
someone on his behalf, including, without limitation, coverage provided by
and through the Joint Insurance Fund (JIF) and/or the municipal excess
liabilities (MEL) policies.
§ 11-22 CLOSTER CODE § 12-3
12:30
MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL — Any person employed by the Borough of Closter,
including elected officials, constitutional officers and their employees, and
volunteers performing services on behalf of the Borough while actually
performing those services; the term does not include persons or entities
performing services under a nonemployment contract with the Borough.
REASONABLE ATTORNEY FEES — The prevailing fees as charged in the
County of Bergen at the time they are incurred. The Borough shall only be
responsible to the extent fees are reasonable as defined herein.
§ 12-4. Notice of claim.
The municipal official shall not be entitled to indemnification or
reimbursement pursuant to this chapter unless, within 14 days of the time
such official is served with any summons, complaint, process, notice,
demand or pleading, this official delivers the original or a copy thereof to
the Borough Attorney.
§ 12-5. Civil actions.
§ 12-6. Limitations.
The Mayor and Council shall not approve indemnification of the defense of
any action if:
A. The Borough of Closter is hereby authorized to provide for the defense
of civil actions brought against its municipal officials and to indemnify
such officials to the extent hereinafter set forth, and shall save harmless
and protect such persons from any financial loss resulting from
litigation which arises as described in Subsection B, below.
B. The obligation of the Borough of Closter to defend and indemnify its
officials for acts or omissions arising out of or in the course of the
performance of the duties of that person shall be limited to:
(1) Those circumstances where the acts complained of took place
during a time when the municipal official was actually performing
services on behalf of the Borough of Closter, whether or not during
formal working hours; and
(2) Those circumstances where it reasonably appears that the
municipal official was acting within the scope of his or her duties
for the Borough.
C. In the event a municipal official is required to defend an action relating
to his or her position subsequent to leaving office, the terms, conditions
and provisions of this section shall apply.
A. The act or omission complained of was not within the scope of
employment or authority.
§ 12-3 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 12-6
12:31
§ 12-7. Revocation of indemnification.
The decision to indemnify based upon preliminary investigation is not final
and binding upon the Borough of Closter. Should facts be revealed during
the course of handling the claim, whether or not they could have been
discovered at an earlier time, that show that the municipal official was
acting in a manner which does not entitle him or her to indemnification
for the reasons stated herein, the Mayor and Council may revoke the
indemnification. Further, should the municipal official unjustifiably fail or
refuse to cooperate in defending the claim, indemnification may be revoked.
§ 12-8. Method to provide for defense; attorney's fees.
B. The act or omission complained of was because of actual fraud, willful
misconduct or actual malice.
C. The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Borough and the municipal official involved.
D. There exist policies of insurance, either obtained by the Borough or by
another, by virtue of which the municipal official is entitled to a defense
of the action in question from the insurer. In the event that the aforesaid
insurance covers less than an entire defense to the particular action,
indemnification shall be approved for that part of the defense not
covered by insurance.
E. The municipal official has failed to deliver the appropriate notice of
claim as required herein.
F. The municipal official fails to cooperate fully with the defense.
G. The municipal official fails to request the defense of any action.
H. Defense of the act or omission complained of is not deemed appropriate
by the Mayor and Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 59:10-1 et seq.
I. The action was brought by the Borough.
J. The legal proceeding involves a question concerning New Jersey
election laws.
K. Nothing in this chapter shall authorize or require the Borough to pay
for punitive or exemplary damages or damages resulting from the
commission of a crime.
A. If the Mayor and Council determines to provide a defense as authorized
by this chapter, it may do so by:
(1) Hiring an attorney of its choice; or
(2) Reimbursing the municipal official for reasonable attorney's fees
and costs incurred in connection with the defense of the legal
proceeding. The obligation to reimburse a municipal official for
§ 12-6 CLOSTER CODE § 12-8
12:32
§ 12-9. Counterclaim or affirmative cause of action.
If the municipal official files a counterclaim, counteraction or asserts any
affirmative cause of action in the legal proceeding, the Borough shall not be
obligated to reimburse for any attorney fees or court costs attributable to
such counterclaim, counteraction or affirmative cause of action.
§ 12-10. Settlement of claims.
By accepting indemnification from the Borough in accordance with this
chapter, the municipal official agrees that the Borough may perform such
investigations and enter into such negotiations on the municipal official's
behalf as the Borough shall deem necessary and may settle any claims,
regardless of whether the Borough actually feels the allegations are
groundless or false. In the event that the municipal official refuses to
consent to any settlement, the Borough shall be liable only for that amount
for which the Borough could have settled the claim for, had the municipal
official consented.
§ 12-11. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not create, nor shall be construed as, a contract of
insurance between the Borough and any municipal official. The Borough
shall not be considered an insurer or primary insurer for any purpose and
shall not by this chapter be obligated to settle any claim on a municipal
official's behalf or to tender its limits of coverage in order to avoid excess
liability on the municipal official's part.
§ 12-12. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all matters which have not been finally resolved
at the date of enactment hereof, regardless of whether or not the acts for
which damages are sought occurred before passage of this chapter.
Chapter 14
expenses shall arise upon final determination of the legal
proceedings. However, the Borough may reimburse a municipal
official for a portion of expenses incurred prior to a final decision.
B. A resolution shall be adopted appointing counsel for the defense and
determining counsel fees. The hourly rate shall not exceed the rate paid
to the Borough Attorney without a written resolution of the Council.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the Mayor and Council from
demanding and reviewing periodically any costs and attorney's fees in
connection with the defense of the municipal official. In the event a
dispute over attorney's fees arises, the Borough reserves the right to
submit the dispute to the Fee Arbitration Committee of the district or
pursue any other course of legal action.
§ 12-8 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 12-12
14:33
EMERGENCY SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 21.
§ 12-12 CLOSTER CODE § 12-12
14:34
ARTICLE I
Length of Service Awards Program
[Adopted 8-20-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:809]
§ 14-1. Program created.
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is hereby created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 199713 to reward members
of the volunteer firefighters and ambulance squad members for their loyal,
diligent and devoted services to the residents of Borough of Closter.
§ 14-2. Annual contributions.
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferredincome
account for each volunteer member that meets the criteria set forth
below; that such contributions shall be made in accordance with a plan that
shall be established by the Borough of Closter pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388;
and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the laws of
the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue Code and this
article.
§ 14-3. Criteria for eligibility.
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets the criteria as follows:
§ 14-4. Estimated cost.
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
§ 14-5. Points.
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the volunteer fire company/ambulance squad in
accordance with the following schedule:
A. One hundred points are required for a member to be eligible for an
annual contribution.
B. Five years of service are required for vesting.
C. The annual contribution to an eligible member of the Fire Department
shall be $200 to $700 on a sliding-scale basis.
D. The annual contribution to an eligible volunteer service (ambulance)
corp member shall be $600 per member.
A. For regular annual services: $34,000 per year.
A. Fire Department: see Schedule A.14
13.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.
§ 14-1 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 14-5
14:35
§ 14-6. When effective.
That this article shall not take effect unless it is approved by voters as a
public question at the next general election.16
B. Ambulance and Rescue Squad: see Schedule B.15
14.Editor's Note: Schedule A is on file in the borough offices.
15.Editor's Note: Schedule B is on file in the borough offices.
16.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1999:809 was approved at the general election held
November 2, 1999.
§ 14-5 CLOSTER CODE § 14-6
14:36
Chapter 16
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tree preservation and removal — See Ch. 181.
§ 14-6 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 14-6
14:37

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 6-23-1976 by Ord. No. 1976:284 (Ch. 33 of the 1967
Code)]
§ 16-1. Commission created.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., there is hereby established in and
for the Borough of Closter, County of Bergen and State of New Jersey,
an Environmental Commission to be known as the "Closter Environmental
Commission."
§ 16-2. Membership and compensation.
A. The Environmental Commission should consist of seven members to be
appointed by the Mayor of the Borough of Closter, provided that all
members must be residents of the Borough of Closter. At all times one
member of such Commission shall be a member of the Planning Board
of the Borough of Closter and one member shall be a Councilman of the
Borough of Closter. Should such member's term on the Planning Board
or Council terminate, then a replacement from said bodies shall be
designated to fill the unexpired term on said Commission in order to
ensure such representation. The Mayor shall designate from said
Commission one member to serve as Chairman of said Environmental
Commission, whose duty it shall be to preside at all meetings. No
member may receive any compensation, although expenses may be
provided for upon approval by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Closter.
B. Alternate members. [Added 3-14-1990 by Ord. No. 1990:590]
(1) The Mayor of the Borough of Closter shall have full power to
appoint two alternate members to the Environmental Commission
in accordance with the requirements set forth below. The two
alternate members shall be designated as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2" at the time of appointment by the Mayor.
(2) The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except
that the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be
two years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2 so
that the term of not more than one alternate member shall expire in
any one year.
(3) Any vacancy occurring otherwise than by the expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired term
only.
(4) The alternate members shall serve without compensation. They
may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. In
§ 16-1 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 16-2
14:39
§ 16-3. Terms of office; removal; vacancies.
The terms of members on the Environmental Commission shall be for three
years or until the appointment and qualification of their successors. Any
member may be removed for cause by the Mayor or by the Council of the
Borough of Closter, provided that written charges are served upon said
member and a hearing held thereon, at which time such members shall
be entitled to be heard in person or by the Council. Should a vacancy
occur other than by expiration of term, said vacancy shall be filled for the
unexpired term. In order to first create said Environmental Commission,
two members shall be appointed for one-year terms expiring December
31, 1976, two members shall be appointed for two-year terms expiring
December 31, 1977, and three members shall be appointed for threeyear
terms expiring December 31, 1978. Thereafter as the aforesaid terms
expire, there shall be at least two annual appointments then commencing
a term of three years. Except for initial adjustments or for special aspects
of the Planning Board and Council members, as set forth in § 16-2, all
appointments shall commence the first day of January of the year in which
the appointment is made.
§ 16-4. Powers.
the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member
is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
C. Associate members. [Added 11-22-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:814]
(1) The Mayor of the Borough of Closter shall have full power to
appoint associate members to the Environmental Commission in
accordance with the requirements set forth below.
(2) The terms of the associate members shall be for one year.
(3) Any vacancy occurring otherwise than by the expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired term
only.
(4) The associate members shall serve without compensation. They
may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote.
A. The Environmental Commission shall have power as follows:
(1) To study and make recommendations concerning open space
preservation.
(2) To study and make recommendations concerning water resources
management.
(3) To study and make recommendations concerning air pollution
control.
(4) To study and make recommendations concerning solid waste
management.
§ 16-2 CLOSTER CODE § 16-4
14:40
(5) To study and make recommendations concerning noise control.
(6) To study and make recommendations concerning the protection of
all shade trees (Ch. 16, Article II), soil and landscapes. [Amended
12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:815]
(7) To study and make recommendations concerning environmental
appearances.
(8) To study and make recommendations concerning marine resources
as well as protection of flora and fauna.
(9) To conduct research into the use or potential use of open land areas
of the municipality.
(10) To coordinate the activities of other unofficial bodies or
organizations concerned with the use of open space.
(11) To advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts and
pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary to effectuate
the purposes and powers as herein set forth.
(12) To promote in general an environmental, ecological conservation
and natural resources program for the Borough of Closter.
(13) To solicit recommendations for the allocation of the open space
funds and report to the Mayor and Council with their findings.
[Added 12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:815]
(14) The Commission may appoint committees to carry out any of the
foregoing responsibilities. The committees shall be chaired by a
Commission member and composed of associate members as
delineated in § 16-2C. [Added 12-20-1999 by Ord. No.
1999:815]
(15) The Commission shall be responsible for policies, procedures and
application forms necessary to carry out it's responsibilities with
the advice of the appropriate borough personnel. [Added
12-20-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:815]
(16) To study and make recommendations concerning all of the
Borough's parkland, preserves and natural open space. [Added
10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1108]
B. In addition to the aforesaid, upon designation by the Mayor and
Council, said Environmental Commission may act as liaison between
other environmental commissions or governing bodies of other
municipalities along with federal agencies on a county, state or federal
level.
§ 16-4 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 16-5
14:41
§ 16-5. Index of open areas.
The Environmental Commission shall create and maintain an index of all
open areas in the Borough of Closter for the publicly or privately owned
areas in order to obtain information on the proper present and future use
of such areas and may from time to time recommend to the Planning Board
of the Borough of Closter such programs concerning such open space for
inclusion in the Master Plan of the Borough of Closter and for prospective
development and use of such areas.
§ 16-6. Management of properties.
When designated by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter,
the Environmental Commission may manage for environmental and
conservation purposes such lands which are owned in whole or in part by
the Borough of Closter by virtue of direct acquisition, condemnation or
donation.
§ 16-7. Acquisition of lands.
If authorized and approved by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Closter, the Environmental Commission may acquire property, both real
and personal, in the name of the municipality by gift, purchase, grant,
bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes and shall administer the
same for such purposes subject to the terms of the conveyance or gift.
Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest,
development right, easement (including conservation easement), covenant
or other contractual right (including a conveyance on conditions or with
limitations or reversions) as may be necessary to acquire, maintain,
improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly
utilize open spaces and other land and water areas in the municipality.
§ 16-8. Records and reports.
The Environmental Commission shall convene no fewer than four times a
year and may convene more often at the determination of the members
of said Commission. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings and records
maintained by said Commission of all of its activities. The Commission shall
report periodically, as required by the Mayor and Council, to the Mayor and
Council, but in any event the Commission shall make an annual report to
the Mayor and Council indicating its accomplishments or activities for the
preceding year and its plans or projects for the following year. Included in
said reports shall be an accounting for any expenditures made during the
period of the report.
§ 16-9. Organization.
In furtherance of § 16-2 of this chapter, the Chairman of the Environmental
Commission shall organize said Commission within 30 days of its creation,
and the Commission shall choose by majority vote a person designated to
act in the absence of the Chairman. Said Commission is also authorized to
§ 16-5 CLOSTER CODE § 16-9
14:42
adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation, which bylaws shall not
become effective without the approval of the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Closter. Similarly, should the Commission be designated by the
Mayor and Council to manage certain lands as set forth, such managing
shall not necessarily be exclusive but may be jointly with the Mayor and
Council or with other bodies or agencies of joint use as may be determined
necessary by the Mayor and Council. In conjunction with said management,
the Commission may recommend rules and regulations for the use of said
properties and the conduct of all persons using the same, which rules shall
be subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council or any joint agencies
charged with the final responsibility for management of said lands.
§ 16-10. Appropriations.
The Environmental Commission shall have no powers to raise funds of
its own other than the receipt of gifts of real or personal property, as
hereinabove provided, with the exception that the Mayor and Council may
authorize private fundraising activities if deemed necessary. The Mayor
and Council may annually determine and appropriate sufficient sums for
the care, custody, policing or maintenance of lands controlled, in whole
or in part, by such Commission, which funds shall be raised by taxation
as part of the municipal budget. In addition, the Mayor and Council may
appropriate annually a sum for the expenses incurred by the Environmental
Commission.
§ 16-11. Clerical and other employees.
The Commission may appoint or employ a Secretary or Clerk and other
personnel as may be necessary for the operation of the Commission and for
custodial, supervisory or other care of lands within the jurisdiction of said
Commission, provided that the expenditure of such funds must be within
the limits of the total appropriation of funds made by the governing body
on behalf of such Commission; provided further, however, that any salaries
as opposed to expenses shall be fixed and determined by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter and shall be included in the general
Salary Ordinance of the Borough of Closter.17
17.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk. Former
Art. II, Protection of Trees, adopted 4-26-2000 by Ord. No. 2000:824, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 2-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:859. See now Ch. 59,
Shade Tree Commission.
§ 16-9 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 16-11
14:43
Chapter 18
ETHICS, CODE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 43. Personnel policies — See Ch. 48.
§ 18-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — Any agency, board, governing body, including the chief
executive officer, office, commission or other instrumentality within the
Borough of Closter and any independent local authority created by or
appointed under the authority of the Borough of Closter which performs
function other than of a purely advisory nature.
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION — Any corporation, partnership, firm,
enterprise, franchise, association, trust, sole proprietorship, union or other
legal entity.[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
EMPLOYEE — Any person, whether compensated or not, whether part-time
or full-time, employed by or serving on a Borough agency who is not an
officer.
INTEREST — The ownership or control of more than 10% of the profits,
assets or stock of a business organization, but shall not include the control
of assets in a nonprofit entity or labor union.
MEMBER OF IMMEDIATE FAMILY — The spouse or dependent child of an
officer or employee residing in the same household.
OFFICER[Amended 7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:626] — Any person,
whether compensated or not, whether part-time or full-time:
A. Elected to any office of a Borough agency;
Serving on a Borough agency which has the authority to enact
ordinances, approve development applications or grant zoning
variances;
B.
C. Who is a member of an independent municipal authority;
Who formulates management policies and practices and who is charged
with the responsibility of directing the effectuation of such
management policies and practices; or
D.
Whose functional responsibilities or knowledge in connection with the
issue involved in the collective negotiations process would make his or
her membership in any appropriate negotiating unit incompatible with
his or her official duties, and shall include but not be limited to the
E.
§ 16-11 CLOSTER CODE § 18-1
14:44
OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — An officer or employee of the Borough of
Closter or of an agency under the authority of or appointed by the Borough
of Closter.
§ 18-2. Ethical standards. [Amended 9-23-1992 by Ord. No.
1992:260]
Officers and employees of the Borough of Closter shall comply with the
following provisions:
Mayor, members of the Borough Council, the Borough Administrator,
the Superintendent of Public Works, the Director of the Department of
Recreation, the Chief of Police, members of the Police Department who
hold the rank of Captain or above, the Tax Assessor, the Borough Clerk,
the Borough Attorney, the Borough Engineer, the Borough Planning
Consultant, the Borough Auditor, the Municipal Prosecutor, the Public
Defender, Planning Board members, the Planning Board Attorney,
Zoning Board of Adjustment members, Zoning Board of Adjustment
Attorneys, Local Assistance Board members, the Director of Public
Assistance, the Fire Chief, Library Board members, the Library
Director, the Tax Collector/Treasurer, members of the Board of Health,
the Health Officer/Sanitarian, the Shade Tree Commission members, all
Borough Deputies, the Construction Code Official/Zoning Officer, the
Borough Fire Official, members of the Board of Ethics and the Attorney
to the Board of Ethics.
A. No officer or employee of the Borough of Closter or member of his or
her immediate family shall have an interest in any business
organization or engage in any business, transaction or professional
activity which is in substantial conflict with the proper discharge of his
or her duties in the public interest.
B. Independent local authorities.
(1) No independent local authority shall for a period of one year
subsequent to the termination of office of a member of that
authority:
(a) Award any contract which is not publicly bid to a former
member of that authority;
(b) Allow a former member of that authority to represent, appear
for or negotiate on behalf of any other party before that
authority; or
(c) Employ for compensation, except pursuant to open competitive
examination in accordance with Title 11A of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated and the rules and regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto, any former member of that authority.
§ 18-1 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 18-2
14:45
(2) The restrictions contained in this subsection shall also apply to any
business organization in which the former authority member holds
an interest.
C. No officer or employee shall use or attempt to use his or her official
position to secure unwarranted privileges or advantages for himself or
herself or others.
D. No officer or employee shall act in his or her official capacity in any
manner where he or she, a member of his or her immediate family or
any business organization in which he or she has an interest has a
direct or indirect financial or personal involvement that might
reasonably be expected to impair his or her objectivity or independence
of judgment.
E. No officer or employee shall undertake any employment or service,
whether compensated or not, which might reasonably be expected to
prejudice his or her independence of judgment in the exercise of his or
her official duties.
F. No officer or employee, members of his or her immediate family or any
business organization in which he or she has an interest shall solicit or
accept any gift, favor, political contribution, service, promise of future
employment or other thing of value based upon an understanding that
the gift, favor, loan, contribution, service, promise or other thing of
value was given or offered for the purpose of influencing him or her,
directly or indirectly, in the discharge of his or her official duties. This
provision shall not apply to the solicitation or acceptance of
contribution to the campaign of an announced candidate for elective
public office, if the officer has no knowledge or reason to believe that
the campaign contribution, if accepted, was given with the intent to
influence the officer in the discharge of his or her official duties.
G. No officer or employee shall use or allow to be used his or her public
office or employment or use, allow to be used or disclose any
information not generally available to the members of the public, which
he or she receives or acquires in the course of and by reason of his or
her office or employment, for the purpose of securing financial gain for
himself or herself, any member of his or her immediate family or any
business organization with which he or she is associated.
H. No officer or employee or any business organization in which he or she
has an interest shall represent any person or party other than the
Borough in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other
matter pending before any Borough agency. This provision shall not be
deemed to prohibit an employee from representing another employee
where the representation is within the context of official labor union or
similar representational responsibilities, nor shall this provision be
applicable to the Borough Public Defender with respect to
representation of defendants in the Municipal Court.
§ 18-2 CLOSTER CODE § 18-2
14:46
§ 18-3. Financial disclosure statements.
I. No officer shall be deemed in conflict with these provisions if, by reason
of his or her participation in the enactment of any ordinance, resolution
or other matter required to be voted upon or which is subject to
executive approval or veto, no material or monetary gain accrues to him
or her as a member of any business, professional occupation or group to
any greater extent than any gain could reasonably be expected to
accrue to any other member of such business, profession, occupation or
group.
J. No elected officer shall be prohibited from making an inquiry for
information on behalf of a constituent if no fee, reward or other thing of
value is promised to, given to or accepted by the officer or member of
his or her immediate family, whether directly or indirectly, in return
therefor.
K. No officer or employee of the Borough or any of its agencies shall direct
or cause any employee of the Borough to do or perform any service or
work outside of public work or employment, nor shall any officer or
employee of the Borough perform any such service or work for such
officer or employee.
L. Nothing shall prohibit any officer or employee of the Borough of Closter
or members of his or her immediate family, from representing himself,
herself or themselves in negotiations or proceedings concerning his,
her or their own interests.
M. No officer or employee shall approve or disapprove or in any way
recommend the payment of any bill, voucher or indebtedness owed or
allegedly owed by the Borough in which he or she has a direct or
indirect interest.
N. No officer or employee elected or appointed in the Borough shall
request, use or permit the use of any public property, vehicle,
equipment, material, labor or service for personal convenience or the
private advantage of himself or herself or any other person. This
prohibition shall not be deemed to prohibit an official or employee from
requesting, using or permitting the use of such public property, vehicle,
equipment, material, labor or service, which it is the general practice to
make available to the public at large or which is provided as a matter of
stated public policy for the use of officers and employees in the conduct
of official business.
A. All officers and employees of the Borough of Closter shall annually file a
financial disclosure statement.
B. All financial disclosure statements shall include the following
information which shall specify, where applicable, the name and
address of each source, the officer's or employee's name, residence
address and job title:
§ 18-2 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 18-3
14:47
(1) Each source of income, earned or unearned, exceeding $2,000,
received by the officer or employer or a member of his or her
immediate family during the preceding calendar year. Individual
client fees, customer receipts or commissions on transactions
received through a business organization need not be separately
reported as sources of income. If a publicly traded security is the
source of income, the security need not be reported unless the
officer or employee or member of his or her immediate family has a
financial interest in the business organization.
(2) Each source of fees and honorariums having an aggregate amount
exceeding $250 from any single source for personal appearances,
speeches or writing received by the officer or employee or a
member of his or her immediate family during the preceding
calendar year.
(3) Each source of gifts, reimbursements or prepaid expenses having
an aggregate value exceeding $400 from any single source,
excluding relatives, received by the officer or employee or a
member of his or her immediate family during the preceding
calendar year.
(4) The name and address of all business organizations in which the
officer or employee or a member of his or her immediate family had
any interest, including a personal interest, during the preceding
calendar year.
(5) The address and brief description of all real property in this state in
which the officer or employee or a member of his or her immediate
family held a financial or personal interest during the preceding
calendar year. As to any interest in real property in his or her own
name or in conjunction with another person, the officer or
employee shall set forth the nature of his or her interest and the
identity of the other person having another interest in the property.
(6) Whether or not he or she, his or her spouse, to his or her
knowledge, or any business association in which he or she has an
interest at present or in the past 12 months has had any interest,
directly or indirectly, in any application to the Borough or any
Borough agencies or in any license, bid, contract, transaction or
matter involving the Borough or any of its agencies or requiring
any official action by the Borough or any of its officers or public
bodies. If the officer, employee, spouse or business association in
which he or she has an interest had such interest, the officer or
employee shall fully set forth and describe the matter, including in
his or her description the names of the persons involved, the name
of the Borough agency or public body involved, whether or not the
matter is still pending, if concluded, the outcome of the matter, and
the name of each person who handled the matter for the Borough
or any of its agencies or public bodies.
§ 18-3 CLOSTER CODE § 18-3
14:48
§ 18-4. Borough of Closter Board of Ethics.
C. Financial disclosure shall be made on the financial disclosure statement
forms promulgated by the New Jersey Local Finance Board in
accordance with the New Jersey Local Government Ethics Law18 and
addenda to such forms, as required. The Borough Clerk shall make the
forms available to the officers and employees required to file a financial
disclosure statement. All statements shall be filed on or before April 30
each year, except that each local government officer shall file a financial
disclosure statement within 30 days of taking office. The original
statement shall be filed with the Borough Clerk. A copy of the statement
shall be filed with the Local Finance Board and with the Borough of
Closter Board of Ethics. [Amended 5-25-2011 by Ord. No.
2011:1087]
D. All financial disclosure statements shall be public records.
A. Organization. [Amended 7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:626]
(1) Appointment and membership. [Amended 5-25-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011:1087]
(a) There is hereby established the Borough of Closter Board of
Ethics consisting of six members who are residents of the
Borough who shall hold no other office or employment with any
public body in the Borough. The members of the Board shall be
appointed by the Mayor and Council in the manner set forth in
Subsection A(1)(b) of this section. The members shall be
chosen by virtue of their known and consistent reputation for
integrity and their knowledge of local government affairs. No
more than three members of the Board shall be of the same
political party.
(b) The following Borough organizations shall be requested by the
Mayor and Council at least 30 days prior to appointment to
recommend to the Mayor and Council the names of two
candidates for appointment to the Board of Ethics: Library
Trustees, Recreation Committee, Shade Tree Commission,
Environmental Commission, Improvement Commission and
Historic Preservation Commission. The two candidates
recommended by each organization shall not be of the same
political party. The candidates selected shall not be members of
the aforesaid organizations. Each Board has 30 days from the
date the Chairman receives the request to respond. In the
event none of the above-mentioned Borough organizations
make the requested recommendations within 30 days of
receipt, the Mayor and Council shall nominate and/or appoint
members without obtaining the recommendation(s).
18.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq.
§ 18-3 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 18-4
14:49
(2) The members of the Borough of Closter Board of Ethics shall
annually elect a Chairperson from among the membership.
(3) The members shall serve for a term of five years, except that of the
members initially appointed, two of the public members shall be
appointed to serve for terms of five years, one member shall be
appointed to serve for a term of four years and the remaining
members shall be appointed to serve for terms of three years. Each
member shall serve until his or her successor has been appointed
and qualified. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the
Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment for the unexpired term.
(4) Members of the Board shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of their duties under this section.
(5) All hearings required pursuant to this section shall be conducted in
conformity with the rules and procedures, insofar as they may be
applicable, provided for hearings by a state agency in contested
cases under the Administrative Procedure Act, N.J.S.A. 52:14B-1 et
seq.
(6) In the event that a hearing is to be held, the officer or employee
charged with any violation hereof shall be accorded due process of
law, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Right to counsel.
(b) Prehearing discovery.
(c) Right to take sworn oral and written testimony from any
person.
(d) Reasonable notice of hearing.
(e) Right to subpoena persons and documents.
(f) Right to make stenographic record of the hearing.
(g) Right of examination and cross-examination.
B. Facilities and staff.
(1) The Mayor and Council shall provide the Borough of Closter Board
of Ethics with the facilities needed for the conduct of its business
and the preservation of its records and shall supply equipment and
supplies as may be necessary and as may be provided for in the
annual municipal budget.
(2) All necessary expenses incurred by the Borough of Closter Board of
Ethics and its members shall be paid, upon certification of the
Chairperson of the Board, by the Borough Treasurer within the
limits of funds appropriated in the annual budget or by emergency
§ 18-4 CLOSTER CODE § 18-4
14:50
appropriations for those purposes. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 1993:663]
(3) The Borough of Closter Board of Ethics may request and receive
assistance from Borough officers and employees, including the
Borough Clerk and Borough Attorney, and may appoint employees,
including independent counsel and clerical staff, as are necessary
to carry out the provisions of this chapter within the limits of funds
appropriated by the Mayor and Council for those purposes in the
annual budget.
C. Adoption of the Code of Ethics.
(1) Within 90 days after the appointment of the Borough of Closter
Board of Ethics, the Board shall promulgate by resolution a Code of
Ethics for all officers and employees serving the Borough.19
Officers and employees serving an independent Borough authority
shall be deemed to be serving the Borough for the purposes of this
section. Until such time as the Borough of Closter Board of Ethics
shall have adopted a Code of Ethics, the provisions set forth in
§ 18-2 shall serve as the Code of Ethics. The Code of Ethics
promulgated by the Board of Ethics shall be either identical to the
provisions set forth in § 18-2 or more restrictive but shall not be
less restrictive.
(2) Within 15 days following the promulgation thereof, the Code of
Ethics and a notice of the date of the public hearing to be held on
the Code of Ethics shall be published in the newspaper designated
for the publication of official notices for the Borough and shall be
distributed to the Borough Clerk for circulation among the officers
and employees serving the Borough.
(3) The Borough of Closter Board of Ethics shall hold a public hearing
on the Code of Ethics not less than 30 days following its
promulgation at which any officer or employee of the Borough or
any other person wishing to be heard shall be permitted to testify.
(4) As a result of the hearing, the Board of Ethics may amend or
supplement the Code of Ethics as it deems necessary.
(5) If the Code of Ethics is not identical to the provisions set forth in
§ 18-2, the Borough of Closter Board of Ethics shall, as required by
law, submit the Code of Ethics to the New Jersey Local Finance
Board for approval.
(6) If the Local Finance Board fails to act within 60 days of the
submission, the Code of Ethics shall be deemed approved.
19.Editor's Note: The Board of Ethics has adopted a formal Code of Ethics, which is on file in
the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 18-4 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 18-4
14:51
(7) A Code of Ethics identical to the provisions set forth in § 18-2 shall
take effect 10 days after the public hearing.
(8) The Borough of Closter Board of Ethics shall forward a copy of the
Code of Ethics to the Borough Clerk and shall make copies
available to officers and employees serving the Borough.
D. Powers and duties of the Board of Ethics.
(1) The Borough of Closter Board of Ethics shall have the following
powers:
(a) To initiate, receive, hear and review complaints and hold
hearings with regard to possible violations of the Borough
Code of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements by Borough
officers or employees.
(b) To issue subpoenas for the production of documents and the
attendance of witnesses with respect to its investigation of any
complaint or to the holding of a hearing;
(c) To forward to the County Prosecutor or the Attorney General or
other governmental body any information concerning
violations of the Code of Ethics or financial disclosure
requirements by officers or employees serving the Borough
which may warrant the institution of other legal proceedings
by the County Prosecutor or Attorney General.
(d) To render advisory opinions to officers or employees serving
the Borough as to whether a given set of facts and
circumstances would constitute a violation of any provision of
the Code of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements.
(e) To enforce the provisions of the Code of Ethics and financial
disclosure requirements with regard to officers and employees
serving the Borough and to impose penalties for the violations
thereof as are authorized by this section.
(f) To adopt rules and regulations and to do other things as are
necessary to implement the purposes of this section.
(2) The Board of Ethics shall report to the Mayor and Council by May
15 of each year the name of any officer or employee who has failed
to file an annual disclosure statement.
(3) The Board shall file an annual report of its activities with the Mayor
and Council by December 15 of each year.
E. Advisory opinions.
(1) An officer or employee of the Borough may request and obtain from
the Borough of Closter Board of Ethics an advisory opinion as to
whether any proposed activity or conduct would, in its opinion,
§ 18-4 CLOSTER CODE § 18-4
14:52
constitute a violation of the Code of Ethics or any financial
disclosure requirements.
(2) Advisory opinions shall not be made public except when the Board,
by a vote of 2/3 of all of its members, directs that the opinion be
made public.
(3) Public advisory opinions shall not disclose the name of the officer
or employee unless the Board of Ethics, in directing that the
opinion be made public, so determines.
F. Complaints.
(1) The Borough of Closter Board of Ethics, upon receipt of a signed
written complaint by any person alleging that the conduct of any
officer or employee serving the Borough is in conflict with the Code
of Ethics or financial disclosure requirements, shall acknowledge
receipt of the complaint within 30 days of receipt and initiate an
investigation concerning the facts and circumstances set forth in
the complaint.
(2) The Board shall make a determination as to whether the complaint
is within its jurisdiction or frivolous or without any reasonable
factual basis.
(3) If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is outside its
jurisdiction, frivolous or without actual basis, it shall reduce that
conclusion to writing and shall transmit a copy thereof to the
complainant and to the officer or employee of the Borough of
Closter against whom the complaint was filed.
(4) If the Board shall conclude that the complaint is within its
jurisdiction and has at least a minimal factual basis, the Board shall
notify the officer or employee of the Borough of Closter against
whom the complaint was filed of the nature of the complaint and
the facts and circumstance set forth therein.
(5) The officer or employee shall have the opportunity to present the
Board of Ethics with any statement or information concerning the
complaint which he or she wishes.
(6) If the Board of Ethics determines that a reasonable doubt exists as
to whether the officer or employee of the Borough of Closter is in
conflict with the Borough Code of Ethics or any financial disclosure
requirements, the Board of Ethics shall conduct a hearing
concerning the possible violation and any other facts and
circumstances which may have come to the attention of the Board
of Ethics with respect to the conduct of the officer or employee.
(7) The Board of Ethics shall render a decision as to whether the
conduct of the officer or employee is in conflict with the Code of
§ 18-4 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 18-4
14:53
Ethics or any financial disclosure requirements. This decision shall
be made by no fewer than 2/3 of all members of the Board.
(8) If the Board of Ethics determines that the officer or employee is in
conflict with the code or any financial disclosure requirements, it
may impose any penalties which it believes appropriate within the
limits of this chapter.
(9) Upon the conclusion of any hearing pursuant to this section, the
Board of Ethics shall make a written report to the Mayor and
Council.
G. Enforcement and penalties.
(1) An appointed officer or employee of the Borough of Closter found
guilty by the Borough of Closter Board of Ethics of the violation of
any provision of this chapter or of any Code of Ethics in effect
pursuant to this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 or more
than $500, which penalty may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1. The Borough of Closter Board of Ethics shall report its
finding to the office or agency having the power of removal or
discipline of the appointed officer or employee and may
recommend that further disciplinary action be taken.
(2) An elected officer or employee of the Borough of Closter found
guilty by the Borough of Closter Board of Ethics of the violation of
any provision of this chapter or of any Code of Ethics in effect
pursuant to this chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more
than $500, which penalty may be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law, N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1.
(3) The finding of the Borough of Closter Board of Ethics that an
appointed officer or employee of the Borough of Closter is guilty of
the violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any Code of
Ethics in effect pursuant to this chapter shall be sufficient cause for
his or her removal, suspension, demotion or other disciplinary
action by the officer or agency having the power of removal or
discipline. When a person who is in the career service is found to
have violated the provisions of this chapter, the procedure leading
to removal, suspension, demotion or other disciplinary action shall
be governed by any applicable procedures of Title 11A of the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated and the rules promulgated pursuant
thereto.
H. Records of the Board of Ethics. All statements, complaints, requests or
other written materials filed pursuant to this chapter and any rulings,
opinions, judgments, transcripts or other official papers prepared
pursuant to this chapter shall be preserved for a period of five years
from the date of filing or preparation, as the case may be.
§ 18-4 CLOSTER CODE § 18-4
14:54
Chapter 21
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
§ 21-1. Creation.
A Fire Department be and the same hereby is created, which Fire
Department shall consist of the Closter Volunteer Fire Association known
as and by the name of the "Knickerbocker Hook and Ladder Company,"
which Association is hereby designated and constituted the authorized Fire
Department of said Borough of Closter.
§ 21-2. Fire apparatus.
All fire apparatus and means of extinguishing fires provided by said borough
shall be entrusted to said Knickerbocker Hook and Ladder Company.
§ 21-3. Authorization of Department.
The Knickerbocker Hook and Ladder Company shall continue to be the
authorized Fire Department of said borough and shall be entrusted with the
apparatus and means of extinguishing fires provided by said borough only
so long as, in the judgment of the Borough Council, said association shall
prove worthy and efficient.
§ 21-4. Subject to inspection and supervision.
The Knickerbocker Hook and Ladder Company shall at all times be subject
to the inspection and supervision of the Borough Council and when on duty
at any fire shall be subject to reasonable rules and regulations as may be
adopted by the Borough Council.
§ 21-5. Rights; acceptance of provisions.
The Knickerbocker Hook and Ladder Company shall not act or acquire any
rights under this chapter until it shall have accepted the provisions of this
chapter by a vote of at least two-thirds ( 2/3) of its members, and after
acceptance, said Knickerbocker Hook and Ladder Company shall have the
right to surrender all its rights hereunder by giving the Borough Council
three (3) months' notice, in writing, and by giving up and surrendering all
borough property in its possession.
§ 18-4 EMERGENCY SERVICES § 21-6
14:55
§ 21-6. Repairs.
The Knickerbocker Hook and Ladder Company, by its vote as required
having accepted the foregoing chapter, and the Council agree to keep in
repair the truck and all apparatus belonging to the Knickerbocker Hook
and Ladder Company, also the firehouse in lieu of rent for the use of the
firehouse for the housing of all apparatus belonging to both the Council and
the Knickerbocker Hook and Ladder Company.
§ 21-7. Clothing allowance. [Added 11-23-1987 by Ord. No.
1987:555; amended 9-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:631]
Chapter 23
FOOD AND ASSISTANCE BOARD
§ 23-1. Composition. [Amended 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1185]
The Food and Assistance Board shall be composed of a minimum of three
and a maximum of five persons. Members Four and Five are optional
appointments and are not mandatory. The members of the Board shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the governing body. The
members shall serve without compensation but shall be allowed their
necessary and actual expenses.
A. Firemen shall receive for the calendar year, commencing January 1,
1993, a clothing allowance in the sums and for attendance at the
specified percentage of fires, drills and cleanups as follows:
Attendance Rate
(percent)
Clothing Allowance
35 $150.00
50 225.00
60 300.00
B. Commencing January 1, 1994, and annually thereafter, the allowance
set forth in Subsection A shall be adjusted by the same percentage as
the average percentage base salary increase for all employees of the
borough (union and nonunion) during the preceding calendar year.
Salary increases granted retroactively for prior years shall be
considered increases in the year in which the retroactive increase is
granted.
C. This allowance shall be paid by voucher signed by the individual
fireman and approved by the Fire Chief.
D. The allowance will be paid after completion of the year upon receipt of a
certification by the Fire Chief as to the hours served.
§ 21-6 CLOSTER CODE § 23-2
14:56
§ 23-2. Terms of members.
§ 23-3. Organization.
The Board shall organize and select a Chairman and a Secretary.
§ 23-4. Manner of assistance.
The Board shall operate the Borough's food pantry, provide emergency
payments of utility bills, and publish a newsletter. In addition, the Board
shall provide assistance by any other method approved by the governing
body and complying with the laws of New Jersey.
Chapter 26
HEALTH, BOARD OF
§ 26-1. Creation.
There shall be in and for the Borough of Closter a Board of Health, in
accordance with the provision of an Act of the Legislature of the State of
New Jersey entitled "An Act to Establish in This State Boards of Health and
a Bureau of Vital Statistics and Define Their Respective Powers and Duties,"
approved March 31, 1887, and the several supplements and amendments
thereto.
§ 26-2. Composition; terms.
A. The terms of each member of the Board shall be for two years, expiring
in alternate years, except that the initial appointments following the
adoption of this subsection shall be: Member One shall be appointed for
a three-year term expiring December 31, 2017; Member Two shall be
appointed to a two-year term expiring December 31, 2016; Member
Three shall be appointed for a three-year term expiring December 31,
2017; Member Four shall be appointed to a two-year term expiring
December 31, 2016; and Member Five (if any) shall be appointed to a
three year term expiring on December 31, 2017. As each member’s
initial appointment expires, the new term shall be for two years.
[Amended 5-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1185]
B. The term of each member of the Board shall begin on the first day of
January, and each member shall continue in office until his successor
shall be appointed and shall qualify. Vacancies shall be filled for the
unexpired terms only.
A. Such Board of Health shall consist of seven (7) members, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor in the same manner as other officers of the
borough are appointed. The terms of all members of the Board of
Health expiring on and after January 1, 1955, shall be reappointed and
shall hold office for terms of four (4) years, except in case of a vacancy,
§ 23-2 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 26-2
26:57
§ 26-3. Debt limited to appropriation.
The Board of Health shall not contract any debt or debts of any kind beyond
the amount of the appropriation made for its use by this Council.
Chapter 28
HOUSING AUTHORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fair housing — See Ch. 100.
§ 28-1. Statement of desire to participate.
The Borough of Closter desires to participate in the area of operations of
the Housing Authority of Bergen County throughout its territorial boundary
and the jurisdiction of its Mayor and Council for the purpose of alleviating
the shortage of safe and sanitary housing.
in which case the person appointed to fill the vacancy shall hold office
for the unexpired term only.20
B. Alternate members. [Added 3-14-1990 by Ord. No. 1990:590]
(1) The Mayor of the Borough of Closter shall have full power to
appoint two (2) alternate members to the Board of Health in
accordance with the requirements set forth below. The two (2)
alternate members shall be designated as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2" at the time of appointment by the Mayor.
(2) The terms of the alternate members shall be for two (2) years,
except that the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall
be two (2) years for Alternate No. 1 and one (1) year for Alternate
No. 2 so that the term of not more than one (1) alternate member
shall expire in any one (1) year.
(3) Any vacancy occurring otherwise than by the expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired term
only.
(4) The alternate members shall serve without compensation. They
may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualifications of a regular member. In
the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member
is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 26-2 CLOSTER CODE § 28-2
28:58
§ 28-2. Consent to inclusion.
The Borough of Closter does hereby consent to its inclusion in the area of
operation of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
§ 28-3. Approval required for new construction.
The Borough of Closter understands that the Housing Authority of Bergen
County will not make application for new construction in the Borough of
Closter without the approval of the governing body of the Borough of
Closter.
§ 28-4. Copy to be filed.
The Clerk be and is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified
copy of this chapter with the Commissioner of the State Department of
Conservation and Economic Development and with the Secretary of the
Housing Authority of Bergen County.
Chapter 29
IMPROVEMENT COMMISSION
§ 29-1. Purpose and mission.
The Closter Improvement Commission is an advisory body to the Mayor
and Borough Council and the Planning Board. Its primary mission is to
foster a sense of community by supporting and/or introducing Boroughwide
improvement initiatives, supporting civic and cultural activities and
facilitating aesthetic improvements specifically, but not limited to, the
historic Downtown Renaissance Zone (see § 29-11 of this chapter).
§ 29-2. Composition; terms of regular and alternate members.
A. Composition of regular members. The Closter Improvement
Commission shall consist of 11 regular members to be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. Of these
members, one may be a representative of the Closter Historic
Preservation Commission. At least six of the remaining nine members
shall be Closter residents who are not members of the Borough Council.
Each of these 11 shall have voting privileges. All regular members serve
without compensation. [Amended 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:983;
6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1190]
B. Composition of alternate members. The Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council, shall appoint two alternate members to
the Closter Improvement Commission. The two alternate members shall
be designated by the Mayor "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" at
the time of the appointment. They may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
§ 28-2 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 29-2
28:59
§ 29-3. Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Secretary.
At the annual reorganization meeting to be held each January, the
Commission members shall elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and a
Secretary, each to serve for a period of one year.
§ 29-4. Quorum and voting.
At all meetings of the Commission, a quorum for conducting business shall
consist of six members, including alternate members. In the event that less
than six members attend a meeting, no official business may be conducted.
At all meetings where a quorum is present, Commission business shall be
considered approved upon the affirmative vote of the majority of members
present.
§ 29-5. Responsibilities.
The Closter Improvement Commission shall be responsible for making
recommendations to the Mayor and Borough Council based on the results
of the work carried out by the Commission. These recommendations shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote first.
Alternate members shall serve without compensation.
C. Terms of regular members and alternate members.
(1) Each regular and alternate member shall be appointed for a term of
two years (except that the term of any member appointed after the
annual reorganization, but during the calendar year, shall expire on
December 31 of the following calendar year; any vacancy occurring
for reasons other than the expiration of term shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term only). For the purposes of
Commission continuity, upon adoption of this chapter, the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint for a term
of three years five regular members to the Commission. All
appointments thereafter shall be for a period of two years, except
for members appointed after the annual reorganization, but during
the calendar year.
(2) Any vacancy occurring other than by the expiration of term shall be
filled by appointment by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of
the Council, for the unexpired term only.
(3) After three unexcused absences from monthly meetings, any
member or alternate member shall be removed from the
Commission. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the
Council, shall appoint a replacement alternate member to serve the
unexpired portion of the removed member's term.
§ 29-2 CLOSTER CODE § 29-5
28:60
§ 29-6. Powers.
§ 29-7. Professional consultants.
The Commission shall have the right to employ professional consultants
when necessary, provided the costs are within their budgetary constraints.
§ 29-8. Meetings.
The Commission shall meet monthly, with special meetings scheduled as
needed and with notice provided to the public as required by the Open
Public Meetings Act. All meetings shall be open to the public unless there
is basis for closing the meeting to the public as authorized by N.J.S.A.A
10:4-12 of the Open Public Meetings Act. If so closed, the Commission shall
adhere to the procedural rules of the Open Public Meetings Act.
§ 29-9. Subcommittees.
The Commission may form subcommittees representing the constituencies
of its membership. However, all actions shall be taken by the Commission
A. Help foster the development of a Chamber of Commerce, facilitating a
positive working alliance among business owners, local government
and citizens of the Borough.
B. Aid in improving the environment of the Borough's business districts.
C. Assist in the protection of the historical quality of the Downtown
Renaissance Zone, including but not limited to the making of
recommendations for approval of permanent signs. The Downtown
Renaissance Zone is defined to include all properties listed by block and
lot in § 29-11 of this chapter.
D. Foster a sense of community through public activities and engagement
with other civic groups.
A. (Reserved)21
B. Site plan — Downtown Renaissance Zone. The Commission shall review
site plans, as forwarded by the Planning Board, for any permanent
changes in the Renaissance Zone and make recommendations
according to the criteria set out in Closter Code § 173-50. The
Commission shall make written recommendations to the Planning
Board within 30 days of receipt of the site plan by the Commission in
accordance with Municipal Land Use Law.
C. Drafting of bylaws. The Commission may draft bylaws consistent with
this chapter.
21.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A, Signs in the Downtown Renaissance Zone, was
repealed 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1163.
§ 29-5 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 29-9
28:61
as a whole, with the advice and consent of the Mayor and Borough Council
when required.
§ 29-10. Fund-raising.
The commission may raise funds to advance and promote its purposes
with the consent of the Mayor and Borough Council according to state
regulation.
§ 29-11. Limiting schedule: The Downtown Renaissance Zone.
The Downtown Renaissance Zone consists of the following properties as
shown on the Tax Map of the Borough of Closter:
Block 1301 Lots 7 through 13 inclusive
Block 1302 Lot 1
Lots 12 through 21 inclusive
Lots 23 through 32 inclusive
Block 1303 Lot 1
Block 1305 Lot 1
Lots 3, 4.01, 5, 6 and 7.01
Block 1309 Lot 1
Lots 3 through 8 inclusive
Block 1311 Lot 11
Block 1312 Lots 7 through 21 inclusive
Block 1313 Lots 1 through 5 inclusive
Block 1314 Lots 1 through 4 inclusive
Block 1315 Lots 1, 2, 5 and 6
Block 1701 Lots 1 and 2
Chapter 30
INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Municipal Court — See Ch. 11.
§ 29-9 CLOSTER CODE § 29-11
28:62
ARTICLE I
Interboro Regional Communications Network
[Adopted 2-23-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:445 (Art. I of Ch. 51B of the
1967 Code)]
§ 30-1. Findings of fact; statutory authority.
The Mayor and Council hereby make the following declarations:
§ 30-2. Agreement. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
The Mayor and Council hereby agree with the Boroughs of Alpine,
Demarest, Harrington Park, Northvale and Norwood that the Borough of
Closter shall provide the aforementioned communication services in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the aforementioned
agreement.
§ 30-3. Execution of documents.
The Mayor and Council hereby direct the Mayor and Clerk to execute any
and all contract documents which are necessary to effectuate the terms of
this article.
§ 30-4. When effective. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
This article shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law and upon the adoption of an ordinance by the Boroughs of Alpine,
Demarest, Harrington Park, Northvale and Norwood authorizing the similar
execution of the aforesaid agreement.
A. The Borough of Closter has offered to provide certain emergency radio
and telephone communications services and the Boroughs of Alpine,
Closter, Demarest, Harrington Park, Northvale and Norwood have
offered to pay for such services in accordance with the terms and
conditions of an agreement which is on file in the office of the Borough
Clerk and available for public inspection during regular business hours.
[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
B. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter has reviewed said
offers and desires to accept the same.
C. The Borough of Closter is permitted to enter into the aforementioned
agreement with the Boroughs of Alpine, Demarest, Harrington Park,
Northvale and Norwood pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq., the
Interlocal Services Act, and is required to adopt an ordinance in order
to enter into said agreement. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
§ 30-1 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 30-4
28:63

ARTICLE II
Library System Computer Consortium
[Adopted 7-23-1986 by Ord. No. 1986:531 (Art. II of Ch. 51B of the
1967 Code)]
§ 30-5. Agreement.
The Mayor and Clerk are hereby authorized to execute an additional
participant agreement (the "agreement") with the Bergen County
Cooperative Library System Computer Consortium, Inc., a copy of which
is on file in the office of the Clerk and available for inspection and is
incorporated by reference as if set forth at length, in connection with the
construction and installation of the central system and the use thereof by
the Borough of Closter.
§ 30-6. Payment plan.
The municipality does hereby elect to pay its obligation under the additional
participant agreement on the deferred four-year plan.
§ 30-7. Funding.
There shall be appropriated annually in the budget sufficient funds to
pay the proportionate share to be paid by the Borough of Closter of the
operation, maintenance and debt service expenses incurred in regard to the
central system in accordance with the interlocal services agreement and the
additional participant agreement.
§ 30-8. Duty of officials.
The appropriate officials of the Borough of Closter shall take all steps
necessary to enable the municipal library to effectively utilize the central
system to provide better library service to the residents of the Borough of
Closter.
§ 30-9. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon adoption, approval and publication
thereof and upon approval of the additional participant agreement by the
consortium.
§ 30-5 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 30-9
28:65

ARTICLE III
Municipal Court Services
[Adopted 4-24-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:712]
§ 30-10. (Reserved)22
§ 30-11. Agreement to share Municipal Court services.
The Mayor and Council hereby agrees with the Borough of Rockleigh that
the Borough of Closter shall share the aforementioned Municipal Court
services in accordance with the terms and conditions of the aforementioned
agreement subject to the adoption of a corresponding ordinance by the
Borough of Rockleigh authorizing the execution of the agreement between
the two boroughs.
§ 30-12. Execution of documents.
The Mayor and Council hereby directs the Mayor and Borough Clerk to
execute any and all contract documents which are necessary to effectuate
the terms of this article.
§ 30-13. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law and upon the adoption of an ordinance by the Borough of Rockleigh,
authorizing the similar execution of the aforesaid agreement.
22.Editor’s Note: Former § 30-10, Terms of agreement; acceptance, as amended, was repealed
7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1194.
§ 30-10 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 30-13
28:67

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)23
§ 30-14. through § 30-16. (Reserved)
23.Editor’s Note: Former Art. IV, Senior Citizen Transportation Services, adopted 4-14-1999
by Ord. No. 1999:787, was repealed 7-22-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1194.
§ 30-14 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 30-14
28:69

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)24
24.Editor’s Note: Former Art. V, Emergency Services Dispatching Agreement, adopted
5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:897, was repealed 10-14-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1197.
HOUSING AUTHORITY § 30-14
28:71
Chapter 35
LAND USE PROCEDURES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 30-14 CLOSTER CODE § 30-14
28:72
ARTICLE I
Planning Board
§ 35-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Borough of Closter."
§ 35-2. Establishment.
There is hereby established, pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 291,25 in the Borough
of Closter a Planning Board of nine members, consisting of the following
four classes:
§ 35-3. Alternate members. [Added 4-23-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:348;
amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
A. Class I: the Mayor.
B. Class II: one of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the governing body to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if there
is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board, as required
by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV members.
C. Class III: a member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
D. Class IV: six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and one may be a member of the Historic Preservation
Commission. A member of the Environmental Commission who is also a
member of the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall
be a Class IV Planning Board member unless there is among the Class
IV members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which case
the member of the Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be
the Class II member of the Planning Board. [Amended 4-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008:1006]
A. There is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
alternate members for the Borough of Closter Planning Board. There
shall be two alternate members who shall be municipal residents and
who shall be appointed by the appointing authority for Class IV
members and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members.
[Amended 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1006]
25.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 35-1 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-3
28:73
§ 35-4. Terms.
§ 35-5. Vacancies.
If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of a term,
it shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
B. The term of office of each of the alternate members shall be for two
years, except that the initial terms of such alternate members shall be
one year and two years, as designated by the appointing authority. The
Mayor shall designate one alternate member as "Alternate No. 1" and
the other alternate member as "Alternate No. 2."
C. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
A. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his or
her official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and
Class III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or shall terminate
at the completion of his or her term of office as a member of the
Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.
B. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he or
she is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his
or her Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
C. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent
the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four
years after their appointment, as determined by resolution of the
governing body; provided, however, that no term of any member shall
exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom
shall continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they
were appointed. Thereafter all Class IV members shall be appointed for
terms of four years, except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall
run from January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
§ 35-3 CLOSTER CODE § 35-6
28:74
§ 35-6. Organization; officers.
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary, who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
§ 35-7. Planning Board Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon
the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an
attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 35-8. Experts and staff.
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not
exceed, however, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the governing body for its use.
§ 35-9. Powers and duties generally.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply. It shall also have the following powers and
duties:
A. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the municipality, including any areas outside
its boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relation to
the planning of the municipality, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
B. To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Review Ordinance26 of the municipality in accordance with the
provisions of said ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law, P.L.
1975, c. 291, (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
C. To approve conditional use applications in accordance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance,27 pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
D. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
E. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 35-6 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-9
28:75
§ 35-10. Time limits for decisions.
F. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend the same to the governing body.
G. To consider and make a report to the governing body within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to
it, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
governing body, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
H. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment, variances,
pursuant to Section 57c of P.L. 1975, c. 291,28 from lot area, lot
dimensional, setback and yard requirements, provided that such relief
from lot area requirements shall not be granted for more than one lot.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of a
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to
the request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit, as the
case may be.
I. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the governing body for the aid and assistance of the
governing body or other agencies or officers.
A. Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within
such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions
of the Map Filing Law29 or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording officer,
the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat
or deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board before it will be accepted for filing by the county recording
officer.
B. Preliminary approval of major subdivision. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
28.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
29.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 35-9 CLOSTER CODE § 35-10
28:76
§ 35-11. Procedure for filing applications.
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291,30 shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Planning Board. The applicant shall file at least 14 days
before the date of the monthly meeting of the Board 20 copies of a sketch
plat, one copy of an application for minor subdivision approval, one copy of
an application for major subdivision approval or one copy of an application
for site plan review, conditional use approval or planned development. At
the time of filing the application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to
the date set for the hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps
or other papers required by virtue of any provisions of this chapter or any
rule of the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Board shall
inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of
the regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 35-12. Citizens' Advisory Committee.
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
the developer; otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
C. Ancillary powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in Article I, § 35-9G, of this chapter, the Planning Board shall grant
or deny approval of the application within 95 days after submission by
the developer of a complete application or within such further time as
may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to
act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application, and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the
failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant.
D. Final approval.
(1) Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of submission of a complete application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(2) Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of the signing of the plat unless within such period the plat
shall have been duly filed by the developer with the county
recording officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown,
extend the period for recording for an additional period not to
exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the plat.
30.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 35-10 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-12
28:77
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 35-13. Environmental Commission.
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 35-12 CLOSTER CODE § 35-13
28:78
ARTICLE II
Zoning Board of Adjustment
§ 35-14. Establishment; composition.
§ 35-15. Alternate members. [Added 4-23-1979 by Ord. No.
1979:348; amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven residents of the Borough
of Closter appointed by the Mayor and subject to confirmation by the
Council to serve for terms of four years from January 1 of the year of
their appointment. The terms of the members first appointed shall be so
determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of
such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years after
their appointment, provided that the initial term of no member shall
exceed four years. Thereafter the term of each member shall be for four
years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be construed to affect the
term of any present member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, all of
whom shall continue in office until the completion of the term for which
they were appointed. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
C. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term only. The vacancy shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Council.
A. There is hereby established, pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 216,31 alternate
members for the Borough of Closter Board of Adjustment. There shall
be two alternate members for the Borough of Closter Board of
Adjustment.
B. The term of office of each of the alternate members shall be for two
years, except that the initial terms of such alternate members shall be
one year and two years, as designated by the appointing authority.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by
the authority appointing them as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2." Alternate members shall be appointed by the same appointing
authority as regular members.
C. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
31.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 35-14 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-16
28:79
§ 35-16. Officers.
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from its
members and shall also select a Secretary, who may or may not be a Board
member or another municipal employee.
§ 35-17. Board of Adjustment Attorney.
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint and fix
the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney.
§ 35-18. Experts and staff.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
§ 35-19. Rules and regulations.
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 35-20. Powers.
A. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
B. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such Board, including, but not by way of limitation, the authority
in connection with any case action or proceedings before the Board to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof and the Zoning Map in accordance with
the general rules of construction applicable to legislative enactments.
C. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general rules hereby laid down that
equity shall be done in cases where the strict construction of the
provisions of this chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and
duties of the Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by
statute, the Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it
§ 35-16 CLOSTER CODE § 35-20
28:80
§ 35-21. Appeals and applications.
§ 35-22. Power to reverse or modify decisions.
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may,
in conformity with the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291,33 or amendments
thereto or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
in said P.L. 1975, c. 291,32 or subsequent statutes in such case made
and provided, and it shall from time to time furnish to any person
requesting the same a copy of its rules and information as to how
appeals or applications may properly be filed with the Board for its
decision thereon.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party. Each appeal shall be taken within the 20 days prescribed by
statute by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the
appeal was taken, together with three copies of said notice with the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Said notice of appeal shall
specify the grounds for said appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is
taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. [Amended
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
B. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to the Construction Official shall
be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. One copy
of the application shall be filed. At the time of filing the appeal or
application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set for
the hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other
papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of
the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of
the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
C. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her that, by reason of
facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not
be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the Board of Adjustment or the Superior Court of New Jersey on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
32.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
33.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 35-20 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-22
28:81
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made and, to that end, have all the powers of the Construction Official from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 35-23. Expiration of variance.
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Board
of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or
structures or permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by
limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within one year
from the date of publication of the notice of the judgment or determination
of the Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the period
of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal
from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to the governing body or to a
court of competent jurisdiction until the termination in any manner of such
appeal or proceeding.
§ 35-24. Powers granted by law.
A. The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law
to:
(1) Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal
made by an administrative official or agency based on or made in
the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.34
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance,35 or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized by the Zoning Ordinance to
pass.
(3) Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property the
strict application of any regulation pursuant to Article 8 of this
Act36would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties
to or exceptional and undue hardship under the developer of such
property, grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such
property, a variance from such strict application of such regulation
so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, including a variance
for a conditional use; provided, however, that no variance shall be
granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use, and provided
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
36.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 35-22 CLOSTER CODE § 35-24
28:82
§ 35-25. Additional powers.
further that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a
request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60. [Amended
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
(4) In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from regulations pursuant to Chapter 173,
Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review, including but not limited
to allowing a structure or use in a district restricted against such
structure or use, but only by affirmative vote of at least five
members. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
B. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.37
Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in § 35-24 of this Article, have power given by law to:
(1) Direct the issuance of a permit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, for
a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
(2) Direct the issuance of a permit, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, for
a building or structure not related to a street [Amended 1-3-1994
by Ord. No. 1993:663]
B. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6 of P.L. 1975, c.
291,38 or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67,
whenever the proposed development requires approval by the Board of
Adjustment of a variance pursuant to of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. The
developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required
approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent
approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
38.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 through 59.
§ 35-24 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-25
28:83
§ 35-26. Time limit for decisions.
§ 35-26.1. Application checklist. [Added 11-22-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:659]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3, applicants before the Board of Adjustment
must submit their application complete with the information set forth as
follows.40
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial
impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning
Ordinance.39 The number of votes of Board members required to grant
any such subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided for the
approval in question, and the special vote shall be pursuant to the
aforesaid N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:372]
A. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76b, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 120 days after submission by a
developer of a complete application to the administrative officer or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the
event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the application for
approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter.
[Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
B. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one-hundredtwenty-
day period or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
40.Editor's Note: The application checklist is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 35-25 CLOSTER CODE § 35-26.1
28:84
ARTICLE III
Provisions Applicable to Both Boards
§ 35-27. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
act on any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify
himself or herself from acting on a particular matter, he or she shall not
continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter nor participate
in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
§ 35-28. Meetings.
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for
lack of applications for development to process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meeting shall be held on
notice to its members and public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All action shall be taken by a majority vote of the members of the
municipal agency present at the meeting, except as otherwise provided
by any provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291, or P.L. 1979, c. 216.41 [Amended
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, P.L. 1975, c. 231.42
F. A member of a municipal agency who was absent for one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the
matter upon which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his or
her absence from one or more of the meetings; provided, however, that
such Board member has available to him or her the transcript or
recording of all of the hearing from which he or she was absent and
certifies, in writing, to the Board that he or she has read such transcript
or listened to such recording. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:372]
41.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 35-27 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-29
28:85
§ 35-29. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter
be made available for public inspection during normal business hours at
the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have the right
to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested
party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his or her
use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 35-30. Fees. [Amended 1-26-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:297; 9-9-1981
by Ord. No. 1981:419; 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1991:617]
§ 35-31. Escrow deposits. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372;
amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
A. All fees as provided by existing ordinances of the Borough of Closter
shall be preserved and saved from repeal except as the same may be
inconsistent herewith.
B. There are hereby established the following filing fees which shall be
paid by all applicants for variances, special permits, subdivision
approvals, site plan approvals and searches for prior variances,
subdivisions or site plan approvals and any other applications made
either to the Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board. These fees
shall be paid to the Secretary of the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment, depending on the Board to which application has been
made, and shall accompany all applications or appeals.
C. Fees shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits. [Added
1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
D. Site plan or subdivision approval with variances. In any case wherein
one or more variances are requested as a part of a site plan or
subdivision development, the application shall be accompanied by a fee
as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits. [Amended 1-3-1994
by Ord. No. 1993:663]
E. Deposit for costs. In all matters wherein either the applicant or the
approving authority is required to publish notice of a hearing or a
determination of the authority, the application shall be accompanied by
a deposit intended to reimburse the Borough for the cost of such
notification in an amount as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and
Deposits, payable at the time of the submission of the application.
[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
A. Escrow deposit amounts shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and
Deposits.
§ 35-29 CLOSTER CODE § 35-31
28:86
§ 35-32. Fee for updating Tax Map. [Added 4-11-1990 by Ord. No.
1990:593; amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Upon the approval of any minor or major subdivision, the applicant shall
pay to the Borough of Closter a fee as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and
B. Deposit for inspection of site plan and subdivision. The applicant shall
deposit simultaneously with any application for final site plan or
subdivision approval the sum of 5% of the estimated cost of
improvements, less building construction costs, to cover engineering,
investigation and inspection of improvements, legal and planning costs,
recording fees and all other costs in connection with the site plan or
subdivision.
C. Rules governing escrow deposits. Upon receipt of an application for one
of the above applications, the administrative officer shall send a copy of
the application and one set of all maps and reports to the professionals
and consultants of the approving authority. Within a reasonable time of
receipt of the same, said professionals shall submit an estimate of funds
sufficient in amount to undertake technical reviews and findings of fact
relative to the application at hand. Such estimated deposits shall be
approved by the approving authority and may from time to time be
reviewed by the governing body. The applicant shall forthwith deposit
funds on demand, which funds shall be required to be placed in an
escrow account by the Treasurer of the Borough of Closter. Such funds
on deposit shall be expended to reimburse the municipality and the
approving authority for moneys paid to professionals and consultants
engaged by them on account of the reasonable cost of their services
rendered with reference to the application for which the deposit has
been established. Upon receipt of the funds above and herein provided
for, the administrative officer shall notify the professionals and other
consultants of the approving authority that all appropriate
examinations and reviews may be undertaken. Should additional funds
be required after the original deposit has been exhausted, such
additional funds shall be paid by the applicant to the Treasurer of the
Borough of Closter and placed in the appropriate account, subject to
the conditions above provided for. Funds remaining in the escrow
account at the completion of the project or phase of the application
procedure, as the case may be, shall be returned without interest to the
applicant as soon as is practicable. The approving authority shall take
no formal action unless all application fees and escrow funds have been
paid to the Treasurer of the Borough of Closter, except those provided
to be paid upon application for final approval, which shall be payable to
the Borough Treasurer at the time specified. All escrow deposits are
intended solely to reimburse the municipality and the approving
authority for expenses incurred by them, or either of them, on account
of the performance of their respective professionals and consultants
with respect to a particular application, together with the cost of
posting official newspaper notices.
§ 35-31 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-32
28:87
Deposits, for the purpose of updating and amending the Borough Tax Map
to reflect any necessary changes occasioned by said subdivision.
§ 35-33. Hearings.
§ 35-34. Notice requirements for hearings.
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. or pursuant to the determination of the
municipal agency in question, the application shall give notice thereof as
follows:
A. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he or she
may designate shall have power to administer oaths and to issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the
parties, and the provisions of P.L. 1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.),
shall apply.
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitation as to time and number of witnesses.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Each municipal agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The municipal agency shall not be required to permit any interested
party to listen to its recording, but the municipal agency shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request, to any
interested party at his or her expense. The municipal agency in
furnishing a transcript shall not charge more than the maximum
permitted by N.J.S.A. 2B:7-4. Each transcript shall be certified, in
writing, by the transcriber to be accurate. [Amended 4-21-1980 by
Ord. No. 1980:372; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
§ 35-32 CLOSTER CODE § 35-34
28:88
whether located within or without the municipality in which the
applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy
thereof on the owner as shown on said current tax duplicate or his or
her agent in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the property owner at his or her address as shown on
said current tax duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a
partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to
a corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice
president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or law
to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to § 35-34B of this Article to the owners of land in
such adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the
subject premises.
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of
P.L. 1975, c. 291.43
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and the applicant shall
file an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on
the application for development.
H. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
43.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.
§ 35-34 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-34
28:89
§ 35-35. List of property owners furnished. [Amended 4-21-1980 by
Ord. No. 1980:372; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Upon the written request of an applicant, the Tax Assessor shall, within
seven days, make and certify a list from the current tax duplicates of names
and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice
pursuant to Article III, § 35-34 of this Code. The applicant shall be entitled
to rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice
to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
A sum as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, shall be charged for
such list.
§ 35-36. Form and content of decisions.
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which
any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
J. Notice requirements shall be deemed satisfied by notice to the
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has
a unit above or below it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of
any co-owner whose apartment has an apartment above or below it.
Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime,
community trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership
of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property
which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as
to a corporation without further notice to unit owners, co-owners or
homeowners on account of such common elements or areas. [Added
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
A. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall include
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
B. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of the decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his or her
attorney, without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed to all persons who have requested it and who paid the fee
prescribed by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall
also be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk, who shall make a copy
of such filed decision available to any interested party upon payment of
a fee calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of
other public documents in the municipality.
C. Failure of a motion to approve an application for development to receive
the number of votes required for approval shall be deemed an action
denying the application. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
D. The municipal agency may provide such written decision and findings
and conclusions, either on the date of the meeting at which the
§ 35-34 CLOSTER CODE § 35-36
28:90
§ 35-37. Publication of decisions.
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, without separate charge to the applicant. Said notice shall be sent
to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any
such decision.
§ 35-38. Payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application, or if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on said property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either prompt payment
of such taxes or assessments or the making of adequate provision for the
municipal agency takes action to grant or deny approval or, if the
meeting at which such action is taken occurs within the final 45 days of
the applicable time period for rendering a decision on the application
for development, within 45 days of such meeting, by the adoption
of a resolution of memorialization setting forth the decision and the
findings and conclusions of the municipal agency thereon. An action
resulting from the failure of a motion to approve an application shall
be memorialized by resolution as provided above, notwithstanding the
time at which such action occurs within the applicable time period for
rendering a decision on the application. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980:372]
E. The adoption of a resolution of memorialization pursuant to this
subsection shall not be construed to alter the applicable time period for
rendering a decision on the application for development. Such
resolution shall be adopted by a vote of a majority of the members of the
municipal agency who voted for the action previously taken, and no
other member shall vote thereon. The vote on such resolution shall be
deemed to be a memorialization of an action of the municipal agency
and not to be an action of the municipal agency, except that failure to
adopt such a resolution within the forty-five-day period shall result in
the approval of the application for development, notwithstanding any
prior action taken thereon. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:372]
F. Whenever a resolution of memorialization is adopted in accordance
with this section, the date of such adoption shall constitute the date of
the decision for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications
required by law. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
§ 35-36 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-38
28:91
payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be adequately
protected.
§ 35-39. Scheduling; records.
Both the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall schedule hours
for the Secretaries of the respective Boards, which hours shall coincide
with the hours of the Building Inspector at the Municipal Building for the
performance of their duties. All records pertaining to the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment shall remain on the premises of the Municipal Building
and not be removed.
§ 35-40. Developer's agreement. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:372]
A. In all instances wherein the Planning Board or, in the proper case, the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall grant subdivision, site plan or
conditional use approval requiring the construction or extension of
municipal improvements, the dedication of lands for public use, the
construction of site improvements or other performance for which a
security may be required, there shall be executed by the developer an
agreement between it and the Borough of Closter to be drawn by the
Borough Attorney, specifying the nature and extent of the developer's
obligations.
B. The following procedures shall be observed in connection with the
execution of such developer's agreements and the posting of security.
(1) Developer's agreements shall be signed by the Mayor and Clerk;
the Planning Board Chairman and Secretary; the Zoning Board
Chairman and Secretary, where applicable; and the developer.
[Amended 9-8-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:419]
(2) An executed copy of the agreement shall be forwarded to the
developer's attorney with a letter advising that all necessary bonds
and escrows be posted with the Treasurer. A copy of this
transmittal is to be sent to the Treasurer, the Construction Official,
the Engineer and the administrator, together with a photocopy of
the developer's agreement.
(3) The transmittal to the Treasurer would include a request that he or
she certify to the Construction Official (copy to Clerk, Engineer and
administrator) when the required bonds and escrows are received
by him.
(4) The transmittal letter to the Construction Official will advise him or
her that he or she is instructed by the Mayor and Council that no
permits or certificates of occupancy are to be issued until the
Treasurer has certified receipt of all necessary bonds and escrow
funds.
§ 35-38 CLOSTER CODE § 35-40
28:92
(5) Copies of all of the above are to be sent to the Borough Attorney for
his or her records.
(6) The original of the developer's agreement will be placed in a
fireproof cabinet in the Clerk's office. The Planning Board will also
receive a signed copy for its file, which is ultimately filed in the lot
and block files located in the Clerk's office.
§ 35-40 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-40
28:93

ARTICLE IV
Appeals
§ 35-41. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Amended
1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the Construction Official of
the municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance44 or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by
filing a notice of appeal in the manner set forth in Article II, § 35-21A of this
chapter, and in accordance with the provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal
Land Use Law of 1975.45
§ 35-42. Appeals from Board of Adjustment to governing body.
An appeal from any decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment granting a
use variance pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17d may be taken
to the governing body, provided that such appeal shall be made within 10
days of the date of publication of such final decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 35-43. Appeals from Board of Adjustment and Planning Board to
governing body.
An appeal from any final decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, other
than an appeal of the type described in § 35-42 hereof, and an appeal from
any final decision of the Planning Board may be taken to the governing
body, provided that such appeal shall be taken in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-17.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
45.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 35-41 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-43
28:95

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 35-44. Definitions. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in P.L. 1975, c.
291, or P.L. 1979, c. 216,46 such term is intended to have the meaning set
forth in the definition of such term as found in the applicable statute, unless
a contrary intention is clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 35-45. Repealer.
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan
Review Ordinance47 or any other ordinance of the Borough of Closter which
contain provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are
hereby to the extent of such inconsistency repealed.
§ 35-46. Ordinances continued.
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 81 of P.L. 1975, c. 291,48 the
substantive provisions of the existing Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning
Ordinance and Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Borough of Closter49 and
the development regulations set forth therein shall continue in full force and
effect and shall be read in pari materia with this chapter.
§ 35-47. Pending applications.
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such application shall be governed by the provisions of Article IV of this
chapter.
§ 35-48. Filing of copies.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the Municipal Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law.
The Clerk shall also file with said County Planning Board copies of all other
ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as the Subdivision,
Zoning and Site Plan Review Ordinances.50
46.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 73, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review, and Ch. 200, Zoning.
48.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review, and Ch. 200, Zoning.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review, and Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 35-44 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-48
28:97

ARTICLE VI
Historic Preservation Commission
[Added 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-85251]
§ 35-49. (Reserved)
§ 35-50. Short title.
This article shall be known by and maybe referred to by this short title of
"The Historic Preservation Ordinance of the Borough of Closter."
§ 35-51. Purposes.
The provisions of this article are intended to effect and accomplish the
protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of especially noteworthy
examples and elements of the Borough's environment in order:
A. To safeguard the heritage of Closter by preserving resources within the
Borough which reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, and
architectural history;
B. To encourage the continued use of historic and/or noteworthy buildings,
structures, objects, and sites and to facilitate their appropriate reuse;
C. To maintain and develop an appropriate and harmonious setting for the
historic and architecturally significant buildings, structures, sites, and
districts within the Borough;
D. To stabilize and improve property values within the Borough;
E. To foster civic pride in the history and architecture of the Borough;
F. To encourage proper maintenance of and reinvestment in the buildings
and structures within the Borough;
G. To regulate appropriate alteration of historic sites as well as new
construction within or near historic districts to ensure compatibility
with the existing environment and the Master Plan of the Borough;
H. To discourage the unnecessary demolition or other destruction of
historic resources;
I. To further the public's knowledge of the history and development of the
Borough as well as its appreciation of the Borough's historic sites;
J. To enhance the visual and aesthetic character, diversity, and continuity,
and interest in the Borough and its neighborhoods;
K. To encourage beautification and private investment in the Borough;
51.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. IV, Historic Preservation
Commission, adopted 6-10-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:762.
§ 35-49 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-51
28:99
§ 35-52. Definitions.
As used in this article:
ADDITION — An extension or increase in building size, floor area or height.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Construction Code Official.
ALTERATION — Any change in the exterior of architectural features or of
any improvement or addition.
APPLICATION — A request to the Commission made pursuant to this article
for the purposes of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness or other action
by the Commission hereunder specified.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application to the Planning
Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Borough for the approval
of a major or minor subdivision plat, site plan, planned development,
conditional use, zoning variants, or the direction of the issuance of a permit
pursuant to Section 25 or 27 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55d-34 or
40:55D-36).
BUILDING — Any man-made structure, its site and appurtenances created
to shelter any form of human activity.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS (or C/A) — That document issued
by the Historic Preservation Commission required before work commences
on any landmark or building, structure, site, or object located within a
landmark district.
COMMISSION — The Historic Preservation Commission pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — The officer in charge in the granting of
building or construction permits in the Borough.
DEMOLITION — The partial or total razing, dismantling, or destruction,
whether entirely or in significant part, of any building, structure, object or
site. Demolition includes the removal of a building, structure or object from
its site or the removal or destruction of the facade or surface.
DESIGNATED PROPERTY or DISTRICT — An individual building, structure,
site, object, or district which has been designated as having historical,
architectural, cultural, aesthetic, or other significance pursuant to the
provision of this article.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alterations, relocation
or enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land extension of use of land for which permission may
be required pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
DISTRICT — See "landmark district."
L. To promote the economic welfare of the Borough through the
preservation of its historic sites and landscapes.
§ 35-51 CLOSTER CODE § 35-52
28:100
EVALUATION — The process of determining whether identified properties
meet defined criteria of historical, architectural, archeological, or cultural
significance.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and certain intervening
or surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and
character of historic site or sites as specifically designated herein.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — Any prehistoric or historic district, site, building,
structure, or object included in the Borough Historic Site's Survey, or
eligible for inclusion in the National Register (of Historic Places); such term
includes artifacts, records, and remains which are related to such a district,
site, building, structure, or object.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural object,
or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which has been
designated in the Master Plan as being of historic, archeological, cultural,
scenic or architectural significance at the national, state, or local level, as
specifically designated herein, or any property which is located in a historic
district. The designation of a historic site or landmark shall be deemed to
include the Tax Map lot on which it is located as well as the right-of-way
contiguous thereto.
IMPROVEMENT — Any structure or any part thereof installed upon real
property by human endeavor and intended to be kept at the location of such
construction or installation.
IN-KIND — Construction or construction materials that match construction
or construction materials being replaced on a designated structure or
object, thereby maintaining historic composition, design, color, texture and
other visual qualities.[Added 2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:980]
INTEGRITY — The ability of a property or element to convey its historic
significance; the retention of those essential characteristics and features
that enable a property to effectively convey its significance.
INTERESTED PARTY — Any person whose right to use, acquire or enjoy
property is affected by any action taken under this article or whose rights
to use, acquire or enjoy property under this article or under any other law
of this state or of the United States have been denied, violated or infringed
by an action or a failure to act under this article.
INVENTORY — A list of historic properties determined to meet criteria of
significance specified herein.
LANDMARK — A building, structure, site, or object which has a special
character or special historical or aesthetic interest as part of the
development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the Borough, state,
or nation, and which has been designated as a landmark pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
LANDMARK DISTRICT or DISTRICT — A geographic area with distinctly
definable boundaries composed of several buildings or sites which:
§ 35-52 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-52
28:101
MASTER PLAN — The Master Plan of the Borough of Closter, as amended
from time to time, compiled pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
MINOR APPLICATION — Any application for certificate of appropriateness
which:
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW — The Municipal Land Use Law of the State of
New Jersey, P.L. 1975, c . 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time.
NATIONAL REGISTER CRITERIA — The established criteria for evaluating
the eligibility of properties for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places.
NONCONTRIBUTING BUILDINGS — A building, site, structure, or object
that does not add to the historic or architectural qualities, historic
associations or archaeological values for which a property is significant
because: it was not present during the period of significance; due to
alterations, disturbances, additions, or other changes, it no longer
possesses historic integrity reflecting its character at that time or is
incapable of yielding important information about the period.
OBJECT — A material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historic,
scenic, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable, yet
related to a specific setting or environment.
ORDINANCE — A legislative act of the governing body of a municipality
adopted in accordance with statutory requirements as to notice, publicity,
and public hearing as required by law.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR — The repair of any
deterioration, wear, or damage to a structure or any part thereof in order
to return the same as nearly practicable to its original condition prior to
the occurrence or such deterioration, wear, or damage with in-kind material
and replacement of exterior elements or accessory hardware, including
signs, using the same materials and workmanship and having the same
appearance.
Has acquired a unity of character through the interrelationships of the
component buildings and sites; and
A.
Has been designated as having historical, archeological, cultural,
scenic, architectural or other significance pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
B.
A. Does not involve demolition, relocation, or removal of a historic site;
Does not involve an addition to an individual property or a property in
a historic district or new construction in a historic district;
B.
Is a request for approval of fences, signs, lighting, paving, or
streetscape work which will comply with the adopted design guidelines
for the improvement proposed and which will not substantially affect
the characteristics of the historic site or the historic district.
C.
§ 35-52 CLOSTER CODE § 35-52
28:102
OWNER — Any person having a right, title, or interest in any property so as
to be legally entitled, upon obtaining such permits and other authorizations
as may be required pursuant to law, to perform construction, alteration,
removal, demolition, or other work with respect to such property.
PERMIT — Any required approval for exterior work to any improvement or
property in a historic district or on a historic site. Permit shall include, but
is not limited to, a building permit, a demolition permit, a permit to move,
convert, relocate, or remodel, or to change the use or type of occupancy of
any improvement or property in a historic district which involves exterior
changes to the structure or the property on which it is located.
PRESERVATION — The act or process of applying measures to sustain the
existing form, integrity and material of a building or structure, and the
existing form of vegetative cover of a site. It may include initial stabilization
work, where necessary, as well as ongoing maintenance of the historic
building materials.
PROTECTION — The act or process of applying measures designed to
preserve the physical condition of a property by guarding it from
deterioration or loss.
RECONSTRUCTION — The act or process of reproducing by new
construction the exact same form and detail of a vanished or nonsurviving
building, structure, or object, or any part thereof, as it appeared at a
specific period of time when documentary and visible evidence is available
to permit accurate reconstruction.
REHABILITATION — The act or process of returning a property to its state
of utility though repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient
contemporary use while preserving those portions or features of the
property which are significant to its historical, architectural and cultural
values.
REPAIR — Any work done on an improvement that is not an addition and
does not change the exterior appearance of any improvement; provided,
however, that any such repairs must be done with materials and
workmanship of the same quality as the existing materials and
workmanship of the improvement.
RESTORATION — The act or process of accurately recovering the form and
details of a property and its setting as it appeared at a particular period
of time by means of the removal of a later work or by the replacement of
missing earlier work.
SITE — Any real property, whether public or private, with or without
improvements, which is the location of a significant event or series of
events, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building,
structure, or object, or any configuration, portion, or group of forgoing,
which has been designated by the Commission as having historical,
archeological, cultural, scenic, or architectural significance pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
§ 35-52 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-52
28:103
STREETSCAPE — The visual character of the street including, but not
limited to, the architecture, building setbacks and height, fences,
storefronts, signs, lighting, parking areas, materials, sidewalks, curbing and
landscaping.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the
surface of a parcel of land. The word "structure" shall also include any
building or improvement with a roof.
SURVEY — A process of identifying and gathering data on a community's
historic resources. It includes a field survey which is the physical search
for and recording of historic resources on the ground, preliminary planning
and background research before the field survey begins, organization and
presentation of survey data as the survey proceeds, and the development of
inventories.
SURVEY DATA — The raw data produced by the survey; that is, all the
information gathered on each property and area investigated.
VIEW or PUBLIC VIEW — The view by the public of a building, structure,
object, or site from any point on a street or walkway which is used as a
public thoroughfare, either vehicular and/or pedestrian.
§ 35-53. Historic Preservation Commission.
A. Establishment; composition. It is hereby established, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 et seq., in the Borough of Closter, a Historic
Preservation Commission, "H.P.C." The Commission shall consist of
seven members appointed by the Mayor and Council with the advice
and consent of the Council. [Amended 3-12-2008 by Ord. No.
2008:1004]
(1) The seven members of the H.P.C. shall fall within three classes as
follows:
(a) Class A: A person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history.
(b) Class B: A person who is knowledgeable of the local history or
has demonstrated interest in local history.
(c) Class C: A citizen of the municipality who shall hold no other
municipal office, position, or employment except for
membership on the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(2) Class C members are regular members who are not designated as
Class A or B.
(3) Class A and Class B members may reside outside the Borough, with
preference given to residents of the Borough.
(4) There shall be at least one Class A and at least one Class B member.
§ 35-52 CLOSTER CODE § 35-53
28:104
B. Alternate members. There shall be two alternate members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and
shall be designated at the time of the appointment as "Alternate No. 1
and Alternate No. 2." Alternate members shall meet the qualification of
Class C members.
C. Terms.
(1) The initial terms of the regular members first appointed under this
article shall be determined to the greatest practicable extent so
that the expiration of the terms shall be distributed evenly over the
first four years of their appointment, provided that the initial term
of no regular member shall exceed four years. Thereafter, the term
of a regular member shall be for four years. Notwithstanding any
other provisions, the term of any member common to the Historic
Preservation Commission and the Planning Board shall be for the
terms of the membership on the Planning Board, and the term of
any member common to the Historic Preservation Commission and
the Board of Adjustment shall be for the term of membership on the
Board of Adjustment.
(2) In the case of alternate members, the initial terms shall be
distributed evenly over the first two years after their initial
appointment, provided that the initial term of no alternate member
shall exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of an alternate
member shall be two years.
D. Vacancies. Vacancy in any class, including alternate members,
occurring otherwise than by an expiration of term, shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
E. Organization; officers.
(1) The Historic Preservation Commission shall elect a Chairman and a
Vice Chairman from its members and shall select a Secretary who
may or may not be a member of the Historic Preservation
Commission or a municipal employee.
(2) Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings. They may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in
order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
F. Funding; staff.
(1) The Borough Council shall make provisions in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Historic Preservation
Commission.
§ 35-53 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-53
28:105
(2) The Historic Preservation Commission may employ, contract for,
and affix the compensation of experts and other staff and services
as it shall deem necessary within its budget. The Commission shall
obtain its legal counsel from the Municipal Attorney at the rate of
compensation to be determined by the governing body.
Expenditures pursuant to this section shall not exceed, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for
the Commission.
G. Rules and organization of the Commission. The Commission shall have
the authority to adopt all rules and regulations necessary to carry out
its functions under the provisions of this article, including, but not
limited to, maintenance of records and procedures subject to the
following:
(1) No Commission member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any business
interest. Mere ownership of and occupation of an historic residence
shall not be deemed a personal or financial interest.
(2) The Commission shall establish a regular schedule of meetings. The
Commission shall meet no less than once every month to address
the current agenda, otherwise the Commission shall meet once
every two months. Additional meetings may be called by the
Chairperson or Vice Chairperson as required to fulfill its
obligations to advise the Planning Board, Zoning Board, or Borough
Council as deemed necessary.
(3) All Commission minutes and records as kept and maintained by the
Commission's Secretary shall be public records, and all
Commission meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meeting
Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-7 et seq.).
(4) A member of the Borough Council and a member of the Planning
Board shall be designated as liaison between those bodies and the
Commission. The role of such liaisons should be informational only,
and shall possess no voting rights with regard to action taken by
the Commission.
(5) The Commission shall adopt written rules for the transaction of its
business and for the consideration of applications for certificates of
appropriateness for the designations of historic districts and sites.
(6) When the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment refers an
application to the Historic Preservation Commission, then the
referring Board shall receive a copy of the Commission's Report.
(7) The Construction Official shall maintain and display an up-to-date
map showing the historic districts, as well as a current listing of
historic sites.
§ 35-53 CLOSTER CODE § 35-53
28:106
(8) A member of the Commission may, after a public hearing, if
requested, be removed by the governing body for cause.
(9) Meetings; quorum.
(a) The Historic Preservation Commission shall establish and post
in Borough Hall a schedule of meetings. Regular meetings
shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for a lack of
applications to process.
(b) Five members shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of
those present and voting shall prevail and shall be sufficient to
grant or deny a certificate of appropriateness, change a
historic site or district designation or to grant a demolition
permit. [Amended 1-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2017:1237]
(c) The Historic Preservation Commission shall prepare an annual
report to the governing body which shall be available to the
public and placed on file in the Borough Hall. The report shall
detail all activities, including problem solving, advice and
support given.
H. Powers and duties of the Commission. The power and duties of the
Commission shall be as follows:
(1) To survey buildings, structures, objects, sites, and districts located
within the Borough, and to research and evaluate them for their
significance in accordance with the criteria established as set forth
in § 35-54A; [Amended 7-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:869]
(2) To maintain and expand when appropriate a comprehensive
inventory of such buildings, structures, sites, objects and districts
which are worthy of designation under the provisions of this article;
(3) To propose to the Borough Council those buildings, structures,
objects, sites and districts located within the Borough which it has
found to be worthy of landmark designation and hence should be
subject to provisions of this article. Actual nomination to a finding
of eligibility for or listing on the National or State Register of
Historic Places is not necessary for the provisions of this article to
take effect once a property has been designated as significant by
the Commission;
(4) To nominate buildings, structures, objects, sites and districts for
the inclusion in the National and/or the State of New Jersey
Registers of Historic Places;
(5) To make recommendations to the Planning Board and Borough
Council in the preparation and periodic updating of the Historic
Preservation Element of the Master Plan for the Borough,
including, but not limited to, the addition or deletion of historic
sites and districts identified in the Borough's Master Plan;
§ 35-53 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-53
28:107
(6) To make recommendations to the Planning Board and Borough
Council on the historic preservation implications of any proposed
or adopted zoning or development ordinance(s) or proposed or
adopted elements of the Borough's Master Plan;
(7) To advise and assist Borough officers, employees, boards, and other
bodies, including those at the county, state or federal levels, on all
matters which have potential impact on the historic buildings,
structures, objects, sites or districts in the Borough or on the
physical character and ambience of any portion of the Borough or
region;
(8) To approve or disapprove applications for certificates of
appropriateness and minor applications pursuant to the provisions
of this article;
(9) To draft and/or recommend to the Borough Council and the
Planning Board ordinances or amendments to existing ordinances
that would resolve any conflicts which may exist between the
design standards of this article and the building or zoning
regulations of the Borough;
(10) To advise the Borough Council and the Planning Board on the
relative merits or proposals involving the use of public funds to
restore, preserve and protect historic buildings, structures,
objects, and sites, including the preparation of the long-range plan;
therefore, to advise the Borough Council and Planning Board on
securing state, federal, and/or other grants or assistance in support
of such projects; and to monitor such projects once under way;
(11) To increase public awareness to the value of historic, architectural,
and cultural preservation by developing and participating in public
information programs;
(12) To cooperate with local, county, state, or national historical
societies, governmental bodies, and organizations to maximize the
contributions of the Commission in accordance with the intent and
purposes of historic preservation;
(13) To make information available to residents of historic buildings or
districts concerning guidelines for rehabilitations and design
criteria for new construction established under this article;
(14) To seek any benefits which may be granted under the National
Historic Preservation Act, as amended, or any other state or federal
legislation, including, but not limited to, the benefits which flow to
communities under the Certified Local Government Program with
regard to training, grant funding, and technical assistance; and, in
furtherance thereof, to take any steps necessary to assist the
Borough of Closter in the preparation and submission of any
documents needed for certification of the Borough as a Certified
Local Government under the National Historic Preservation Act.
§ 35-53 CLOSTER CODE § 35-54
28:108
§ 35-54. Designation of buildings, structures, objects, sites and
districts as historic.
A. Criteria for designation. The Commission shall consider as worthy of
designation those buildings, structures, objects, sites, and districts that
have integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association, and that meet one or more of the following
criteria:
(1) That are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the Borough of Closter by reflecting or exemplifying
the broad cultural, political, economic, or social history of the
nation, state, or community;
(2) That are associated with historic personages important in national,
state, or local history;
(3) That is the site of an historic event which had a significant effect on
the development of the nation, state or community;
(4) That embody distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method
of construction; that represent the work of a master; that possess
high artistic values; or that represent a significant distinguishable
entity whose components may lack individual distinction;
(5) That are otherwise of particular historic significance to the
Borough of Closter by reflecting or exemplifying the broad cultural,
political, economic or social history of the nation, state, or
community.
B. Procedures for designation. Proposals to designate a property as
historic pursuant to this article may be made by the Borough Council,
the Commission, the Planning Board, or by the verified (sworn)
application of the owner(s) or authorized agent(s) of the individual
property to be designated, or, in the case of a proposed district, by the
verified (sworn) application of 10% of the owners of record or persons
residing within the district, or by a verified (sworn) application of any
organization with a recognized interest in historic preservation, in
accordance with the following procedures: [Amended 7-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002:869]
(1) Nomination proposals. The party proposing property for
designation under this section shall prepare and submit to the
Commission a nomination report for each proposed property, site,
or district. For historic district designations, the report shall
include a building-by-building inventory of all properties within the
district; photographs of representative properties within the
districts; a property map of the district showing boundaries and a
physical description and statement of significance for the district.
For individual landmark designations, the report shall include one
or more photographs; the tax lot and block number of the property
as designated on the official Tax Map of the Borough; and a
§ 35-54 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-54
28:109
physical description and statement of significance and proposed
utilization of the site.
(2) Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition during
pendency of designation action. No applications for a permit to
construct, alter or demolish any structure or any feature of a
proposed landmark or property located within a proposed
landmark district, filed subsequent to the date that an application
has been filed or a resolution adopted to initiate designation of a
proposed landmark or landmark district, shall be approved by the
administrative officer or other municipal agency without review by
the Commission of such applications and the granting of a C/A.
Commission review of such applications shall be conducted as if the
property related to such applications had already been designated
as a landmark property or district, and thereby are subject to the
same criteria, standards, and procedures which govern similar
applications concerning properties designated as landmarks or
properties within a landmark district. After the expiration of 180
days from the date of the initial filing of the designation proposal
with the Commission, the permit application may be approved
without Commission review in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Municipal Code of the Borough.
(3) Notice. The Commission shall schedule a public hearing on the
proposed designation of a landmark or landmark district at least 20
days prior to the hearing and the Commission shall, by personal
service or by certified mail:
(a) Notify the owner(s) of record of a property that has been
proposed for designation, or of a property within a district that
has been proposed for designation, that the property is being
considered for such designation and the reason therefor;
(b) Advise the owner(s) of record of the significance and
consequences of such designation and the rights of the
owner(s) of record to contest such designation under the
provisions of this article;
(c) Notify the owner(s) of record of the date, time, and location of
the hearing concerning the proposed designation of the
property; and
(d) Serve any notices further required under the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law.
(4) Public notice of hearing. Public notice of hearing shall be given at
least 20 days prior to the hearing by publication in the official
newspaper of the Borough. A copy of the nomination report shall
also be made available for public inspection in the Borough Clerk's
office at least 20 days prior to the hearing.
§ 35-54 CLOSTER CODE § 35-54
28:110
(5) Hearing. At a public hearing scheduled in accordance with this
article, the Commission shall review the nomination report and
accompanying documents. Interested persons shall be entitled to
comment on the proposed nominations for designation. Those
persons who intend to file a formal protest against a proposed
designation under § 35-54B(6) of this article must submit their
protest in writing to the Commission in accordance with the
provisions of that section of this article. [Amended 7-10-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002:869]
(6) Protests. Protests against landmark designation signed by the
owner(s) of record of a proposed landmark may be filed with the
Commission 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing date of the
proposed designation before the Commission. [Amended
2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:980]
(7) Commission report. Upon Commission review and public hearing,
the Commission shall forward the Borough Council its report which
shall contain a statement of its recommendations and the reasons
therefor with regard to proposed designations considered at the
hearing, including a list and map of properties approved for
designation.
(8) Referral to the Planning Board. The Borough Council shall refer the
report to the Planning Board, which in turn shall report to the
Borough Council as soon as possible but within 60 days. Failure of
the Planning Board to transmit its report within the sixty-day
period provided herein shall relieve the Borough Council of its
obligations relating to the referral of such a report to the Planning
Board. Borough Council action on a landmark or landmark district
designations shall be otherwise subject to those procedures and
statutes that apply to a change of a zoning designation and the
adoption, revision, or amendment of any development regulation.
(9) Final designation. As soon as possible after its receipt of the report
of the Planning Board or the expiration of the period allowed for
the Planning Board comment on designations pursuant to this
article, the Borough Council shall act upon the proposed
designation list and map, and may approve, reject, or modify by
ordinance any designation recommendations made by the Planning
Board. In the event that the Borough Council votes to reject or
modify any Planning Board recommendations for a proposed
designation, the Borough Council shall record in its minutes the
reasons for not following such recommendation. All action taken by
the Borough Council on proposed designations shall become
effective upon a favorable vote of a majority of the eligible
members of the governing body. [Amended 2-14-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007:980]
(10) Public notice of designation. Notice of designation shall be made
public by publication in the official newspaper of the Borough and
§ 35-54 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-54
28:111
§ 35-55. Review of applications; informal review of concept plans.
by distribution to the municipal agencies reviewing development
applications and permits. A certificate or letter of designation shall
be sent to the owner(s) of record.
(11) Incorporation of designated landmarks into Borough records. Upon
adoption, the designation list and map shall be incorporated by
reference into the Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough as required by the provisions of the Municipal Land Use
Law. Designated properties shall also be noted as such on the
records for those properties maintained by the offices of the
Borough Tax Assessor and the Borough Clerk.
(12) Amendments. Landmark and landmark district designations may
be amended in the same manner as they were adopted in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
(13) A property that has been designated as historic pursuant to this
section of the Code is subject to the zoning requirements outlined
in Chapter 200, Limiting Schedule A.52 [Added 12-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012:1136]
A. Actions requiring review.
(1) All permits and development applications involving the
development activities that affect a historic landmark or an
improvement within a historic district shall be reviewed by the
Commission. Such review shall be required for the following
actions:
(a) Demolition of a historic landmark or an improvement within a
historic district.
(b) Relocation of any structure within a historic district or of any
historic landmark.
(c) All changes in the exterior architectural appearance of any
improvement within a historic district or of any historic
landmark in the public view as defined in this section of the
Code by addition, alteration, or replacement. [Amended
6-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1097]
(d) Any new construction of an improvement in a historic district.
(e) Site plans or subdivisions affecting a historic landmark or an
improvement within a historic district.
(f) Zoning variances affecting a historic landmark or an
improvement within a historic district.
52.Editor's Note: Said schedule is included at the end of Chapter 200, Zoning.
§ 35-54 CLOSTER CODE § 35-55
28:112
(g) New paint applied to historically unpainted exterior surfaces.
[Added 2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:980]
(2) Within 60 days of receiving an application for review, the
Commission shall submit in writing to the Planning Board its
recommendation with respect to the application. The report shall
include findings and conclusions which are based on evidence in
the record. Final determination of the appropriateness of the
application shall be made by the Commission, which decision shall
be binding on the administrative officer.
B. Actions not requiring review.
(1) When a historic landmark requires immediate emergency repair to
preserve the continued habitability of the landmark and/or health
and safety of its occupants or others. Emergency repairs shall be
performed only in accordance with the following procedure:
[Amended 7-10-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:869]
(a) When, a historic landmark or key or contributing historic
district resource requires immediate repair to preserve its
continued habitability and/or the health and safety of its
occupants or others, emergency repairs may be performed in
accordance with the applicable construction codes
immediately upon approval of the Construction Official, who
shall certify that a bona fide emergency of the type described
herein exists, without first obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness from the Commission. Under such
circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such as are
necessary to preserve the continued habitability of the building
or structure and/or health and safety of its occupants or others.
Where feasible, temporary measures to prevent further
damage shall be used, provided these measures are reversible
without damage to the building or structure.
(b) Simultaneously with the commencement of the emergency
work, the property owner shall make a request for a certificate
of appropriateness from the Commission memorializing the
approval of said emergency work. This request shall be made
pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article.
(c) It should be noted that the procedures outlined in this section
should be strictly limited to those circumstances which, in the
opinion of the Construction Official, rise to the level of a bona
fide emergency of the type referenced above. No work in
addition to the emergency repairs shall be performed until an
appropriate request for approval has been granted by the
Construction Official and the Commission.
(2) Changes to the interior of structures.
§ 35-55 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-55
28:113
§ 35-56. Standards for review.
(3) For ordinary repairs and maintenance which do not constitute a
change to the appearance to the structure. The following are the
only activities which do not require Commission review according
to this criteria:
(a) Repair of existing windows and doors using the same material.
Installation of storm windows that are compatible with the
architectural period or design of the subject structure.
(b) Maintenance and repair of existing roof material, involving no
change in the design, scale, material, or appearance of the
structure.
(c) Repair of existing roof structures such as dormers and
chimneys using the same materials which will not alter the
exterior architectural appearance of the structure.
(d) Replacement in kind of existing shingles, clapboards, or other
siding maintaining the architectural integrity of the structure.
(e) Maintenance and repair of existing shingles, clapboards or
other siding using the same materials that are being repaired
or maintained.
(f) Repairs to existing signs, shutters, outdoor displays, fences,
hedges, street furniture, awnings, off-street driveway and
parking material and sidewalks using the same material for
those items noted above being repaired.
(g) New paint applied to historically painted exterior surfaces.
[Added 2-14-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:980]
C. Informal review of concept plan for proposed undertakings. At the
request of the applicants considering action that may require
Commission review, the Commission shall grant an informal review of a
concept plan for the proposed undertaking. Neither the applicant not
the Commission shall be bound by any informal review.
A. General criteria for review. In reviewing an application for its effect on
a landmark or a building, structure, or site located within the landmark
district, the following criteria shall be used by the Commission, the
Planning Board, the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the Borough Council
and all other officials and agencies of the Borough responsible for the
administration of this article. The criteria set forth in this subsection
relate to all projects affecting landmarks and any buildings, structures,
objects, and sites located within landmark districts; and, with regard to
such proposed projects, the following factors shall be considered:
(1) The impact of the proposed change on the historic, architectural,
and/or cultural significance of the landmark or landmark district;
§ 35-55 CLOSTER CODE § 35-56
28:114
(2) The importance of the landmark or the building, structure, object,
or site to the nation, state, region, or municipality, and the extent to
which its historic or architectural interest would be adversely
affected to the detriment of public interest;
(3) The use of any landmark or landmark district involved in the
proposed change;
(4) The extent to which the proposed action would adversely affect the
public's view from the street of a landmark, building, structure,
object, or site located within a landmark district;
(5) The impact that the proposed change would have on the
architectural or historic significance of the landmark or landmark
district and the visual compatibility of the proposed change with
adjacent buildings, structures, objects and sites in accordance with
the requirements for design compatibility set forth herein.
B. Rehabilitation of existing buildings, structures, objects, and sites. In
reviewing any application, the Commission shall make its
recommendation as to whether any application should be approved,
approved with conditions, or denied on the basis of the purposes and
the provisions of this article and the following standards for review,
which are identical to the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards for
Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings" as
hereafter may be amended: [Amended 2-14-2007 by Ord. No.
2007:980]
(1) Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property which requires minimal alteration of the building,
structure, object, or site and its environment, or to use a property
for its originally intended purpose.
(2) The distinguishing original qualities or character of a building,
structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The
removal or alteration of any historic material or distinctive
architectural features should be avoided when possible.
(3) All buildings, structures, objects and sites shall be recognized as
products of their own time. Alterations that have no historical basis
and which seek to create an earlier appearance shall be
discouraged.
(4) Changes which may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a building, structure,
object, or site and its environment. These changes may have
acquired significance in their own right, and this significance shall
be recognized and respected.
(5) Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
which characterize a building, structure, object or site shall be
treated with sensitivity.
§ 35-56 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-56
28:115
(6) Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced, whenever possible. In the event replacement is
necessary, the new material should match the material being
replaced in composition, design, color, texture, and other visual
qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural features
should be based on accurate duplication of features, substantiated
by historic, physical, or pictorial evidence rather than on
conjectural designs or the availability of different architectural
elements from other buildings or structures.
(7) The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods
that will damage the historic building materials shall not be
undertaken.
(8) Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project.
(9) Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and
additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural or
cultural material, and such design is compatible with the size,
scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood
or environment.
(10) Whenever possible, new additions or alterations to structures shall
be done in such a manner that if such additions or alterations were
to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the
structure would be unimpaired.
C. Design criteria-new construction.
(1) In assessing the design of any proposed addition or new
construction, the Commission shall consider the following design
criteria in conjunction with the standards of rehabilitation and
review criteria set forth above. These design criteria shall be used
to analyze the appropriateness of new construction in the form of
additions and alterations to the landmarks or new construction,
additions, or alterations to buildings, structures, objects, or sites
located within landmark districts.
(a) Height. The height of the proposed structure shall be visually
compatible with adjacent buildings.
(b) Proportion of facade. The relationship of the width of the
building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(c) Proportion of the openings. The relationship of the width of
windows to the height of windows in a building shall be visually
§ 35-56 CLOSTER CODE § 35-56
28:116
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(d) Rhythm of solids. The relationship of solids to voids in the
facade of a building shall be visually compatible with buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(e) Rhythm of spacing. The relationship of the building to the open
space between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually
compatible with buildings and places to which it is visually
related.
(f) Rhythm of entrances. The relationship of entrances and
porches to the street shall be visually compatible to buildings
and places to which it is visually related.
(g) Relationship of materials. The relationship of materials,
texture, and tone to the facade and roof of a building shall be
visually compatible with the predominant materials used in
buildings to which it is visually related.
(h) Roof. The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible
with buildings to which it is visually related.
(i) Continuity of walls. Walls and open fencing shall maintain
visual compatibility with buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(j) Scale. The size of a building mass in relation to open spaces,
window and door openings, porches and balconies shall be
visually compatible with buildings and places to which it is
visually related.
(k) Exterior features. A structure's related exterior features, such
as lighting, fences, sidewalks, driveways and parking areas,
shall be compatible with the features of those structures to
which it is visually related and shall be appropriate for the
historic period for which the structure is significant. New
signage shall also abide by any supplemental historic design or
graphic standards that may be developed by the Commission
for the district.
(2) It is not the intent of this article to discourage contemporary
architectural expression or to encourage new construction which
emulates existing buildings or historical architectural interest or of
a certain period architectural style, but rather to preserve the
integrity and authenticity of a historic preservation district and to
ensure the compatibility of new structures therein.
D. Review criteria for demolition. With regard to applications to demolish
a landmark or any building, structure, object or site located within a
landmark district, the following matters shall be considered:
§ 35-56 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-56
28:117
(1) Its historical, architectural, cultural, and aesthetic significance in
relation to the criteria set forth in this article.
(2) Its use, its intended use, and/or the use for which the buildings,
structure, object, or site was originally designed and the feasibility
of the continuation of its designed use.
(3) Its importance to the Borough and the extent to which its historical
or architectural value is such that its removal would be detrimental
to the landmark district and/or to the public interest.
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual, or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture, or material that it could not be reproduced
or could be reproduced only with great difficulty.
(5) The extent to which its retention would promote business, create
new positions, attract tourists, students, writers, historians, artists,
or artisans, encourage study and interest in American history,
stimulate interest and study in architecture and design, educate
citizens in American culture and heritage or make the Borough a
more attractive and desirable place in which to live.
(6) The probable impact of its removal upon the ambience of the
landmark district.
(7) The structural soundness and integrity of the building, structure,
object, or site and the economic feasibility for its restoration or
rehabilitation so as to allow for its reasonable use.
(8) The threat to the public health and safety as a result of
deterioration or disrepair of the building, structure, object, or site.
(9) The technological feasibility of structural rehabilitation.
(10) The interference with the charitable purposes of any nonprofit or
charitable organization if demolition is not permitted.
E. Criteria regarding the relocation of historic buildings or structures. The
following factors shall be considered with regard to an application to
move to a new location or site any landmark or any building, structure,
or object located within a landmark district:
(1) The impact of the loss of integrity suffered as a result of the
removal from the original and/or historic location; and, if located
within a historic district, the impact of that loss integrity upon the
district as a whole.
(2) The reasons for not retaining the landmark or structure at its
present site.
(3) The compatibility, nature, and character of the areas adjacent to
both the present site and the proposed site as they relate to the
§ 35-56 CLOSTER CODE § 35-56
28:118
§ 35-57. Certificates of appropriateness.
protection of historic properties and districts as regulated by this
article.
(4) In the event that a proposed new location is in a historic district,
the impact on the visual compatibility of adjacent buildings,
structures, objects or sites as set forth herein.
(5) The likelihood of significant damage to the physical integrity of the
building, structure or object itself.
A. When required. A certificate of appropriateness issued by the
Commission shall be required before a permit is issued or before work
can commence for any of the following activities within a historic
district(s) or on a historic site designated on a zoning map:
(1) Demolition of any building, improvement, site, place, or structure.
(2) Change in the exterior appearance of any building, improvement,
site, place or structure by addition, reconstruction, alteration or
maintenance. Exterior change for all primary and accessory
buildings shall include special consideration of character-defining
features visible from the public right-of-way.
(3) Relocation of a principal or accessory building or structure.
(4) Any addition to or new construction of a principal or accessory
building or structure.
B. When not required.
(1) A certificate of appropriateness shall not be required before a
permit is issued by the Construction Code Official for changes to
the interior of structure or which strictly meet the standards for
ordinary maintenance and repair as defined in this article.
(2) The Construction Official shall review all permit applications to
determine if the application proposes work which constitutes
ordinary maintenance or repair as defined in this article. The
Construction Official may issue a permit if he/she finds that the
work strictly meets the standards for ordinary maintenance and
repair as defined in this article. The Construction Official shall refer
the application to the Historic Preservation Commission if he finds
that the proposed work does not meet the standards for ordinary
maintenance and repair.
C. Application procedures.
(1) The administrative officer shall refer all applications for permits
pertaining to regulated activities involving landmarks or any
buildings, structures, objects, and sites located within landmark
districts to the Commission for a written report on the application
§ 35-56 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-57
28:119
of the Zoning Ordinance provisions concerning historic
preservation to any of those aspects of the changes proposed which
were not determined by approval of an application for development
by a municipal agency pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
A certificate of appropriateness (hereinafter "C/A"), issued by the
Commission in accordance with the procedures of this article, is
required prior to the commencement of any activities involving
landmarks or properties within landmark districts which are
governed by the provisions of this article.
(2) Applications shall be made on forms available in the office of the
administrative officer in the Closter Borough Hall. Completed
applications shall be delivered or mailed to the administrative
officer at the Closter Borough Hall or may be submitted directly to
the Commission for review and approval.
(3) Upon receipt of an application for a C/A, the Commission shall
schedule a hearing for the purpose of reviewing said application
and shall advise the applicant(s) in writing of the time, date, and
place of said hearing.
(4) Applications shall include a completed application form which
contains a precise written description of the proposed work or
activity and any of the following as may be required by the
Commission:
(a) Photographs of the existing structure or lot;
(b) Scaled drawings showing site plan layout, facade elevations,
and specifications for materials;
(c) For new construction applications, a streetscape elevation
drawn to scale, showing the new structure in the context of
neighboring buildings, structures and sites;
(d) For large projects, working drawings;
(e) The Commission may require the submission of additional
information reasonably necessary to reach an informed
decision on the application.
D. Commission review of applications for permits (N.J.S.A. 40:50D-111).
(1) The Commission shall review applications for a C/A at a public
hearing. The applicant(s) shall not be required to appear or to be
represented at any meeting of the Commission at which the
Commission will consider his or her (their) application for a C/A,
regardless of the ultimate findings and a report of the Commission.
(2) As soon as practicable but no later than 45 days after the
administrative officer has referred the application to the
Commission, the Commission shall return to the administrative
officer its written report recommending granting or denying the
§ 35-57 CLOSTER CODE § 35-57
28:120
application, which report may be stated in resolution form. The
Commission shall file a second report with the Planning Board
within 10 days of the Commission's decision on the application.
(3) Appeals from determinations of the Construction Official pursuant
to referral to the Historic Preservation Commission may be made
by the applicant to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, according to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a. Nothing herein shall be deemed to limit the
right of judicial review of the action after an appeal is concluded by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The appellant shall pay all costs
for copies of any transcript(s) required for appeal.
(4) The owner shall post the certificate of appropriateness on a
conspicuous spot on the site visible to the public during the entire
process of work.
(5) Issuance of an approval of a permit shall be deemed to be final
approval pursuant to this article. Such approval shall neither cause
nor prevent the filing of any collateral application. The denial of a
permit shall be deemed to preclude the applicant from undertaking
the activity applied for.
(6) When a C/A has been issued, the administrative officer or his
appointee shall, from time to time, inspect the work approved by
such certificate and shall regularly report to the Commission the
results of such inspections, listing all work inspected and reporting
any work not in accordance with such certificate.
(7) Except as hereafter provided, a C/A shall be valid for a period of
two years from date of issue unless reasonable extensions are
requested by the applicant or the Commission. In cases where
demolition is permitted, the C/A shall be valid for one year from the
date of the Historic Preservation Commission approval of the
application. The one-year period shall not be extended.
E. Minor applications. The Chairman of the Historic Preservation
Commission, or a committee of Commissioners appointed by him/her
and acting on his/her behalf, may review applications for minor work,
without holding a public hearing. If the Chairman finds the application
appropriate, he/she may act in place of the full Commission and issue a
certificate for minor work to the Construction Official, who may then
issue a building permit. If the Chairman does not find the application
appropriate, the application should be scheduled for a public hearing
before the full Commission. [Amended 7-10-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:869]
F. Assignment. No assignment of the rights granted by a certificate of
appropriateness shall be permitted.
§ 35-57 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-58
28:121
§ 35-58. Development in historic zoning districts or sites;
informational copies of applications from Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110)
The Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall refer to the Commission
every application submitted to either Board for development in historic
zoning districts or on historic sites designated on the Zoning or Official
Map, or identified in any component element of the Master Plan. The
referral shall be made when the application for development is deemed
complete or is scheduled for a hearing, whichever occurs sooner. Failure
to refer the application as required shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding. The Commission may provide its advice, which shall be
conveyed through its delegated members or staff, who shall testify orally at
the hearing and explain any written report which may have been submitted
by the Commission regarding the application. The Commission shall make
available to the applicant a copy of its written report concerning said
application for development.
§ 35-59. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. Violations defined. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties herein.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. Any person who shall undertake
an activity without approvals required by this article shall be deemed to
be in violation hereof.
B. Notice of violations. Upon learning of the violation, the administrative
officer shall personally serve upon the owner of the property whereon
the violation is occurring a notice describing the violation in detail and
giving the owner 10 days to abate the violation by restoring the
building, structure, or site to its condition prior to the violation. If the
owner cannot personally be served within the Borough with said notice,
a copy shall be posted on the property and a copy shall be sent to the
owner at his or her last known address.
C. Injunctive relief. In the event that the violation is not abated within 10
days of service or posting on site, whichever is earlier, the
administrative office shall cause to be instituted any appropriate action
or proceeding to prevent such unlawful activity, to restrain, correct, or
abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building,
structure, or site, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use
in or about such premises as follows:
(1) If any person shall undertake any activity requiring permit and
report of the Commission without first having obtained approval,
he or she shall be required to immediately stop the activity, apply
for approval, and take any necessary measures to preserve the
affected premises pending such approval. If the work is denied, he
or she shall immediately restore the building, structure, object, or
site to its condition prior to any such activity. The administrative
§ 35-58 CLOSTER CODE § 35-59
28:122
§ 35-60. Preventative maintenance; violations.
officer is hereby authorized to seek injunctive relief regarding a
stop action or restoration in the Superior Court not less than 10
days after the delivery of notice pursuant to Subsection B hereof.
(2) In the event of the threat of imminent action for which the
necessary approvals have not been granted, and which action
would permanently and adversely change a landmark or any
building, structure, object, or site located within a landmark
district, the administrative office is empowered to apply to the
Superior Court of New Jersey for injunctive relief as is necessary to
prevent such actions.
D. Penalties. In addition to the remedies provided above, a person
convicted of a violation of this article before a court of competent
jurisdiction shall be subject to penalties as follows:
(1) For each day up to 10 days, not more than $100 per day.
(2) For each day between 11 days and 25 days, not more than $250 per
day.
(3) For each day beyond 25 days, not more than $500 per day.
(4) For each day beyond 25 days, a jail term, not to exceed 90 days may
be imposed.
A. Priority. Recognizing the need for preventive maintenance to insure the
continued useful life of historic buildings, structures, objects, and sites,
the Borough Council hereby declares that code enforcement for such
designated properties is a high municipal priority.
B. Notice of violation. In the event that any landmark or any building,
structure, object, or site located within a landmark district deteriorates
to the point that, in the best estimate of the administrative officer, the
cost of correcting the outstanding code violations equals more than
10% of the cost of replacing the entire building, structure, object, or
site on which the violation occurs, the administrative officer shall serve
personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice on the
owner of the property listing the violations, the estimate for their
abatement, and the replacement costs of the improvements, and stating
that if the owner does not take all necessary remedial action within 60
days, or such extensions as the administrative officer shall grant for
good cause, the Borough of Closter's designated official may, at the
expiration of said 60 days, enter upon the property and abate such
violations and cause the cost thereof become a lien on the property.
C. Hearing. Upon receipt of such notice, the owner may, within 20 days
after such receipt, notify the administrative officer of his or her
intentions to have a hearing as to the allegations and estimates set forth
in the notice. Such a hearing shall be conducted by the Commission and
§ 35-59 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 35-60
28:123
§ 35-61. Municipal responsibility.
It shall be the duty of all municipal officials of the Borough of Closter
reviewing all permit applications involving any real property or
improvements thereon to determine whether such application involved any
activity which should also be the subject of an application for a permit,
and if it should be, to inform the Secretary of the Commission, the
administrative officer, and the applicant of the same.
shall, so far as possible, be a formal adversary proceeding in which
the administrative officer shall establish matters alleged in the notice
by the preponderance of the evidence. If a hearing is requested, the
administrative officer will, within 10 days following the hearing, serve
on the owner an opinion in writing setting forth his or her conclusions
and the reasons therefor.
D. Action without a hearing. If the owner does not request a hearing, the
findings of the Administrative Officer set forth in the notice issued in
§ 35-59B shall be binding, and the administrative officer may take such
necessary action as granted by the provisions of this article.
E. Right of abatement. If the owner does not comply with the findings of
the administrative officer, the administrative officer may enter onto the
premises and, by use of municipal labor or outside contractors, or both,
perform such work as is necessary to abate all violations.
F. Costs. The administrative officer shall then certify to the Borough
Council the cost of such work performed, plus all administrative,
clerical and legal costs and overhead attributable thereto and shall
present the same to the Borough Council.
G. Lien. The Borough Council may, by resolution, vote to cause the sum so
certified to become a lien upon the property, payable with the next
quarter's property taxes, and, if not then paid, bearing interest at the
same rate as delinquent taxes.
§ 35-60 CLOSTER CODE § 35-61
28:124
Chapter 38
MAP, OFFICIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 35.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 171.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 38-1. Purpose.
In order to facilitate the planning of the Borough of Closter and to fix the
location and widths of streets and drainage rights-of-way and the location
and extent of public parks and playgrounds and to conserve and promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare, it is hereby declared
necessary to adopt an Official Map of the Borough of Closter.
§ 38-2. Map adopted; file copy.
Chapter 43
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrator — See Ch. 3.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 18.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 48.
A. In accordance with the provisions of the Official Map and Building
Permit Act, 1953 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq., as amended and
supplemented), there is hereby adopted as the Official Map of the
Borough of Closter, in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey, a
certain map entitled "Official Map, Borough of Closter, Bergen County,
New Jersey," dated August 11, 1966, and prepared by A. C. Hobelman,
Borough Engineer.53
B. A copy of said Official Map shall be filed in the office of the Borough
Clerk of the Borough of Closter and shall be available for public
inspection.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 35-61 MAP, OFFICIAL § 38-2
38:125

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 6-25-1975 by Ord. No. 1975:269 (Ch. 61 of the 1967
Code)]
§ 43-1. Officers appointed annually.
There shall be annually appointed, in accordance with the statutes of the
State of New Jersey, the following officers: Borough Treasurer, Borough
Attorney, Borough Engineer and Borough Auditor.
§ 43-2. Duties.
Such officers shall perform the duties required by law and ordinances of
the Borough of Closter, as well as all such duties customarily performed in
connection with such offices and as assigned by the Mayor and Council.
§ 43-3. Terms of office.
The person appointed to such office shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
and Council and unless sooner removed shall hold office until his or her
successor has been appointed and qualified.
§ 43-4. Compensation.
In compensation for the services rendered by the holders of such offices,
they shall be paid according to the compensation provided for in the Annual
Salary Ordinance for the Borough of Closter.54
§ 43-5. Residency.
None of the holders of said offices, the Health Officer or the attorneys,
engineers, auditors or professional advisors or consultants to any boards or
agencies of the Borough of Closter shall be required to be residents of the
Borough of Closter.
54.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 43-1 MAP, OFFICIAL § 43-5
38:127

ARTICLE II
Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 2-8-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:569]
§ 43-6. Position created; responsibilities.
Pursuant to P.L. 1988, c. 110,55 there is hereby created and established the
position of Chief Financial Officer of and for the Borough of Closter. The
Chief Financial Officer shall carry out the responsibilities set forth under
N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et seq. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed
in the same manner as the Borough Treasurer. The salary of the Chief
Financial Officer shall be as set forth in the Salary Ordinance of the Borough
of Closter.56
55.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.
56.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 43-6 MAP, OFFICIAL § 43-6
38:129

ARTICLE III
Clerical Floater
[Adopted 6-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005: 938]
§ 43-7. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Clerical Floater in the Borough of
Closter for the purpose of providing supplementary administrative services
to various Departments of the Borough.
§ 43-8. Appointment.
This position will be made by annual appointment by the Mayor and Council.
§ 43-9. Position full-time; funding.
This position shall be considered full time for the purposes of employment
and will be funded on a pro rata share by each receiving department.
§ 43-10. Schedule.
Scheduling for this position will rest with the Borough Administrator or his/
her designee.
§ 43-7 MAP, OFFICIAL § 43-10
38:131

ARTICLE IV
Data Processing Coordinator; Deputy
[Adopted 6-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:939]
§ 43-11. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Data Processing Coordinator in the
Borough of Closter for the purpose of providing data processing services to
various administrative departments of the Borough.
§ 43-12. Deputy.
There is also created the position of Deputy Data Processing Coordinator
for the same purpose.
§ 43-13. Appointment.
These positions will be made by annual appointment by the Mayor and
Council.
§ 43-14. Positions part-time; funding.
These positions will be considered part-time for the purpose of employment
and will be funded as a line item in the annual operating budget.
§ 43-15. Schedule and reporting.
Scheduling and reporting for this position will rest with the Borough
Administrator or his/her designee.
§ 43-11 MAP, OFFICIAL § 43-15
38:133

ARTICLE V
Land Use Coordinator
[Adopted 5-23-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:984]
§ 43-16. Position created.
There is hereby created the position of Land Use Coodinator in the Borough
of Closter for the purposes of providing administrative assistance to the
Planning Board and Zoning Board of the Borough and other duties as
assigned. He or she shall act as the Secretary to the Planning Board and
Zoning Board and/or as Land Use Clerk, where those terms are used in this
Code and in the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Act.57
§ 43-17. Appointment.
This position will be made by annual appointment by the Mayor and Council.
§ 43-18. Position full-time; funding.
This position shall be considered full-time for the purposes of employment
and shall be funded as a line item in the annual operating budget.
§ 43-19. Schedule and reporting.
Scheduling and reporting for this position shall rest with the Borough
Administrator or his/her designee.
57.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 43-16 MAP, OFFICIAL § 43-19
38:135

ARTICLE VI
Municipal Housing Liaison
[Adopted 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1020]
§ 43-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the Borough of Closter's responsibility to assist
in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985.58
§ 43-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering the
affordability controls of some or all units in the affordable housing program
for the Borough of Closter to ensure that the restricted units under
administration are affirmatively marketed and sold or rented, as applicable,
only to low- and moderate-income households.
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON — The employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Borough of Closter.
§ 43-22. Establishment of position; compensation; powers and
duties.
A. Establishment of position of Municipal Housing Liaison. There is hereby
established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison for the Borough
of Closter.
B. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by the governing
body and may be a full- or part-time municipal employee.
C. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for the Borough of
Closter, including the following responsibilities which may not be
contracted out:
(1) Serving as Closter's primary point of contact for all inquiries from
the state, affordable housing providers, administrative agents and
interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Closter's Fair Share
Plan;
58.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.
§ 43-20 MAP, OFFICIAL § 43-22
38:137
(3) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH.
D. Subject to approval by COAH, the Borough of Closter may contract with
or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged
by the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the Borough of Closter
except for those responsibilities which may not be contracted out
pursuant to Subsection C above. If the Borough of Closter contracts
with another entity to administer all or any part of the affordable
housing program, including the affordability controls and affirmative
marketing plan, the Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the
contracting administrative agent.
E. Compensation. Compensation, if any, shall be fixed by the governing
body at the time of the appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
F. Administrative powers and duties assigned to the Municipal Housing
Liaison.
(1) Affirmative marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
affirmative marketing plan of the Borough of Closter and the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements and landlord/tenant law.
(2) Household certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
§ 43-22 CLOSTER CODE § 43-22
38:138
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Borough of Closter when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
(3) Affordability controls.
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
(4) Resale and rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
(5) Processing requests from unit owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
§ 43-22 MAP, OFFICIAL § 43-22
38:139
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air-conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
(6) Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person other than a household duly certified
to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent,
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls; and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH, as required.
(7) The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 43-22 CLOSTER CODE § 43-22
38:140
ARTICLE VII
Assistant Chief Financial Officer
[Adopted 1-25-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1218]
§ 43-23. Position created; responsibilities.
The Assistant Chief Financial Officer is hereby created and established as
a position in the Borough of Closter. The Assistant Chief Financial Officer
shall assist the Chief Financial Officer to carry out the responsibilities set
forth under N.J.S.A. 52:27BB-26 et. seq. The salary of the Assistant Chief
Financial officer shall be as set forth in the salary ordinance of the Borough
of Closter.
§ 43-23 MAP, OFFICIAL § 43-23
38:141
Chapter 46
PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrator — See Ch. 3.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 43.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 48.
§ 43-23 CLOSTER CODE § 43-23
38:142
ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 2-22-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1116]
§ 46-1. Positions eligible for participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 46-2. Exempt positions.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 46-3. Implementation and construal.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.), as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 46-4. Filing with state.
A copy of this article shall be filed with the Director of the Division of
Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey Department of the Treasury.
A. Borough Administrator.
B. Treasurer.
C. Municipal Court Judge.
A. Certified Health Officer.
B. Tax Collector.
C. Chief Financial Officer.
D. Construction Code Official.
E. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
F. Tax Assessor.
G. Registered Municipal Clerk.
H. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspectors.
I. Principal Public Works Manager.
J. Municipal Court Certified Administrator.
§ 46-1 MAP, OFFICIAL § 46-4
38:143
Chapter 48
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 46-4 CLOSTER CODE § 46-4
38:144
ARTICLE I
General Policy
[Adopted 3-27-1974 by Ord. No. 1974:250 (Art. I of Ch. 65 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 48-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPARTMENT HEAD — Any person appointed to be the supervisor or
administrative official appointed to supervise the members of a department
of the Borough of Closter.
FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee appointed to a position within the
Borough of Closter and who is required to work a full workweek or number
of hours as provided from time to time by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Closter or its properly designated officials.
PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — A person appointed to a position by the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Closter whose duties require less than a full
workweek on behalf of the Borough.
PERMANENT EMPLOYEE — Includes all persons appointed by the Mayor
and Council to salaried positions within the Borough of Closter, which
positions have been authorized by ordinance and compensation for which
has been provided in the Salary Ordinance adopted by the Mayor and
Council.[Added 8-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:456]
PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEE — An employee of the Borough of Closter
whose qualifications for appointment to a permanent position have been
determined and who will acquire permanent employee status upon
completion of a probationary period by appointment to permanent status
by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter.[Added 8-10-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983:456]
SCHOOL CROSSING GUARD — An employee of the Borough of Closter,
appointed annually by the Mayor and Council, who works certain hours as
directed by the Chief of Police of the Borough of Closter and is compensated
at hourly rates as established in the Salary Ordinance adopted by the Mayor
and Council.[Added 8-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:456]
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE — Any person, appointed by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter or its properly designated officials, whose
appointment is less than permanent in nature or has less than a full term
attached to the position and which appointment is for a limited time only.
§ 48-2. Qualifications, application and appointment.
A. Employment by the Borough of Closter shall be based solely on the
applicant's qualifications without regard to race, creed, color, natural
origin, sex or age.
§ 48-1 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-2
38:145
§ 48-3. Approval of positions: maintenance of policies.
B. Whenever a vacancy exists or a new position is created, recruitment to
fill the same with a qualified person will be conducted by the Borough
Administrator or other person designated by the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Closter.
C. The Mayor and Council shall determine the appropriate qualifications
for the particular position to be filled, and the decision of the Mayor and
Council in such matters shall be final.
D. Prior to the appointment of any applicant, the person may be asked to
undergo a physical examination or examinations as requested by the
Mayor and Council by physicians named by the Mayor and Council. The
prospective appointee or employee shall also complete and file a
prescribed questionnaire of physical condition and medical history with
the Administrator of the Borough. Every newly hired employee must
undergo an official background check. [Amended 2-25-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-1026]
E. It is the policy of the Borough of Closter to offer employment and fair
treatment to all its employees. The employee is expected to properly
maintain his or her mental and physical well-being to the reasonable
satisfaction of the department head and the Mayor and Council.
F. An application for employment may be rejected for the following
reasons, among others:
(1) The applicant fails to qualify because he or she is unable to perform
the duties of the position.
(2) The applicant is physically unfit to perform the duties of the
position for which he or she has applied.
(3) The applicant is addicted to the habitual or excessive use of drugs
or intoxicants.
(4) The applicant has been convicted of any crime or offense involving
moral turpitude.
(5) The applicant has been dismissed from previous employment for
delinquency, insubordination or misconduct.
(6) The applicant has practiced or attempted to practice any deception
or fraud in his or her application or in furnishing other evidence of
eligibility for appointment.
G. This article shall not affect or apply to members of the Police
Department.
A. The Mayor and Council shall formally approve the creation of any new
position and prior to any appointment to such position.
§ 48-2 CLOSTER CODE § 48-3
38:146
§ 48-4. General rules and regulations.
B. The Borough Administrator shall be responsible for maintaining all
personnel policies of the Borough of Closter, including those
established by this article.
A. Reporting accidents. An employee who is injured in the performance of
his or her duties shall immediately report the accident to his or her
supervisor, and the employee and the supervisor shall each submit at
once a written report detailing the accident to the Borough
Administrator.
B. Outside employment. The employee shall not accept outside
employment or engage in outside business activities if there is any
reasonable probability that such outside employment will interfere with
an employee's performance or compromise an employee's position with
the Borough. It shall be the responsibility of an employee to notify the
Borough Administrator, in writing, of acceptance by the employee of
any outside employment within 15 days of acceptance of such
employment. [Amended 8-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:456]
C. Personnel records. The Borough Administrator shall establish forms for
maintaining personnel records for each employee in the Borough. The
personnel records shall contain periodic personnel evaluation reports
by the respective department head, which reports are hereby required
of each department head. The records shall include dates of
appointments, promotions, job titles, salaries, commendations,
disciplinary actions, leaves of any type taken and accumulated,
grievances and similar information. All such files and reports shall be
confidential records and accessible only to the Borough Administrator
and the Mayor and Council, to the department head of the employee for
whom the record is maintained or to the employee. Such personnel
records shall be maintained in a locked file.
D. Borough policies.
(1) No part of the pay due an employee for work done shall be withheld
from his or her check, except as required by law or as authorized,
in writing, by the employee.
(2) Employees may not accept donations or other gratuities,
contributions or anything of value in connection with the
performance of their duties.
E. Political activity; certain political activities prohibited. Borough
employees shall not engage in any political activities during working
hours.
F. Full-time employees are those employees who are appointed to a
position within the Borough and who are required to work a full
workweek or number of hours as provided from time to time by the
Mayor and Council or its property designated officials. At the present
§ 48-3 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-4
38:147
§ 48-5. Holidays.
time, full time hours equal 35 hours per week. [Added 2-25-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-1026; amended 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
A. All permanent employees of the Borough of Closter shall receive 13
holidays with compensation at the regular rate of daily compensation in
each calendar year. Each department head, with the approval of the
Borough Administrator, shall establish the holidays for his or her
particular department no later than December 1 for the following year.
All department holiday schedules shall include the following holidays:
[Amended 8-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-456; 4-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1160]
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King’s Birthday (3rd Monday in January)
Presidents' Day (third Monday in February)
Memorial Day (last Monday in May)
Independence Day (July 4th)
Labor Day (first Monday in September)
Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November)
Christmas Day
In addition, the following generally will be included but are subject to
change annually:
Good Friday (varies from year to year)
Columbus Day (second Monday in October)
Veterans Day (November 11th)
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Eve (December 24th)
B. When any of the above legal holidays falls on a Saturday or Sunday, said
holiday shall be celebrated on the Friday before or the Monday after, at
the discretion of the Borough Administrator.
C. In order to be entitled to the above paid holidays, the employee must
work the regular workdays before and after the holiday, except that if a
holiday falls within an employee's vacation, the employee will receive
an additional day of vacation. [Amended 8-10-1983 by Ord. No.
1983:456]
D. Where it is necessary to maintain service requiring an employee to
work on an official holiday, that employee may be compensated by being
permitted to take an equal amount of time off with pay on a regular
working day at a time approved by the department head.
§ 48-4 CLOSTER CODE § 48-5
38:148
§ 48-6. Hours of work; attendance on job.
§ 48-7. Overtime work.
§ 48-8. Vacation leave.
E. Should an official holiday occur when an employee is on sick leave, he
or she shall not have that holiday charged against his or her sick leave.
A. Accurate and complete time and attendance records will be maintained
by each department unit of the Borough. The head of the department
will certify to the Borough Administrator as to the accuracy of the time
and attendance records at the end of each month. Records shall be kept
on forms prescribed by the Borough Administrator.
B. Being punctual is of the utmost importance; consequently, any lateness
and the reason for it will be noted on the time record. Recurring or
chronic lateness will be referred to the Borough Administrator for
appropriate action and will be the basis for disciplinary action against
the offending employee.
C. It is the responsibility of each employee to notify his or her department
head without delay if he or she will be absent from or delayed in
reaching his or her assigned post. If an employee is unable to promptly
communicate with his or her department head, he or she shall notify the
Borough Administrator. Failure to report when absent may lead to
disciplinary action or dismissal. It is the responsibility of each
department head to know at all times the whereabouts of every member
of his or her group.
D. The regular workweek for Borough employees is five days, for not more
than 40 hours. The schedule of hours shall be set by the department
heads, subject to approval of the Mayor and Council.
A. Overtime work shall be kept to a minimum and, except in the case of an
emergency, must be authorized in advance by the department head.
Records will be kept of all overtime and be part of the Administrator's
monthly report to the Mayor and Council.
B. All Borough employees, except those who hold elective office, the
Borough Administrator, the Borough Clerk, the Superintendent of
Public Works, the Chief of Police, the Borough Collector/Treasurer, the
Borough Assessor and the Borough Construction Code Official and
subcode officials, who work in excess of the regular workweek as
described in § 48-6D will be paid overtime at the rate of time and onehalf
their base hourly rate, and said employees who shall work on
Sundays and approved scheduled holidays will be paid at twice the base
hourly rate. Employees of the Department of Public Works who work at
the transfer station shall be treated as part-time employees as defined
in § 48-1. [Amended 8-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:456]
§ 48-5 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-8
38:149
A. All probationary and permanent employees of the Borough of Closter
shall be entitled to paid vacations as follows: [Amended 8-10-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983:456; 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
(1) Employees hired prior to December 31 in any calendar year will
receive 0.83 paid vacation days for each full month worked.
[Amended 1-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2017:1235]
(2) After one year of continuous employment by the Borough: 70 hours.
(3) After five years of continuous employment by the Borough: 105
hours.
(4) After 10 years of continuous employment by the Borough: 140
hours.
(5) Employees hired prior to June 1, 2017, will be eligible after 15
years of continuous employment by the Borough to 175 hours.
Employees hired on or after June 1, 2017, will receive a maximum
vacation benefit of 140 hours after 10 years of continuous
employment by the Borough, as set forth in Subsection A(4) above.
[Amended 1-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2017:1235]
B. All vacations must be scheduled by the department head and approved
by the Borough Administrator. It is his or her responsibility to schedule
individual vacations so that activities of the Borough will be carried on
with minimum interruption and inconvenience.
C. Temporary employees and school crossing guards are not eligible for
vacation benefits. Part-time employees will receive vacation benefits as
provided in Subsection A of this section on a pro-rata basis as more fully
set forth in the Borough’s Personnel Manual. [Amended 8-10-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983:456; 1-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2017:1235]
D. This section does not apply to employees hired on or after January 1,
2009. Employees hired before January 1, 2009, will accrue two extra
days paid vacation for each completed year of their employment up
through 15 years of such employment and three extra days for each
completed year in excess of 15 years. Such accrued vacation will be
granted only upon termination of employment with the Borough. No
employee who has been discharged from the employ of the Borough of
Closter shall be eligible for any of the benefits as described in this
Subsection D. [Amended 2-25-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1026;
7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1046; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No.
2009:1058]
E. Unless specifically authorized by the Mayor and Council in advance,
extra compensation will not be allowed in lieu of unused vacation as it is
desired that each employee take advantage of the authorized annual
vacation period for health, rest, relaxation and pleasure.
F. Except as specified in Subsection D, vacation time cannot be accrued.
§ 48-8 CLOSTER CODE § 48-8
38:150
§ 48-9. Sick leave.
G. Computation of time of employment for purposes of this section shall be
from January 1 of the initial year of employment after completion of the
first full year of continuous employment. [Added 8-10-83 by Ord. No.
1983:456]
H. At the discretion of the Borough Administrator, with the approval of the
Mayor and Council, vacation leave, with compensation, may be granted
to a permanent employee, notwithstanding any requirements of this
Chapter 48. Said granted vacation time shall be charged against the
employee's subsequent year's vacation leave. [Added 8-10-1983 by
Ord. No. 1983:456]
I. Notwithstanding the above provisions, contract employees shall receive
vacation benefits in accordance with the terms of the applicable
contract. [Added 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1046]
A. Sick leave may be granted to probationary and permanent employees
who are unable, through sickness or injury, to perform the duties of
their positions. [Amended 8-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:456]
B. Only full-time and permanent part-time employees shall be entitled to
sick leave with pay for seven hours of sick time for every month of
service during the first calendar year of service following appointment
and 105 hours in every calendar year thereafter. Employees who work
less than 35 hours per week, who are considered either full-time or
part-time and are eligible for benefits, will be eligible, on a pro-rata
basis, for vacation and sick time. [Amended 8-10-1983 by Ord. No.
1983:456; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1058; 4-9-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014:1160]
C. For full-time employees, in order to qualify for sick leave of three
consecutive days or more, the absence of an employee must be properly
certified by a medical professional or hospital. For part-time employees,
the "consecutive days" shall be in accordance with their normal work
schedule. [Amended 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
D. All absences due to illness or disability shall be reported immediately by
or for the employee to his or her department head or the Borough
Administrator.
E. In all cases of reported illness or disability, the Borough shall have the
right to send a visiting nurse or the Borough medical officer to
investigate the report and to have any employee reported or reporting
as ill or sick to be examined by a physician designated by the Borough.
Any employee who has been absent from duty for a continuous period
longer than 70 hours shall furnish the Borough with his or her
physician's medical report certifying that the employee is physically fit
and able to resume his or her duties. The Borough shall also have the
right to have such employee examined physically by a physician of its
§ 48-8 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-9
38:151
own choice to determine whether or not such employee is able to
resume his or her duties and employment. [Amended 4-9-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014:1160]
F. Sick leave may be used for medical appointments for the employee.
[Amended 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
G. An employee suffering a disability as a result of his or her employment
shall not have any such absence resulting therefrom charged against
his or her sick leave time.
H. Except as provided in Subsection B of this section with reference to
employees in the first year of service, unused sick leave shall
accumulate at a rate of not more than 105 hours of sick leave annually
as to all employees; provided, however, that not more than 1,260 hours
may be accumulated by any employee during the course of
employment. [Amended 5-10-1978 by Ord. No. 1978:338;
2-26-1986 by Ord. No. 1988:522; 4-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1160]
I. Upon an employee's normal retirement or upon a disability retirement,
the employee shall be compensated for accumulated sick leave by
receiving 50% of such accumulated sick leave days multiplied by an
amount computed on a daily rate basis with reference to annual salary
at the time of retirement. [Amended 5-10-1978 by Ord. No.
1976:338]
J. When a full-time Borough employee is injured in the line of duty, the
Borough Council may, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-7, pass a resolution
giving the employee up to one year's leave of absence with pay. The
total benefits received as salary or for loss therefor by such employee,
other than privately paid insurance plans, shall not exceed such
employee's regular salary. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
K. Sick leave accumulation bank. [Added 10-12-1977 by Ord. No.
1977:317]
(1) Said 15 working days of sick leave shall accumulate from year to
year if they are not used or such unused portion shall accumulate in
a sick leave bank. The sick leave accumulation bank shall not
exceed the total of 180 working days. [Amended 2-26-1986 by
Ord. No. 1986:522]
(2) Upon an employee's normal retirement or upon a disability
retirement, the employee shall be entitled to compensation
representing 50% of all remaining accumulated sick days
(accumulated as of the time of his or her retirement in a sick leave
time bank), which compensation shall be at the employee's daily
rate at the time of his or her retirement.
§ 48-9 CLOSTER CODE § 48-9
38:152
§ 48-9.1. Light and transitional duty. [Added 10-26-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:688; amended 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
L. Sick leave may be granted to each school crossing guard who is unable
because of sickness or injury to perform the duties of his or her
position, limited to the following terms and conditions: [Added
8-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:456]
(1) Each guard may be granted a maximum of three paid sick days
during the period from September 1 to June 30.
(2) Sick day pay shall be taken as the normal daily pay for said school
crossing guard during the immediately preceding workweek.
(3) Only those who have completed 10 months' employment as a school
crossing guard for the Borough of Closter shall be eligible to
receive sick pay.
(4) Section 48-9A, B, C, E, H, I, J and K shall not apply to school
crossing guards.
A. The Borough will endeavor to bring employees with temporary
disabilities back on the job as soon as possible and may assign
transitional and/or light duty to employees who temporarily cannot
perform the essential functions of their positions because of injury or
illness. Transitional duty and/or light duty is not guaranteed and will
not exceed 45 workdays unless extended by the Mayor and Council
upon the recommendation of the Borough Administrator.
B. An employee requesting transitional and/or light duty or the Workers
Compensation Physician shall notify the Borough Administrator as soon
as the temporarily disabled employee is able to return to work with
restrictions. Transitional and/or light duty will only be assigned if the
employee will probably be able to perform the essential functions of the
position after the transitional and/or light duty period. The Borough
Administrator will consult with the department head to determine if
there is any meaningful work that can be performed consistent with the
restrictions. Transitional and/or light duty assignments may be in any
department and not just the employee's normal department. The
Borough Administrator will decide if it is in the best interest of the
Borough to approve a transitional and/or light duty request and will
notify the employee of the decision. The Borough reserves the right to
terminate the transitional and/or light duty assignment at any time
without cause.
C. Employees may not refuse transitional and/or light duty assignments
that are recommended by the Workers Compensation Physician. In such
cases, failure to report to work as directed shall constitute immediate
grounds for dismissal. If the employee believes that the transitional
and/or light duty assignment is beyond the employee's abilities, the
§ 48-9 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-9.1
38:153
§ 48-10. Leaves of absence.
employee may request a meeting with the Borough Administrator who
will render a written response within 24 hours.
D. Employees on transitional and/or light duty will receive their regular
salaries and are prohibited from engaging in any outside employment of
any kind unless they receive prior written approval from the Borough
Administrator. If transitional and/or light duty is approved, the
employee or Workers Compensation Physician must keep the Borough
Administrator informed of the medical progress. (Employees assigned
to transitional and/or light duty will be allotted time off to attend
medical or physical therapy appointments but must request leave time
for any other reason.) If at the end of the transitional and/or light duty
period the employee is not able to return to work without restrictions,
the Borough reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to extend the
transitional and/or light duty or place the employee back on workers'
compensation or disability. This policy does not affect an employee's
rights under the Americans with Disabilities Act,59 the Family and
Medical Leave Act,60 the Fair Labor Standards Act,61 the contagious or
life-threatening illnesses policy or other federal or state law.
A. Maternity. Maternity leave may be granted without pay for up to one
year, provided that the request is approved by the department head and
by the Mayor and Council.
B. Military. Any full-time employee who is a member of the National Guard
or reserve components of the military or naval service of the United
States and is required to perform active duty for training periods shall
be granted a leave of absence with pay for the period of such training.
The amount of such paid leave, unless the employee elects to use his or
her annual vacation leave, shall be the difference between the
employee's salary for the leave period and the amount of money
received from the state or federal government for such service. When
an employee has been called to active duty or inducted into the military
or naval forces of the United States, he or she shall automatically be
granted an indefinite leave of absence without pay for the duration of
such active service. However, in order that the employee may be
reinstated without loss of privileges or seniority, he or she must report
for duty with the Borough within 60 days following his or her honorable
discharge from the military service.
C. Service in court. A full-time employee who is subpoenaed as a witness
in a civil or criminal case, not involving him or her in his or her capacity
as a Borough employee, or an employee who is called and serves on a
jury may be granted paid leave for the period of time in which he or she
is officially involved with the court in such capacity.
59.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
61.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. 201 et seq.
§ 48-9.1 CLOSTER CODE § 48-10
38:154
D. Death in immediate family. Each full-time employee may be granted,
upon approval of said employee's department head, time off with pay,
not to exceed three days, in the event of a death in his or her immediate
family. However, upon recommendation of the department head, a
reasonable extension time beyond three days may be allowed where
circumstances justify such action. The term “immediate family”
includes father or mother, spouse or civil union partner, brother or
sister, son or daughter, mother-in-law or father-in-law of the employee.
[Amended 2-25-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1026]
E. Training. Full-time employees may be granted skill or professional
improvement leave with or without pay for specific courses of study
relating to the work of the Borough in which he or she is employed or
leave to attend conferences of professional and similar associations.
Such leave may be granted upon recommendation of the employee's
department head and approval by the Borough Administrator and the
Mayor and Council.
F. A leave of absence without pay may be requested by an employee of the
Borough by submitting the reasons for the requested leave, in writing,
to the department head. Such requests will require the approval of the
Mayor and Council.
G. Domestic violence leave. [Added 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
(1) The New Jersey Security and Financial Entitlement Act,62 also
known as the "NJ SAFE Act," provides protection for employees and
their family members who have been the victims of domestic
violence or sexual assault. Employees are entitled to 20 days of
unpaid protected leave from work to:
(a) Seek medical attention for physical or psychological injuries;
(b) Obtain services from a victim services organization, pursue
psychological or other counseling;
(c) Participate in safety planning for temporary or permanent
relocation;
(d) Seek legal assistance to ensure health and safety of the
employee or the employee's relative; or
(e) Attend, participate in, or prepare for a criminal or civil court
proceeding relating to an incident of domestic or sexual
violence.
(2) To be eligible for the leave, an employee must meet the following
criteria:
62.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:11C-1 et seq.
§ 48-10 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-10
38:155
§ 48-11. Compensation and longevity.
(a) The employee or his/her child, parent, spouse or domestic
partner must be a victim of domestic violence or a sexually
violent offense;
(b) The employee must have worked for the employer for at least
12 months and for at least 1,000 hours during the twelvemonth
period immediately preceding the requested leave; and
(c) The twenty-day leave must be taken within one year of the
qualifying event.
(3) Employees may take leave on an intermittent basis, but such leave
cannot be shorter than one full day. To the extent the leave is
foreseeable, employees must provide advance notice. In addition,
employees seeking leave must provide proof that they qualify for
the leave. Such proof may include a restraining order, letter from a
prosecutor, proof of conviction, medical documentation or a
certification from an agency or professional involved in assisting
the employee.
(4) In certain circumstances, the basis for the leave may also qualify
under the federal Family and Medical Leave Act63 and/or the New
Jersey Family Leave Act.64 If so, the Borough will treat the leave
concurrently with the leave under those statutes. Employees may
be required to use accrued paid vacation leave, personal time or
sick leave concurrently.
(5) The Borough shall protect the privacy of employees who seek leave
by holding the request for leave, the leave itself or the failure to
return to work in the strictest confidence.
(6) The Borough shall not retaliate, harass or discriminate against any
employee exercising his/her right to take the leave provided by this
policy.
A. The pay of Borough employees shall be on the basis of appropriate
schedules of annual or hourly rates as prescribed in the Salary
Ordinance.65
B. All wages for full-time and part-time employees and officials on an
annual salary basis shall be paid twice monthly. Salary and wages shall
be paid by one check. Only nonsalary items, such as clothing allowance,
gas stipend, insurance refunds, etc., shall be paid by separate check.
Outside employment shall be paid by one separate check. [Amended
2-25-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1026]
63.Editor's Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.
64.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:11B-1 et seq.
65.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 48-10 CLOSTER CODE § 48-11
38:156
§ 48-12. Resignation.
C. Salaries for department heads and their deputies and all positions other
than secretarial, clerical and Department of Public Works' employees
are fixed according to annual rates and not based on a fixed number of
hours of work per week and shall not be adjusted with variation in the
work schedule.
D. The rates of pay for different classes of positions which are prescribed
in the Salary Ordinance shall be changed only by the Mayor and Council
by amendment to the Salary Ordinance.66 Such changes shall be made
annually to become effective on the first day of each year and shall be
retroactive to that day.
E. For employees hired on or after January 1, 2009, this benefit is capped
after four years. For employees hired before January 1, 2009, there
shall be paid to each such full-time employee of the Borough a longevity
pay of 1% of each such employee's current year's base salary for each
three years of completed service to the Borough. After completion of
the first three-year period of service, the employee shall in addition
receive as longevity pay one-third of 1/3 of 1% of the current year's base
salary for each additional year of completed service. Payments under
this section shall be made at the time of regular salary payments.
Computation of time of employment, for purposes of this section, shall
be from January 1 of the initial year of employment. [Amended
5-10-1978 by Ord. No. 1978:333; 2-25-2009 by Ord. No.
2009:1026; 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1046]
F. For those hired on or after January 1, 2013, there shall be no longevity
payments. [Added 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
G. As of January 1, 2014, all full-time and permanent part-time employees
of the Borough shall receive their paychecks via direct bank deposit.
[Added 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
A. Any employee who wishes to resign from the Borough service shall give
his or her office or department head at least two weeks' prior written
notice of his or her resignation, unless the Borough Administrator
requires a longer service or agrees to a shorter notice. Any employee so
resigning shall not take his or her earned annual vacation time during
said two-week notice period.
B. Any employee failing to give at least two weeks' notice shall forfeit his
or her accrued vacation time or any type of compensation in lieu of
vacation.
C. The office or department head shall indicate his or her approval or
disapproval of the employee's resignation notification and forward it to
the Borough Administrator who may reject or accept the terms of the
66.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ 48-11 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-12
38:157
§ 48-13. Retirement.
§ 48-14. Disciplinary action; suspension and dismissal.
resignation. No resignation shall become effective until it is
recommended for approval by the employee's office or department head
and approved by the Borough Administrator.
D. Any employee who does not submit his or her resignation in compliance
with the provisions in this section or whose resignation is not approved
or who is absent from work for a period of three or more days without
notifying his or her office or department head of the reasons for his or
her absence and of his or her intention to return to work may be
considered as having resigned without notice.
E. Any employee who fails to return to his or her duties within three days
after the expiration date of an authorized leave period without notifying
his or her office or department head shall be considered as having
resigned without notice, provided that the failure to give notice was not
caused by unavoidable circumstances.
F. A doctor’s note is required for any and all sick time taken after an
employee submits his or her resignation. [Added 2-25-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009:1026]
A. All Borough employees enrolled in the Public Employees' Retirement
System of New Jersey are subject to the requirements and provisions of
the plan.
B. All information regarding the retirement plan may be obtained from the
office of the certifying agent of the Public Employees' Retirement
System of New Jersey.
A. When a department head has reasonable grounds to believe that an
employee is not conforming to Borough policies and rules or to specific
instructions given him or her, the department head should first
privately discuss the matter with such employee. The department head
should, if possible, then obtain assurance that there will not be a
repetition of the incident.
B. If the matter is not serious and the department head is satisfied, the
matter may be dropped.
C. Should the department head consider such conduct sufficiently
violative of the aforesaid policies, rules or instructions to warrant
further consideration by the Borough Administrator, the employee
should be so advised and a meeting of those interested arranged at the
earliest possible date. All facts should be presented at this meeting,
which should, if possible, be conclusive. A written report of the meeting
and of the action taken should be placed in the employee's personnel
history file.
§ 48-12 CLOSTER CODE § 48-14
38:158
D. In the event that it appears desirable to do so, the matter may be
referred by the Borough Administrator to the Mayor and Council for
review and/or such action as is warranted by the facts.
E. Disciplinary actions against employees may include the following:
(1) Informal private verbal reproof by the department head.
(2) Written memorandum of censure from the department head or his
or her superior.
(3) Letter of admonition from the Borough Administrator or as directed
by the Mayor and Council.
(4) Suspension from duty without pay, not to exceed five working days.
(5) Transfer or demotion of employee.
(6) Separation from the service of the Borough.
F. Suspension from duty of any employee may be ordered by the Mayor
and Council for any of the reasons as specified in Subsection J
hereinafter. If and when such summary action is considered necessary,
suspension may also be ordered by the Borough Administrator until the
Mayor and Council are able to take action thereon. If the Mayor and
Council do not concur with the action of the Borough Administrator,
such employee shall have restored to him or her any pay and privileges
withheld by the action of the Borough Administrator.
G. A fair and complete investigation of the case will be made in no more
than 30 days by the Borough Administrator to accumulate all of the
facts and to interview the interested parties. If requested by the
suspended employee, a hearing will be held and a written record of
such hearing will be made. After the conclusion of the investigation and
hearing, if one is held, the finding and recommendations, supported by
all available data, will be reported to the Mayor and Council.
[Amended 2-25-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1026]
H. All papers in connection with a disciplinary action will be placed in the
employee's personnel file.
I. Any employee may appeal a disciplinary action, except suspension from
duty, by means of the procedure set forth for handling grievances.
J. An employee may be suspended, demoted or otherwise disciplined for
cause. Among the causes sufficient for such action shall be:
(1) Neglect of duty.
(2) Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave
has expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked.
(3) Incompetency, inefficiency or incapacity due to mental or physical
disability.
§ 48-14 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-14
38:159
§ 48-15. Grievance procedure.
(4) Insubordination.
(5) Serious breach of discipline.
(6) Intoxication while on duty.
(7) Commission of a criminal act.
(8) Participating in any political activity prohibited by this article.
(9) Disobedience of departmental rules and regulations.
(10) Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
A. It is the policy of the Borough of Closter that every employee at all
times be treated fairly, courteously and with respect. Conversely, each
employee is expected to accord the same treatment to his or her
associates and department head and to the public.
B. Whenever an employee has a grievance, he or she should first present it
verbally to his or her department head. It is the responsibility of the
department head to arrange a mutually satisfactory settlement of the
grievance as quickly as possible if it can and, in his or her opinion,
should be made within the discretion permitted him. The department
head must either conclude a mutually satisfactory solution to the
grievance within 48 hours of the time presented to him or, failing in
that, must within that time advise the employee and the Borough
Administrator of his or her inability to do so.
C. When an employee is informed by his or her department head that he or
she is unable within the discretion permitted him or her to arrange a
mutually satisfactory solution to the grievance, the employee must, if he
or she wishes to present the grievance to the Borough Administrator, do
so in writing.
D. The employee will prepare the grievance in writing, in duplicate. The
grievance should be stated as completely and as clearly as possible in
order to permit prompt handling. One copy of the grievance shall be
delivered to the Borough Administrator, who will, without delay,
forward it to the Mayor and Council in order to advise the Mayor and
Council of the filing of the grievance.
E. The other copy of the grievance shall be presented by the employee to
his or her immediate department head, to whom the grievance will be
made verbally. The department head will report the facts and events
which led to its presentation, in writing, and include in his or her
written report any verbal answer he or she may have previously given
to the employee concerning this grievance. Within 24 hours after
receipt of the written grievance, the department head must present it,
with the information required from him, to the Borough Administrator.
§ 48-14 CLOSTER CODE § 48-15
38:160
§ 48-16. Conventions; seminars; business and travel expenses.
The following procedure shall be followed with respect to necessary
expenses for conventions, seminars and business or travel of employees
of the Borough while on Borough business or attending job improvement
training:
§ 48-17. Inquiries.
Day-to-day inquiries with respect to the provisions of this article shall be
directed to the Borough Administrator for response.
§ 48-18. Applicability. [Added 8-10-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:456;
amended 2-25-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1026]
This article shall not apply to employees where they are covered by a
separate contractual agreement and/or a rules and regulations manual.
F. The Borough Administrator will attempt to find a mutually satisfactory
solution to the grievance promptly, or failing in that, the complaint will
be referred to the Mayor and Council.
G. Since it is intended that most, if not all, grievances can and should be
settled without the necessity of reference to the Mayor and Council, no
grievance will be heard or considered by the Mayor and Council until it
has passed through all of the above-described steps.
H. All papers and documents relating to a grievance and its disposition will
be placed in the employee's personnel file.
A. No employee shall incur any expense on behalf of the Borough for
conventions, seminars and business or travel expenses without first
receiving the prior written approval of the Borough Administrator.
[Amended 2-25-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1026]
B. Upon returning from any convention, seminar or business trip, the
employee shall make a full oral report and, if required by the
department head, a written report thereof to the appropriate board or
department or the Mayor and Council.
C. All employees shall submit an itemized voucher for all expenses
incurred on any duly authorized trip to a convention, seminar or on any
other valid Borough business and shall thereupon be reimbursed.
D. In the event that an employee's personal vehicle is used for the conduct
of Borough business, the employee may be eligible for mileage
reimbursement through the regular expense voucher process at the IRS
rate in effect at that time. In any case, when an appropriate Borough
vehicle is available, the Borough vehicle shall be used rather than the
employee's personal vehicle. [Added 8-10-1983 by Ord. No.
1983:456; amended 2-25-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1026; 4-9-2014
by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
§ 48-15 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-18
38:161

ARTICLE II
Employment Practices
[Adopted 9-13-1978 by Ord. No. 1978:338 (Art. II of Ch. 65 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 48-19. Policy. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:723]
A. Equal opportunity employment. It shall be the policy of this Borough
that equal opportunity of employment and advancement in employment
shall be based on merit and ability to perform without regard to race,
color, national origin, religion, sex, political affiliation or age. No
arbitrary, unreasonable or artificial barrier shall impede the
employment or promotion of any person for any position.
B. The Borough, in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act,
does not discriminate against a person with a disability in hiring if the
person is otherwise qualified for the job.
C. Antisexual Harassment Policy. The Borough will not tolerate any form of
harassment and has adopted an Antisexual Harassment Policy,
Ordinance No. 1996:721.67
D. Drug-free work environment; smoking.
(1) It is the policy of the Borough to maintain a drug-free workplace in
accordance with the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act
of 1991. The Borough will not tolerate the use of alcohol,
intoxicants or illegal drugs at work. An employee found in
possession of illegal drugs, using illegal drugs and/or alcohol at
work or under the influence of illegal drugs and/or alcohol at work
may be subject to immediate termination, The Borough may
require an employee to submit to a drug test if it has reason to
suspect alcohol or drug use on the job. The Borough may require an
employee who is addicted to alcohol or illegal drugs to attend a
drug or alcohol rehabilitation program as a condition of continued
employment. Failure to stay in such a program shall serve as
immediate grounds for termination of employment.
(2) Smoking is not permitted anywhere in the Municipal Building or in
any Borough-owned vehicle or equipment. [Amended 4-9-2014
by Ord. No. 2014:1160]
E. Whistle-Blower Policy. No person shall be subject to discipline in
retaliation for having reported, in good faith, wrongdoing by another.
This policy shall be administered in accordance with the New Jersey
Whistle-Blower's Law, i.e., the New Jersey Conscientious Employee
Protection Act, N.J.S.A. 34:19-1 et seq.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Sexual Harassment.
§ 48-19 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-19
38:163
F. Catastrophic Illness Policy. [Amended 2-25-2009 by Ord. No.
2009:1026]
(1) The Borough is committed to providing and maintaining a healthy
and safe work environment which allows all employees to perform
their jobs in a safe and productive manner. The Borough respects
the dignity and worth of every employee through its Equal
Opportunity Employment statement, which explains its policy and
practice with respect to prohibiting discrimination in every phase
of employment.
(2) The Borough provides support for individual employees who may
be facing the trauma of a life-threatening or catastrophic illness.
The purpose of this policy is to support the physical and emotional
health of all employees, minimize disruptions or productivity and
morale caused by the presence of a worker with a life-threatening
illness and demonstrate the Borough's continued commitment to its
affirmative action goals related to physically disabled employees.
(3) Employees with such conditions, who are able to meet appropriate
performance standards and whose continued employment does not
pose a threat to their own health and safety or that of others, are
assured equal employment opportunities and reasonable
accommodation in their employment. This has been and continues
to be the policy of the Borough.
(4) If an employee is able to work, he or she is expected to be
productive. If the individual cannot work, then he or she may be
eligible for health and disability benefits.
(5) Consistent with the concern for employees with life-threatening
illnesses, the Borough offers the following range of resources
available through the Personnel Manager:
(a) Employee education and information on terminal illnesses and
specific life-threatening illnesses.
(b) Referral, to agencies and organizations which offer supportive
services for life-threatening illnesses.
(c) Provide consultation in assisting employees in efficiently
managing health, leave and other benefits.
G. Workforce Reduction/Layoff Policy. Employment may be terminated as a
result of reduction in force. Terminations through reductions in force
will be determined on recommendation of the Council Committee in
charge of each department affected and final approval of the governing
body.
H. Notification of job openings. Every effort is made to hire the best
qualified people for municipal employment. Job openings for permanent
full-time employees and permanent part-time employees shall be posted
§ 48-19 CLOSTER CODE § 48-19
38:164
§ 48-20. Criteria for employment or promotion.
§ 48-21. Certain conditions or status not applicable to employment
or promotion.
on the bulletin board of the Municipal Building and are advertised in
local newspapers. Preference is given to hiring and promoting from
within the system. All applicants for positions of municipal employment
are required to fill out a job application form.
I. Job description. As far as possible every job shall have a job description.
Such descriptions should include the following: the name or title of the
job or position; a description of the duties to be performed; hours and
work schedule; date on which appointment is effective; name or title of
the person to whom the appointee reports; starting wage and salary;
and requirements for the position in terms of education, training and
experience.
J. Amendments and ratification. This personnel policy may be amended
from time to time, by the Borough Council through the passage of an
appropriate resolution. Each year these rules and regulations shall be
ratified during the reorganization meeting of the Mayor and Council.
K. Disclaimer. Nothing contained in this section shall be interpreted to
mean that employees will only be terminated for just cause or that a
particular job shall remain available. This section is a guide not a
bargain for contract, and any employee should be aware that it can be
changed at any time without notice.
A. No criteria or standard for employment or promotion in employment
shall be established unless such criteria or standard shall specifically
relate to the job or position to be filled either by employment or
promotion thereto.
B. Criteria may be established requiring a minimum educational or job
experience attainment for certain jobs or positions where such criteria
are job-related or position-related.
C. Any application, test, examination or demonstration of ability for a
particular position or job, whether in writing or oral, shall specifically
relate to the position or job to be filled.
A. Marital status or condition of pregnancy shall not be cause to deny
employment or promotion or to discharge from employment. A
pregnant employee who desires a leave of absence and then a return to
work shall be offered comparable employment at comparable pay on a
first-available basis.
B. The arrest record of an employee or applicant shall not be a bar to
employment or continued employment. Conviction of an applicant or
employee may be a bar to employment or continued employment if the
§ 48-19 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-21
38:165
§ 48-22. Equality in employment opportunities required.
§ 48-23. Compliance with affirmative action policy; administration.
act or conduct resulting in conviction relates to the specific position or
job.
C. Physical requirements that relate to the position or job may be adopted,
but such requirements shall not be applied to the requirement of any
position or job to which they do not relate.
A. There shall be no discrimination between employees on the basis of sex
as to rates of pay or promotional opportunity where equal work
requires equal skill, effort and responsibility for work performed under
similar working conditions.
B. There shall be no discrimination because of the age of any applicant for
employment or any employee as to rate of pay, promotional
opportunities or working conditions, and no limitation shall be placed
upon any person because of age.
C. No person shall be deprived of employment or refused promotion or be
discriminated against in any manner in his or her employment or
employment opportunity by reason of race, color, religion, sex, marital
status, age, political affiliation, sexual orientation, gender identity or
for any reason. Ability to perform and merit shall be the sole criteria for
employment or advancement in employment. [Amended 2-25-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009:1026]
A. To comply with the requirements of the several laws concerning
affirmative action in connection with federal and state grants, the
administration of an equal employment opportunity program shall be
directed by the Borough Administrator.
B. The Borough Administrator shall have the responsibility and authority
to assure that no discrimination concerning the provisions of any
federal or state act shall occur in any program undertaken by the
Borough of Closter and funded in any manner by the United States or
the State of New Jersey or any political subdivision thereof.
C. The Administrator shall require, when necessary under the terms of
this article or of any pertinent law or regulation or executive order, the
filing of an affirmative action program by the Borough or by any
contractor or subcontractor doing any work for which governmental
funds are received.
§ 48-21 CLOSTER CODE § 48-23
38:166
Chapter 50
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 48-23 MAP, OFFICIAL § 48-23
38:167

ARTICLE I
Organization
[Adopted 9-8-1976 by Ord. No. 1976:289 (Art. I of Ch. 72 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 50-1. Enumeration of duties.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the Borough of Closter, New
Jersey, to:
§ 50-2. Composition.
A day and night police force shall be and hereby is established in and for
the Borough of Closter, County of Bergen and State of New Jersey, and shall
consist of the following members of said police force:
§ 50-3. Rules and regulations; police manual. [Amended 5-11-1988
by Ord. No. 1988:561]
A. Preserve the public peace.
B. Prevent crime.
C. Detect and arrest offenders.
D. Protect the rights of persons and property.
E. Guard the public health.
F. Preserve order at elections and all public meetings and assemblages.
G. Remove nuisances existing in public streets, roads, places and
highways and arrest all street mendicants and beggars.
H. Regulate the movement of teams and vehicles in streets, roads, places
and highways.
I. Enforce and prevent the violation of all laws and ordinances of the
Borough.
J. Uphold and enforce the provisions of motor vehicles and traffic
regulations, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
A. One Chief and such of the following superior officers as the Mayor and
Council may from time to time deem necessary and proper:
(1) Captain or Captains.
(2) Lieutenant or Lieutenants.
(3) Sergeant or Sergeants.
B. As many patrolmen as the Mayor and Council may from time to time
deem necessary and proper.
§ 50-1 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-3
38:169
§ 50-4. Appointment to Department. [Added 3-24-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:646; amended 3-13-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:710]
In addition to the requirements for appointment to a police department, as
provided by Chapter 14 of Title 40A of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated,
all applicants must have obtained at a minimum an associate certificate/
degree in criminal justice or police science; or a bachelor of arts or bachelor
of science degree from an accredited institution of higher learning. The
above minimum educational requirements may not be waived except under
exceptional circumstances. An applicant for appointment must successfully
complete a written examination, oral examination, physical test, medical
examination and psychological examination. The medical and psychological
examinations are to be conducted by licensed medical practitioners chosen
by the Mayor and Council.
§ 50-5. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for violation of any provision of this Article and the Police Manual
shall be as provided in Chapter 5 of the Police Manual.69
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Borough Administrator is hereby
designated for the purpose of this chapter and as provided by the
statutes of the State of New Jersey as the "appropriate authority." The
appropriate authority shall be responsible for the overall performance
of the Police Department and shall adopt and promulgate rules and
regulations for the government of the Police Department and for the
discipline of its members. [Amended 3-24-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:646]
B. Said rules and regulations of the Police Department of the Borough of
Closter shall be incorporated in a police manual entitled the "Closter
Police Department Rules and Regulations Manual (Revised 2009),"68 or
in any police manual adopted thereafter, and are hereby incorporated
by reference and made part of this article as if they were set forth in
full. Copies of said manual shall be maintained in the office of the
Borough Clerk, as well as with the Chief of Police. [Amended
12-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:911; 11-9-2009 by Ord. No.
2009:1060]
68.Editor’s Note: Said Manual was adopted 11-9-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1060.
69.Editor's Note: The Police Manual is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 50-3 CLOSTER CODE § 50-5
38:170
ARTICLE II
Intermunicipal Police Assistance
[Adopted 6-22-1977 as Ord. No. 1977:307 (Art. II of Ch. 72 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 50-6. Authorization granted.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter is hereby authorized
to enter into reciprocal agreements with other communities for providing
police assistance and to receive similar police assistance from said
communities.
§ 50-7. Assistance and equipment.
The Police Department of the Borough of Closter shall respond to such calls
for assistance when so ordered by the Chief of Police or his or her designee
and shall provide such personnel or equipment as requested to the extent
possible without endangering persons or property within the Borough of
Closter.
§ 50-8. Effect on benefits.
If any member or officer of the Closter Police Department while rendering
such assistance in other communities shall suffer a casualty or death, he
or she or his or her designee or legal representative shall be entitled to
all salary, pension rights, workmen's compensation and other benefits as if
such casualty or death occurred in the performance of duty in the Borough
of Closter where such duties are normally carried on.
§ 50-6 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-8
38:171

ARTICLE III
Chief of Police
[Adopted 3-24-1993 as part of Ord. No. 1993:646 (Art. IIA of Ch. 72
of the 1967 Code)]
§ 50-9. Establishment of position of Chief of Police.
There is hereby created in the Police Department of the Borough of Closter
the position of Chief of Police.
§ 50-10. Duties.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department and shall
be directly responsible to the appropriate authority for its efficiency and
day-to-day operations. Pursuant to policies established by the appropriate
authority, the Chief of Police shall:
A. Administer and enforce rules and regulations of the Police Department
and any special emergency directive for the disposition and discipline
of the department and its members and officers.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers.
D. Delegate such of his or her authority as may be deemed necessary for
the efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under
the Chief's direction and control.
E. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by the appropriate authority on the operation of the
Police Department during the preceding month and make such other
reports as may be requested by the appropriate authority.
§ 50-9 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-10
38:173

ARTICLE IV
Deputy Chief of Police
[Adopted 9-28-1977 as Ord. No. 1977:313 (Art. III of Ch. 72 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 50-11. Position created.
There is hereby created in the Police Department of the Borough of Closter
the position of Deputy Chief of Police.
§ 50-12. Rank designated.
The Deputy Chief of Police shall rank immediately below the Chief of Police.
§ 50-13. Duties.
The duties of the Deputy Chief of Police shall be the following:
§ 50-14. Access to information.
In order to perform his or her duties, the Deputy Chief of Police shall have
access to all of the files and matters pertaining to police functions within
the Borough of Closter.
§ 50-15. Abolishment of position.
The position of Deputy Chief of Police may, in the future, be abolished
by borough ordinance if the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter
determines that the need for this position no longer exists.
A. To assume the responsibilities of the Chief of Police when the Chief is
not available, pursuant to Chapter 2:2.2 of the Police Rules and
Regulations Manual for the Borough of Closter or when the position of
Chief is vacant.70 [Amended 7-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1098]
B. To assume all of the duties described in Chapter 2:2.2 of the Police
Rules and Regulations Manual for the Borough of Closter when the
Chief is not available or when the position of Chief is vacant.71
[Amended 7-13-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1098]
C. To assist the Chief in running the Department and in carrying out the
responsibilities of the Chief of Police.
D. To carry out any other duties assigned by the Chief of Police.
E. To maintain the personnel files of all of the men in the Department.
70.Editor's Note: The Police Manual is on file in the Borough offices.
71.Editor's Note: The Police Manual is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 50-11 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-15
38:175

ARTICLE V
Detective Bureau
[Adopted 8-11-1971 as Ord. No. 1971:221 (Art. IV of Ch. 72 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 50-16. Creation and establishment of Bureau.
There is hereby created and established a Detective Bureau in the Police
Department of the Borough of Closter, which shall operate and function
under the supervision of the Chief of Police.
§ 50-17. Appointments.
The Chief of Police, subject to the approval and consent of the Mayor and
Council, may, as he or she deems it necessary, assign and detail any officer
or member of the Police Department, not to exceed three in number, to
duty in the Detective Bureau or transfer any police officer serving in the
Detective Bureau from said Detective Bureau to duty in the uniformed
division of the Police Department.
§ 50-18. (Reserved)72
§ 50-19. Officer in charge [Amended 12-22-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:660]
The Detective Bureau shall operate under the officer in charge assigned by
the Chief of Police. Said officer in charge of the Detective Bureau shall be
subject to the orders and directions of the Chief of Police.
§ 50-20. Responsibilities of officer in charge. [Amended 12-22-1993
by Ord. No. 1993:660]
The officer in charge of the Detective Bureau shall be responsible for the
proper and efficient operation of the Bureau. He shall be responsible for
the supervision of all Bureau activities and the assignment of all police
officers assigned to duty in the Detective Bureau. He shall submit monthly
and yearly reports in writing of the activities of the Detective Bureau to the
Chief of Police on dates specified by the Chief.
§ 50-21. Functions and duties of Bureau.
The duties of the police officers assigned to duty in the Detective Bureau
shall include:
A. The investigation and solution of all crimes committed within the
borough.
B. Exerting all efforts to prevent the commission of crimes in the borough.
72.Editor's Note: Former § 50-18, Ranks; salary, was repealed 12-22-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:660.
§ 50-16 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-21
38:177
§ 50-22. (Reserved)73
§ 50-23. Work schedules. [Amended 12-22-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:660]
All police officers serving in the Detective Bureau shall work according to
schedules prepared by the officer in charge of the Bureau and shall be
subject to the orders and directions of such officer in charge.
§ 50-24. Authority and jurisdiction of officer in charge. [Amended
12-22-1993 by Ord. No. 1993:660]
The officer in charge of the Detective Bureau shall have such authority and
jurisdiction over subordinates in the Detective Bureau as a ranking officer
would have in the Uniform Division of the Closter Police Department.
C. The maintenance of proper, written reports and records of all
investigations conducted.
D. The execution of all orders for investigation and police action issued by
the Chief of Police.
E. Obeying all the rules of the Police Department.
73.Editor's Note: Former § 50-22, Extradition cases, was repealed 12-22-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:660.
§ 50-21 CLOSTER CODE § 50-24
38:178
ARTICLE VI
Fees
[Adopted 9-27-1974 as Ord. No. 1974:256 (Art. V of Ch. 72 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 50-25. Fees for services and copies of records.
A. Fees are established for certain services extended and material
distributed by the Police Department. Fee amounts shall be as set forth
in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
B. All fees shall be paid to the Police Department at the time the services
are rendered or the material received.
§ 50-25 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-25
38:179

ARTICLE VII
Standards and Guidelines for Promotions
[Adopted 1-2-1984 by Ord. No. 1984:490(Art. VI of Ch. 72 of the
1967 Code); amended in its entirety 11-19-2007 by Ord. No.
2007:1001]
§ 50-26. Uniform procedure established.
§ 50-27. Promotion to rank of Sergeant.
A. All promotions made in the Police Department, with the exception of
Chief, shall be made in a uniform and standardized procedure
established hereunder by the Mayor and Council.
B. All appointments to and promotions within the Police Department are to
be made by the Mayor and Council.
C. Within 10 days of the posting of the ranking candidates, a candidate
may file a written letter of appeal. Said letter must contain the
reason(s) or justification(s) for an appeal and must be submitted to the
Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council will assess the request.
Such requests may address the following areas of the promotional
process: [Added 9-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1050]
(1) Review and retabulation of the scored elements of the selection
process.
(2) Review of any evaluation or internal document that was used in the
selection process related to the appellant.
D. If the appeal impacts the results of the promotional ranking as
determined by the Mayor and Council, the candidate may be permitted
to be reevaluated. [Added 9-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1050]
A. All applicants for promotion to the rank of Sergeant must have at least
three years of service as a patrolman in the Borough of Closter.
B. Promotion to rank of Sergeant will be based on the following scoring:
(1) Job performance (worth 48 points): based on the average scores
from the previous written performance evaluation. These
evaluations will be performed by supervisory officers and will
include all relevant information in each officer's personnel file.
(2) Written examination (worth 15 points): to be administered by an
agency to be selected by the Mayor and Council.
(3) Oral examination and appraisal (worth 30 points): a composite of
interviews by the supervisory officers (10 points) and the Public
Safety Committee (20 points).
(4) Seniority (worth seven points): two points for military duty and one
point for every two years of completed service up to 10 years.
§ 50-26 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-28
38:181
§ 50-28. Promotion to the rank of Lieutenant.
§ 50-28.1. Promotion to rank of Captain.
§ 50-28.2. Promotion to rank of Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of
Police.
A. All applicants seeking promotion to the rank of Lieutenant must have
served at least three years in the next lower rank in the Closter Police
Department in order to be eligible for promotion.
B. Promotion to the rank of Lieutenant will be based on the following
scoring:
(1) Job performance (worth 48 points): based on the average scores
from the previous written performance evaluation. These
evaluations will be performed by supervisory officers and will
include all relevant information in each officer's personnel file.
(2) Written examination (worth 15 points): to be administered by an
agency to be selected by the Mayor and Council.
(3) Oral examination and appraisal (worth 30 points): a composite of
interviews by the Lieutenants and Captain (if applicable) (10
points) and the Public Safety Committee (20 points).
(4) Seniority (worth seven points): two points for military duty; one
point for every two years of completed service as a Sergeant.
A. All applicants seeking promotion to the rank of Captain must have
served in the rank of Lieutenant for at least three years.
B. Promotion to the rank of Captain will be based on the following scoring:
(1) Job performance (worth 48 points): based on the average scores
from the previous written performance evaluation and will include
all relevant information in each officer's personnel file.
(2) Written examination (worth 15 points): to be administered by an
agency to be selected by the Mayor and Council.
(3) Oral examination and appraisal (worth 30 points): interviews by the
Public Safety Committee (20 points) and the Mayor and Council (10
points).
(4) Seniority (worth seven points): two points for military duty, and one
point for every two years of completed service as a Sergeant or
Lieutenant.
A. Promotion to the rank of Chief of Police shall be made by appointment
by the Mayor and Council.
B. Promotion to the rank of Deputy Chief of Police shall be made by the
Mayor and Council when the Chief of Police announces his or her
§ 50-28 CLOSTER CODE § 50-28.2
38:182
§ 50-29. Guidelines for examinations.
retirement, but not more than six months before the Chief's terminal
leave.
A. At least 60 days prior to the date of examinations, a notice shall be
posted at the Police Department announcing the following:
(1) The position(s) available for promotion.
(2) The date, time and location of the oral examinations (to be given
first).
(3) The date, time and location of the written examinations.
(4) A list of study material.
B. In the event of a tie in the final score of two candidates, the Mayor and
Council shall make the final decision.
C. The ranked listing shall expire three years after it is published.
D. The Mayor and Council reserve the right to require the top three
contenders for promotion to any specific rank to be evaluated for
suitability for the executive position sought by a certified professional
psychologist. The results of these tests will not become part of the
candidate's personnel file.
§ 50-28.2 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-29
38:183

ARTICLE VIIA
Department Organization and Chain of Command
§ 50-29.1. Organization of Department; promotions; chain of
command.
A. The Closter Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police and as
many subordinate officers, members and employees as may be
authorized by the governing body. All appointments to the Department
shall be made by the Borough Council upon recommendation by the
Chief of Police.
B. Promotions within the Police Department shall be made in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Chapter 50 of the Borough Code.
C. Department personnel.
(1) The Closter Police Department may consist of the following
personnel:
(a) One Chief of Police.
(b) One Deputy Chief.
(c) One Captain.
(d) Three Lieutenants.
(e) Five Sergeants.74
(f) Twenty police officers.
(2) Ranks are not required to be filled.
74.Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 2016:2017, adopted 6-22-2016, provided as follows: “Six
Sergeants, up to and until December 31, 2016. This amendment will be automatically
repealed absent further action by the governing body and will return to five Sergeants.”
§ 50-29.1 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-29.1
38:185

ARTICLE VIII
Quasi-Public and Private Duty Work
[Adopted 4-14-1993 by Ord. No. 1993:650 (Art. VII of Ch. 72 of the
1967 Code); amended in its entirety 8-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004:924]
§ 50-30. Quasi-public and private duty work.
A. Quasi-public and private duty work. Whenever a person or entity
requests off-duty service by a police officer, the Chief of Police may
authorize the assignment of a police officer to quasi-public duty or
private duty work which is necessary for safety or security.
B. Escrow accounts for quasi-public and private duty work.
(1) Any person or entity requesting such services shall estimate, in
writing, the number of hours such services are required and
estimate shall be approved by the Chief of Police. If the estimated
cost of such services exceeds $1,500, the person or entity
requesting such services shall establish an escrow account with the
Borough Treasurer by depositing an amount sufficient to cover the
rates of compensation and administrative fees set forth in the Fee
Schedule Ordinance of the Borough of Closter (Chapter A301) for
the total estimated hours of service. Exceptions: Public utility
companies using their own employee work crews will not be
required to establish an escrow account. In addition, local civic,
charitable or religious entities requesting short-term, temporary
assignment of services will not be required to establish an escrow
account.
(2) Prior to assigning any police officer to requested services, the Chief
of Police or his designee shall verify that the balance in the escrow
account of the person or entity requesting services is sufficient to
cover the compensation and fees for the number of hours specified
in the request for services. The Chief of Police shall not, except in
the case of emergency, assign any police personnel unless all fees
and compensation required in the manner described above have
been deposited with the Borough Treasurer. No officer, except in
the case of emergency, shall provide any such services for more
hours than are specified in the request for services.
(3) In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, the aforementioned services shall, at the option of the
Borough, cease, and requests for further or future services may not
be performed or assigned until additional funds have been
deposited in the escrow account in the manner prescribed above.
(4) The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible
for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in
order to avoid any interruption of services and for payment of all
charges incurred.
§ 50-30 MAP, OFFICIAL § 50-30
38:187
(5) For emergency situations, the Police Department shall seek
payment into the escrow account as soon as possible. The person or
entity shall have no more than five days to make any payment
demanded.
§ 50-30 CLOSTER CODE § 50-30
38:188
Chapter 52
PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF
§ 52-1. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Public Works in the borough, which shall
have jurisdiction over activities relating to public works, streets, public
lands and buildings, collection and disposal of solid waste and sanitary and
storm sewers.
§ 52-2. Superintendent of Public Works.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be an office of the
Superintendent and other subordinate positions as may be established by
the Borough Council. The Superintendent shall be appointed by the
governing body. His or her term shall be for a period of one year and shall
expire on December 31 of every year, and any vacancy during the term shall
be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 52-3. Duties of Superintendent.
The duties of the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works shall
include but not be limited to:
A. Qualifications. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
shall be a person qualified by education, training and experience to
perform the duties of office as hereinafter set forth. No person having
less than 10 years of direct experience in the field of municipal public
works, including at least three years of direct supervisory experience in
the same field, shall be eligible to hold this office. He or she shall devote
full time to the duties of the office and not engage in any other
employment.
B. Responsibilities. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
shall plan, direct and control the activities of the Department. He or she
shall be operationally responsible to the Borough Administrator.
A. Ensure appropriate manpower utilization within authorized
organizational and budgetary guidelines for all public works and solid
waste operations.
B. Provide services incumbent upon the Department in a timely and
efficient manner, consistent with budgetary limitations.
C. Supervise the operation, maintenance and repair of any borough-owned
equipment and properties.
D. Keep an inventory control and submit requisitions for all materials and
supplies required by the Department.
§ 50-30 PUBLIC WORKS, DEPARTMENT OF § 52-3
52:189
§ 52-4. Functions of Department.
The Department of Public Works shall provide service relating to the
construction and maintenance of streets, storm drainage and sewer
systems, parks and recreational facilities and public buildings. In addition,
the Department shall operate the solid waste collection and disposal
function in accordance with the rules and regulations as set forth
hereinafter.
E. Supervise the performance of the work of all personnel assigned to his
or her jurisdiction.
F. Recommend to the Borough Administrator the need for any repairs and
replacements to borough-owned equipment, structures, buildings and
grounds.
G. Submit to the governing body a monthly report of all work performed
and services furnished as well as inspections made during the previous
month.
H. Submit to the Borough Administrator recommendations for budget
appropriations for the ensuing year as well as those programs or
reports to the Council or the Administrator deemed necessary to
promote and increase efficiency or improve operations of the
Department.
I. Recommend to the Borough Administrator for approval the expenditure
of all funds by voucher chargeable against the budget of the
Department of Public Works.
J. Coordinate the inspection of all sewer lines in the borough.
K. Receive all complaints from residents and taxpayers of the borough
relating to the operations under his or her jurisdiction, investigate the
same, take appropriate action and report all results to the Borough
Administrator.
L. Set up, keep and maintain all the necessary books, records, field notes,
maps, surveys and similar records necessary to perform the duties of
his or her office and turn over all the records to his or her successor or
the Borough Administrator upon termination of employment by the
borough.
M. Develop and promote training programs for all employees within the
Department and recommend personnel for promotion and/or dismissal
to the governing body, as the case may be.
N. Handle the scheduling of work assignments and programs within the
Department.
O. Establish and maintain working relationships with other borough
employees and the general public.
§ 52-3 CLOSTER CODE § 52-5
52:190
§ 52-5. Rules and regulations.
The Council shall, by resolution, make such rules and regulations necessary
for the proper operation of the Department of Public Works. The rules and
regulations shall be binding upon each member of the Department.
§ 52-6. Salary of Superintendent and Deputy Superintendent.
[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663; 6-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:865]
The salary of the Superintendent of Public Works and Deputy
Superintendent of Public Works shall be as may hereafter be provided in
the Borough of Closter Salary Ordinance adopted and amended from time
to time.75
§ 52-7. Deputy Superintendent. [Added 6-12-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:865]
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be an office of the
Deputy Superintendent of Public Works. The Deputy Superintendent shall
be appointed by the governing body. His or her term shall be for a period
of one year and shall expire on December 31 every year, and any vacancy
during the term shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
Chapter 53
PURCHASING AGENT
§ 53-1. Authorization to enter into contract.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Revised Statutes of the State of New
Jersey, §§ 40:23-6.26 to 40:23-6.29 and 40:23-6.34 to 40:23-6.37, the
Borough of Closter, in the County of Bergen and State of New Jersey, is
hereby authorized to enter into contract with the County of Bergen for
the joint use by the Borough of Closter and other municipalities in the
County of Bergen of administrative services and facilities of the Office of
Purchasing Agent of the County of Bergen (or such other office or officer
duly designated for such purpose by the Board of Chosen Freeholders of
A. Qualifications. The Deputy Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works shall be a person qualified by education, training and experience
to perform the duties of office hereinafter set forth. No person having
less than eight years of direct experience in the field of municipal public
works, including at least two years of direct supervisory experience in
the same field, shall be eligible to hold this office.
B. Responsibilities. The Deputy Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works shall report directly to the Superintendent of Public
Works and shall assist the Superintendent in the duties of the office.
75.Editor's Note: The Salary Ordinance is on file in the Borough Clerk's office.
§ 52-5 PURCHASING AGENT § 53-1
53:191
said County of Bergen) appropriate to the procurement of certain materials,
supplies and equipment which may be determined to be required from time
to time by the borough and which the borough may otherwise lawfully
purchase for itself. The services and facilities of said Office of County
Purchasing Agent (or other officer or office designated by said Board of
Freeholders) shall be provided without cost to the borough.
§ 53-2. Proper municipal officials authorized to execute all
contracts.
The proper municipal officials of the Borough of Closter be and they are
hereby authorized and empowered to execute, on behalf of the borough,
all such contracts with the County of Bergen as may be authorized and
approved by resolution duly adopted by the Borough Council of the
borough.
Chapter 56
RECREATION COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 142.
§ 56-1. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:12-1, there is hereby established
a Board of Recreation Commissioners to consist of seven residents of the
borough.
§ 56-2. Appointment of members. [Amended 10-11-2000 by Ord. No.
2000:836]
The Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and consent of the Council,
shall appoint all members and associate members of the Board of
Recreation Commissioners in the manner provided by law for the
appointment of Borough officers.
§ 56-3. Terms of members; vacancies. [Amended 10-11-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000:836]
A. All members of the Board of Recreation Commissioners shall be
appointed for a period of five years and until their successors are duly
appointed and qualified; provided, however, that in the case of the
initial appointment of members of the Board, the initial terms shall be
for periods of one, two, three, four and five years, respectively, with two
members having initial terms of one year and two members having
initial terms of two years.
§ 53-1 CLOSTER CODE § 56-3
53:192
§ 56-4. Powers and duties.
§ 56-5. Officers.
The Board of Recreation Commissioners shall have the power to appoint
from among its members a Chairman, who shall be the presiding officer, and
such additional officers as the Board may desire, whose terms shall expire
on December 31 in the year of appointment or until their successors are
elected and qualified.
B. The associate members of the Board of Recreation Commissioners shall
be appointed for a period of one year.
C. Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
A. Subject to the general authority of the governing body, the Board of
Recreation Commissioners shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To supervise and regulate all playing fields, playgrounds and
recreational areas belonging to the Borough. It shall be the
Borough's responsibility to maintain said playing fields,
playgrounds and active recreational facilities. [Amended
10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1108]
(2) To establish, supervise and regulate the recreation program to
meet the recreational needs of the residents of the Borough,
including but not limited to the establishment and collection of fees
not to exceed the limits set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and
Deposits. [Amended 8-25-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:805]
(3) To promulgate, adopt and approve such rules and regulations as
the Board of Recreation Commissioners shall deem necessary to
carry out its purposes and objects subject to the review and
approval of the governing body.
(4) To appoint such personnel as may be required to carry out the
responsibilities of the Board of Recreation Commissioners.
(5) To recommend to the governing body a budget for the operation of
the Board of Recreation Commissioners for each calendar year.
B. The Board of Recreation Commissioners shall, in addition, have such
powers and authority as are provided pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:12-1
through 40:12-15, inclusive, except that the Board of Recreation
Commissioners shall not have the authority to acquire lands for public
playgrounds and recreation places without the prior authorization of
the governing body.
§ 56-3 PURCHASING AGENT § 56-6
53:193
§ 56-6. Termination of powers and duties.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction declares that the Board of
Recreation Commissioners shall have the power to acquire lands for public
playgrounds without the necessity of securing prior authorization therefor
by the governing body, this chapter shall immediately and automatically
be repealed, and the powers and duties of the Board of Recreation
Commissioners shall be vested in the governing body.
Chapter 57
(RESERVED)
Chapter 58
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrator — See Ch. 3.
Code of Ethics — See Ch. 18.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 43.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 48.
§ 58-1. Policy.
The Borough of Closter expressly prohibits any form of sexual harassment.
Improper interference with the ability of employees to perform their
expected job duties will not be tolerated. It is Borough of Closter policy that
all employees have a right to work in an environment free of discrimination,
which encompasses freedom from sexual harassment. The Borough of
Closter strongly disapproves of sexual harassment of its employees, in any
form, and states that all employees at all levels of the Borough of Closter
must avoid offensive or inappropriate sexual and/or sexually harassing
behavior at work and will be held responsible for ensuring that the
workplace is free from sexual harassment. All employees, female or male,
shall be permitted to work in an environment free from all forms of unlawful
discrimination and conduct which can be considered harassing, coercive
or disruptive, including sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is a form of
employee misconduct which undermines the integrity of the employment
relationship. Sexual harassment debilitates morale and interferes with work
productivity and, therefore, will not be tolerated.
§ 58-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SEXUAL ASSAULT — Includes gross sexual imposition such as touching,
fondling, grabbing or assault.
§ 56-6 CLOSTER CODE § 58-2
57:194
SEXUAL BRIBERY — Includes solicitation of sexual activity or other sexlinked
behavior by promise of reward.
SEXUAL COERCION — Includes coercion of sexual activity by threat of
punishment.
SEXUAL HARASSMENT — Includes any unwelcome sexual advances,
requests for sexual favors and other verbal or physical conduct based on
gender when:
§ 58-3. Guidelines.
§ 58-4. Complaint procedure.
Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of a person's employment;
A.
Submission or rejection of such conduct by a person is used as a basis
for employment decisions affecting that person;
B.
Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
a person's work performance; or
C.
D. Such conduct creates an intimidating or offensive work environment.
A. The borough policy prohibits unwelcome sexual advances; requests for
sexual acts or favors with or without accompanying promises, threats or
reciprocal favors or actions; or other verbal or physical conduct of a
sexual nature which has the purpose or effect of adversely affecting an
employee's performance or which creates a hostile or offensive working
environment. Examples of prohibited conduct include but are not
limited to lewd or sexually suggestive comments; slurs and other
verbal, graphic or physical conduct relating to an individual's sex; or
any display of sexually explicit pictures, greeting cards, articles, comic
books, magazines, photos or cartoons.
B. In order to ensure the integrity of the work environment, supervisory
personnel are required to ensure adherence to and compliance with
this policy and, upon being informed of possible sexual harassment, are
required to take appropriate immediate action in response, including
informing employees of their right to file a discrimination complaint
with the Administrator.
C. Employees are encouraged, whether directly or through a third party,
to notify the alleged harasser that the behavior in question is offensive
and unwelcome. However, failure to do so does not preclude filing a
complaint. Employees are encouraged to promptly report all alleged
incidents of sexual harassment to the Administrator.
A. Who may file.
(1) Any borough employee who feels that he or she has been the victim
of sexual harassment, or who witnessed acts of sexual harassment
§ 58-2 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 58-4
58:195
against a fellow employee of the borough, may file a complaint
of sexual harassment with the following persons in the following
order:
(a) His or her department head.
(b) The Borough Administrator.
(c) The Mayor and Council.
(2) Any filing of a complaint against a person other than the
complainant's department head must be accompanied by a
statement that the person to whom the complaint should otherwise
be addressed in accordance with the list hereinabove cannot,
according to the complainant, be objective about the sexual
harassment charge the complainant wishes to file.
B. Contents of complaint.
(1) The initial complaint may be made orally or in writing. If the
complaint is made orally, the Borough Administrator or the
alternate officer shall reduce the same to a written document,
which shall, if it is deemed accurate, be signed by the complainant.
The complaint must include the following information:
(a) The name, department and position or title of the complainant.
(b) The name, department and position or title of the charged
party.
(c) The date, time, nature and circumstances, in detail, of each
instance of alleged sexual harassment, including but not
limited to the injuries or consequences suffered by the
complainant, the names of any witnesses to such actions and
the duration of the actions at issue.
(d) Whether such harassment has been previously reported and, if
so, the date and to whom it was reported.
(2) Nothing in this section shall prevent the complainant from
providing other information or documents he or she believes are
essential to the fair adjudication of his or her case.
C. Investigation of filed complaint. The Borough Administrator is hereby
designated as the sexual harassment officer. The Borough Clerk of the
borough is hereby designated as the alternate officer. Persons who, by
reason of the circumstances, are uncomfortable directing a complaint
to the Administrator may report the same to the alternate officer. The
Borough Administrator or alternate officer shall be responsible for the
prompt and thorough investigation of each claim. The investigation
shall be completed within five business days of filing of the complaint,
and a written report of the investigation shall be forwarded to the
Mayor within seven days of the completion of the investigation. A copy
§ 58-4 CLOSTER CODE § 58-4
58:196
§ 58-5. Determination of guilt.
§ 58-6. Sanctions; penalties; appeals.
of the report shall be furnished to the complainant. It shall be the duty
of the person responsible for the investigate to:
(1) Interview the complainant, potential witnesses and the charged
party;
(2) Review municipal files for similar incidents involving the
complainant and the charged party; and
(3) Assess the presence or absence of corroborative evidence.
D. To the extent possible, the sexual harassment investigative proceedings
will be conducted in manner to protect the confidentiality of the
complainant, the alleged harasser and all witnesses. All parties involved
in the proceedings will be advised to maintain strict confidentiality from
the initial meeting to the final decision, to safeguard the privacy and
reputation of all involved. The investigation shall make every attempt to
maintain the confidentiality of the information provided to the
investigator.
E. A finding of no probable cause as a result of an investigation does not
necessarily establish that an accusation is false. However, this policy
shall not be used to intentionally bring frivolous or malicious charges
against an employee.
A. Standard for determination of guilt. The Borough Administrator or the
alternate officer shall determine that a charged party is not guilty of the
offense of sexual harassment unless he/she/they find, based on the
investigation and hearing, in the case of an appeal, that substantial,
credible evidence supports the conclusion that:
(1) The facts as alleged by the complainant are true;
(2) Those facts constitute sexual harassment defined herein; and
(3) The charged party is the person who committed the act of sexual
harassment.
B. If the validity of the complaint cannot be determined, immediate and
appropriate action will be taken to assure that all parties are
reacquainted with the sexual harassment policy so as to prevent sexual
harassment in the future.
A. Penalties.
(1) In the event of an appeal, the Borough Administrator or the
alternate officer shall be permitted to impose the following
penalties or conditions of employment upon a borough employee
found to have committed the offense of sexual harassment:
§ 58-4 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 58-6
58:197
§ 58-7. Retaliation; false accusations.
(a) Written reprimand which shall become a part of the employee's
personnel file.
(b) Discharge or demotion.
(c) Require the employee to undergo psychological therapy at his
or her own expense.
(d) Suspension (with or without pay).
(e) Referral to the criminal justice system.
(2) Any disciplinary action shall be consistent with applicable
collective bargaining agreements and any applicable borough
personnel code provisions.
B. Appeal to the Mayor and Council. A complainant or charged party may
appeal the determination of the Borough Administrator to the Mayor
and Council. The appealing party must file a request for an appeal in
writing with the Borough Administrator within 10 days of the
determination of the Borough Administrator stating why the
determination of the Borough Administrator should be overturned. The
party not appealing shall have the option of submitting, within 10 days
of the filing of the request for an appeal, a statement explaining why the
determination of the Borough Administrator should be affirmed. The
determination by the Mayor and Council shall be a final action.
C. To the extent permitted by law, the borough will not be liable for
damages obtained as a result of a decision of a nonlocal agency or court
of superior administrative remedies described herein.
A. Retaliation. It shall be a violation of this policy for any employee to take
reprisals against any person because she/he has filed a complaint or
testified or assisted in any proceeding under this policy. Threats, other
forms of intimidation, and/or retaliation against the complainant or any
other party based on involvement in the complaint process may be
cause for disciplinary action. There will be no retaliation against
employees for reporting sexual harassment or assisting the borough in
the investigation of a complaint. However, if after investigating any
complaint of harassment or unlawful discrimination the borough learns
that the complaint is not bona fide or that an employee has provided
false information regarding the complaint, disciplinary action may be
taken against the individual who provided the false information.
B. False accusations. Since a charge of sexual harassment is a grave and
serious one, false accusations of sexual harassment are, and will be
treated as, a disciplinary offense and will result in a level of punishment
appropriate for a person actually engaging in such behavior.
§ 58-6 CLOSTER CODE § 58-7
58:198
§ 58-8. Distribution of policy.
A copy of the sexual harassment policy will be distributed to all township
employees and will be posted in a prominent place in the Closter Municipal
Building.
§ 58-9. Training.
Employees of the borough shall be provided with training, by a person
trained to lead or implement such training, which shall include a detailed
discussion of the following:
Chapter 59
SHADE TREE COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16. Tree preservation and removal — See Ch. 181.
§ 59-1. Establishment. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:993;
4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1008]
There is hereby created and established in and for the Borough of Closter
a Shade Tree Commission in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:64-1 et seq.,
the amendments thereto and supplements thereof. Said Commission shall
consist of seven voting members as follows: five regular members plus one
member who is also a member of the Council and one member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission. Should such member’s term on
the Environmental Commission or Council terminate, then a replacement
from said bodies shall be designated to fill the unexpired term on said
Commission in order to ensure such representation. There shall also be
two alternate members. The members and alternate members shall be
appointed by the Mayor and shall be residents of the Borough of Closter.
The terms of the alternate members shall be for five years, except that
C. A person who knowingly and/or recklessly fails to give truthful
testimony to the Administrator shall also be guilty of having made false
accusations.
A. A detailed explanation of what constitutes sexual harassment.
B. The procedures for filing a sexual harassment charge.
C. The procedures to be followed in the investigation of a sexual
harassment charge.
D. Management's obligation regarding incidents of sexual harassment.
E. Recordkeeping requirements.
§ 58-7 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 59-1
58:199
the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be five years for
Alternate No. 1 and four years for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year.
§ 59-2. Powers.
The Shade Tree Commission hereby established shall have all of the powers
and shall be subject to all of the regulations, provisions and restrictions set
forth in the statutes of the State of New Jersey, namely, N.J.S.A. 40:64-1
et seq., the amendments thereto and supplements thereof, and such other
powers and functions as may be lawfully proscribed, designated or given by
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter from time to time. These
statutory powers include:
§ 59-3. Costs; exemptions.
A. Exercise full and exclusive control over the regulation, planting and
care of shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located or
which may hereafter be planted in any public rights-of-way within the
Borough of Closter, including the planting, trimming, spraying, growth,
care and protection thereof.
B. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
C. Move or require the removal of any tree, or part thereof, dangerous to
public safety.
D. Encourage arboriculture; make, alter, amend and repeal, in the manner
prescribed for the passage, alteration, amendment and repeal of
ordinances by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter, any and
all ordinances necessary or proper for carrying out the provisions
hereof.
E. Enter upon private property, with the consent of the owner, for the
purpose of determining whether the trees are healthy and administer
treatment to, or remove, any tree situated upon private property which
is believed to harbor a disease or insects readily communicable to
neighboring healthy trees in the care of the municipality, provided the
suspected condition is first confirmed by certificate issued by or on
behalf of the Department of Agriculture.
A. The initial cost of all trees planted by the Commission, the cost of
planting the same, the cost of the posts and boxes or guards used for
the protection thereof and the cost of the removal of any tree or part
thereof dangerous to public safety may, if the Commission shall so
determine, with the consent of the Mayor and Council, be a charge
upon the real estate in front of which such tree or trees shall be planted
or removed as an improvement thereof. The property owner may
themselves act upon the recommendation of the Commission or allow
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer to provide the service. If the
§ 59-1 CLOSTER CODE § 59-3
58:200
§ 59-4. Planting and removal of trees; notice and hearing;
emergencies. [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:993]
property owner does not fulfill the recommendations of the Commission
within six months, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall
complete the required work. The cost of such service shall be certified
by the Commission to the Borough Collector of Taxes, thereupon
become and be a lien upon said real estate, shall be included in the next
tax bill rendered to the owner or owners thereof and be collected in the
same manner as other taxes against that property.
B. The provisions of this section do not apply to:
(1) A planting to replace a tree or trees theretofore planted by the
Commission;
(2) A planting in connection with Arbor Day exercises or other
educational demonstration.
A. Protection of trees in the Borough right-of-way. No individual or officer
or employee of a corporation shall, without the written permission of
the Shade Tree Commission, cut, prune, break, climb, injure or remove
any living tree in the public right-of-way; cut, disturb or interfere in any
way with the roots of any tree on the public right-of-way; spray with any
chemical or insecticide any tree in the public right-of-way; place any
rope, sign, poster, or other fixture on a tree in the public right-of-way; or
injure, misuse or remove any devise placed to protect such trees on the
public right-of-way.
B. Planting trees. Any person, company or organization henceforth
constructing or performing major alterations to any residences,
commercial and/or office building, dwelling, apartment, or multiplefamily
dwelling within the Borough shall, at its expense, plant shade
trees along the right-of-way upon which the building fronts and abuts in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The Shade Tree
Commission shall designate where such trees are to be planted and the
variety of trees to be used. The person, company or corporation shall
post a bond of $1,500 per tree, such money to be deposited with the
Borough Administrator and designated for Shade Tree Commission use,
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and held for up to two years
and 11 months (i.e., the money, if returned, shall be returned at the end
of the third calendar year from the date the bond was posted). Should
any of the trees not be in satisfactory condition, in the sole discretion of
the Shade Tree Commission, at that time, after notice to the owner, the
moneys shall be used by the Shade Tree Commission to replace those
trees deemed to be unsatisfactory. At the end of two years, any funds
not used to replace unsatisfactory trees shall be refunded to those who
posted the bond(s). If construction is taking place on property with
street trees, see § 181-7 of the Borough Code. [Amended 6-22-2011
by Ord. No. 2011:1094]
§ 59-3 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 59-4
58:201
§ 59-5. Annual appropriation; estimate; amount.
§ 59-6. Violations and penalties and enforcement; replacement
assessment.
C. Shade trees and shrubs in right-of-way: approval required. No shade
tree or ornamental shrub shall be planted on the public right-of-way of
the Borough until such tree or shrub shall first have been approved and
the place where it shall be planted is designated by the Shade Tree
Commission.
D. Notice, hearing and emergencies. In every case where the property of
an abutting owner will be chargeable with the cost of the planting of
any shade tree or trees, the Commission shall give notice of the meeting
at which it is proposed to consider said by personal service of a copy of
the notice upon the abutting owner at least 10 days before the meeting.
The notice shall specify the street, streets, or portions thereof, on which
such planting is proposed and require all persons who may object
thereto to present their objections in writing at the office of the
Commission at or before the meeting. Before final action shall be taken,
all objections so filed shall be considered. The Commission shall give
reasonable notice of its intention to remove, or cause the removal of, a
tree, or part of a tree, dangerous to public safety, unless public safety
requires immediate removal, in which case no notice shall be necessary.
If the Shade Tree Commission finds it appropriate to plant a tree where
none has been planted before, it must give notice to the abutting owner
as described above.
A. During the month of December in each year, the Shade Tree
Commission shall certify to the Mayor and Council the estimated sum
necessary for the proper conduct of its work during the ensuing fiscal
year, which shall include the sums estimated to be expended for such of
the following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made for;
namely:
(1) Payment of wages and salaries of any employees;
(2) Expenses of Commission members in discharging official duties,
including expenses incident to attendance at professional
meetings;
(3) Purchase of trees and shrubbery; and
(4) Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of
services for the prudent promotion of the work.
B. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter shall annually
appropriate such sum as it may deem necessary for said purposes.
A. The Commission may prescribe a fine for the violation of each of its
ordinances in an amount not exceeding $1,500 for each violation (each
tree is a separate violation) or a maximum amount determined by
§ 59-4 CLOSTER CODE § 59-6
58:202
§ 59-7. Disposition of penalties.
All moneys collected in the municipality, either as fines or penalties, for
any violation of a rule or regulation of the Shade Tree Commission, or as
a charge against real estate, under any provision of this article, shall be
forthwith paid over to the municipal officer empowered to be custodian of
the funds of the municipality. Such funds shall be spent in fulfillment of the
goals of the Shade Tree Commission, with the consent and approval of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 59-8. Repealer.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this chapter. All
ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 59-9. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon final passage and
publication as required by law.
subsequent amendments to the state statute, N.J.S.A. 40:64-1. The
ordinances shall be enforced by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer
who shall serve and execute any process issued out of any court under
this article.
B. In addition to the penalties outlined in the above subsection, the
Borough may require a person who removes or otherwise destroys a
tree in violation of this chapter to pay a replacement assessment to the
municipality. The replacement assessment shall be the value of the tree
as determined by the Borough's Code Enforcement Official – Trees. In
lieu of an appraisal, the Borough may use the formula based upon the
number of square inches contained in a cross section of the trunk of the
tree multiplied by a predetermined value per square inch, not to exceed
$27 per square inch. The square inch cross section shall be calculated
from the diameter at 4 1/2 feet above ground level and, if there is a
multiple stem tree, then each trunk shall be measured and the largest
trunk shall be used to determine the fine for the tree. The Borough shall
modify the value of the tree based on its species, variety, location and
its condition at the time of removal or destruction. [Amended
9-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1173]
§ 59-6 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 59-9
58:203
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 65
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 106. Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 65-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices
whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means actuating a device
at the police headquarters of the Borough of Closter and requiring response
thereto by the Police Department, the Fire Department or other municipal
agencies.
§ 65-2. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm designed to summon
the Police or Fire Department or other municipal agencies to any location
in response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this chapter shall
in no way prohibit alarm companies from providing service by private
source to other offices within or without the Borough of Closter so long as
such activity is not connected to the alarm console; except, however, that
any person having a premises protected by an alarm device shall still be
responsible for the registration thereof in accordance with § 65-4B without
fee.
§ 65-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices producing a
visual or audio response, or both, and located within the Municipal Building
of the Borough.
ALARM DEVICE — Any device or mechanism used or designed for detection
and warning of unauthorized entry, fire, smoke, flood or other perils but
specifically excluding local alarm mechanisms located entirely within
enclosed residential buildings.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or aggregate of alarm devices
installed on or within a single building or on or within more than one
building or other structure on a common site at a specific location.
§ 59-9 CLOSTER CODE § 65-3
58:204
BURGLARY ALARM — Any police alarm device actuated by a burglary,
robbery or theft at a specific location.
CENTRAL ALARM STATION — Any facility operated by a private firm that
owns or leases a system of emergency alarm devices, which facility is
manned at all times by trained operators employed to receive, record and
validate alarm signals and to relay information concerning such validated
signals to the police or fire dispatch room.
DIRECT ALARM — Any alarm device connected directly by leased telephone
wires from a specific location to the radio dispatch room at the Municipal
Building.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal or message received by the Police or Fire
Department and to which either or both respond, which signal or message
was directly or indirectly brought about or produced by an alarm device of
any type, but not the result of criminal activity or other emergency and not
created by malfunction of the alarm console within the Municipal Building.
LICENSEE — Any private individual, partnership, corporation or firm which
is authorized by license of the municipality to maintain and operate the
alarm console except for use by the Police and Fire Departments.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm device which, when actuated, produces an
audible or visible signal designed to notify persons within audible or visible
range of the signal that a criminal act or other emergency is occurring or
has occurred.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Closter or any department, agency or
officer duly authorized to act on behalf of the municipality.
PERMITTEE — Any private individual, partnership, corporation or firm
which holds a permit from the municipality to use an alarm device on
premises owned or leased by it.
TELEPHONE ALARM DEVICES[Amended 8-11-1982 by Ord. No.
1982:435] — Any of the following alarm devices:
§ 65-4. Registration and permits.
DIAL ALARM — Any alarm device which automatically or electronically
selects a telephone trunk line of the Police or Fire Department of
the municipality and thereafter delivers a signal or reproduces a
prerecorded message to report a criminal act or other emergency.
A.
DIRECT TELEPHONE ALARM — Any alarm device, mechanism, system,
practice or procedure by which a criminal act or other emergency is
reported by telephone to the municipality by means of a central alarm
station, private alarm company, telephone operator or by any person
other than the owner or lessee of the premises from which the criminal
act or other emergency call emanates.
B.
A. Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful for any individual,
partnership, corporation or firm to operate or maintain any alarm
device, as defined by this chapter, without obtaining a valid permit on
§ 65-3 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 65-4
58:205
an annual basis. Said permits shall be obtainable through the Chief
of Police upon the payment of an annual fee, made payable to the
Borough of Closter, in an amount as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and
Deposits. [Amended 11-24-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:397; 7-26-1989
by Ord. No. 1989:578; 1-3-1994 by 1993:663]
B. Any individual, partnership, corporation or firm which owns and
operates or maintains an alarm device or devices shall make application
to the Chief of Police for a permit therefor on forms supplied by the
Police Department. The application shall specify the name, address and
telephone number of the owner and user of the alarm installation, the
exact location of the alarm device or devices, the name and address of
the installer of said device, the type of device, the name and address of
the individual or firm regularly servicing said alarm device, if any,
provisions relating to false alarms and testing procedures, a list of
names and addresses of persons to be contacted in the event of an
alarm and other information relating to the alarm device reasonably
required by the Chief of Police.
C. Applications for a permit must be filed on or before February 1 next
succeeding the adoption of this chapter for all existing or new alarm
installations and shall be accompanied by an annual fee payable to the
municipality in accordance with the schedule of fees hereinafter set
forth.76 [Amended 7-26-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:578]
D. All permits shall expire on December 31 in the year issued and shall not
be valid after said date. A renewal permit application must be filed with
the Chief of Police on or before January 15 in each year and shall be
accompanied by an annual fee payable to the municipality in
accordance with the schedule of fees hereinafter set forth. The renewal
application, on forms supplied by the Police Department, shall provide
for any changes in information from that contained in the original
application or in the most recent renewal application.
E. The Chief of Police is the designated official of the municipality to issue
and renew permits, to remove or suspend permits and to otherwise
enforce and apply the provisions of this chapter.
F. An application for a permit or permit renewal may be denied if the Chief
of Police disapproves of the equipment intended to be used or continued
by the applicant or the manner of use thereof or if the applicant has
violated any other provision of this chapter or is in default in the
payment of the annual fee.
G. All permits as may be granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the
express conditions that:
(1) The permittee shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the
municipality and its authorized officials, agents and employees
from and against any and all damages, costs, expense and liability
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. A301, Fees and Deposits.
§ 65-4 CLOSTER CODE § 65-4
58:206
§ 65-5. Alarm console license.
arising out of the acts or failure to act of the municipality, the
alarm console licensee, the permittee, the alarm contractor, or any
one or more of them, or arising out of any defects, deficiencies or
inadequacies in any alarm device or devices for which a permit
has been granted or in any installation, monitoring or maintenance
thereof or by reason of any malfunction or defect in the operation
or maintenance of the alarm console.
(2) The permittee shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter.
A. There is hereby established a police alarm console license which shall
be granted upon recommendation of the Chief of Police as set forth in
§ 65-4 of this chapter. Any such licensee shall have exclusive use and
control of the alarm console except for use by the Police Department of
the Borough of Closter, and such licensee will be responsible at no cost
to the Borough of Closter for the establishment, construction and
installation of said console containing equipment and being of a design
approved by the Chief of Police and for the care, maintenance and
management thereafter of said console. Said licensee shall locate said
console and relocate said console if necessary under the supervision of
the Chief of Police at no cost to the Borough of Closter.
B. Any connection to the police alarm console shall be of a type inspected
and approved by the Chief of Police of the Borough of Closter or his or
her designated representative, and any person aggrieved by said
decision may appeal said decision, in writing, within 10 days to the
Mayor and Council.
C. All alarms existing as of the date of the adoption of this chapter, except
dial alarms, shall be connected hereunder to the alarm console by the
licensee, and no connection cost for such transfer shall be permitted.
D. Allowable fees charged by licensees.
(1) The licensee for the alarm console shall be permitted to charge
permittees a maximum installation fee of $50 and a maximum
monthly retainer or maintenance fee of $7, except, however, that
no fee shall be charged to the Borough of Closter or the Board of
Education of the Borough of Closter for monthly charges or console
connection charges for any existing or future systems in public
buildings, and any equipment or alarm devices installed by the
alarm console licensee in such public building shall be at wholesale
cost exclusive of labor charges. Any person, firm or company that
operates a central alarm retransmission facility or central alarm
station for the benefit of permittees shall be permitted to connect
to the alarm console for fire alarm retransmission purposes. The
licensee shall be permitted to charge such person, firm or company
installation and monthly fees based upon the aggregate number of
permittees using such central retransmission facility or central
§ 65-4 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 65-5
58:207
alarm station which connects to the alarm console. [Amended
7-26-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:578]
(2) The licensee at the time of an initial alarm connection shall submit
to the Chief of Police the permittee's application and application fee
pursuant to § 65-4 of this chapter as a condition of the alarm
connection. [Amended 8-11-1982 by Ord. No. 1982:435]
E. The licensee shall install initially an annunciator or display console
having no fewer than 250 zones available for present systems and
future connections, which console shall be approved by the
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.
F. Except as provided in § 65-6 of this chapter, any license issued
hereunder shall be for a term of three years from the date of approval
by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter; such licensee shall
post with the Borough Clerk a performance bond in the amount of
$5,000, noncancelable without notification to the Mayor and Council of
the Borough of Closter, guaranteeing performance for three years of
the obligation of the licensee and ensuring maintenance of said console
and alarm system during said period when such license is in force.
G. Said licensee, for the privilege of obtaining such license, shall pay to the
Borough of Closter a minimum annual sum of not less than 5% of the
gross rental earned annually by such licensee from subscribers
connected to said alarm console, which payment shall be made within
30 days of the close of each fiscal year in which said license is in force,
and such licensee, by acceptance of said license, shall be deemed to
have agreed to having the books and accounts of said licensee open to
inspection by the Borough Auditor or other designated representative
of the Mayor and Council to verify the annual account which shall be
submitted by said licensee coincidental with the fee described herein.
[Amended 7-26-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:578]
H. The licensee granted a license hereunder will assume all liability and
hereby agrees to defend, indemnify and save harmless the Borough of
Closter, its departments, agencies, officials and agents from and against
any and all damages, claims, suits, causes of action and costs and
expenses in connection with or arising out of the installation and
operation of the alarm console. The licensee shall at all times be
considered an independent contractor.
I. Insurance.
(1) The licensee shall provide, prior to the granting of a license, and
maintain in full force and effect with responsible carriers
satisfactory to the Borough the following insurance:
(a) Workmen's compensation and employers' liability insurance
covering all persons employed by the licensee. The licensee
shall also cause any of its subcontractors to provide and
maintain workmen's compensation and employers' liability
§ 65-5 CLOSTER CODE § 65-5
58:208
insurance covering all persons employed by such
subcontractors.
(b) Comprehensive general liability insurance, including
contractors' contingent liability, covering bodily injury with
limits of $500,000 for each person killed or injured and
$1,000,000 for more than one person injured or killed in any
one accident; property damage liability with limits of $100,000
per occurrence.
(2) All insurance policies are to carry cross-coverage clauses; i.e.,
insure both the licensee and the Borough.
(3) All insurance policies shall contain a statement that the same may
not be canceled or modified except upon 10 days' written notice to
the Borough of Closter.
(4) The policies shall otherwise be in a form satisfactory to the
Borough Attorney.
J. Except as otherwise herein provided, any license issued hereunder
shall be for a term of three years.
K. The licensee shall at all times observe and comply with all federal, state
and local laws, ordinances, statutes, regulations and orders that in any
manner affect the installation, repair and operation of the alarm
console system and shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the
Borough and all its various departments, agencies, officials and agents
against any claims, liability or expenses arising out of or based upon the
nonobservance of any of the foregoing.
L. The licensee shall pay all royalties and license fees necessary for the
full and free use and enjoyment by the Borough of any and all rights to
any inventions, machines, processes, licenses or systems supplied by
the licensee which may be included in the alarm console system either
in the installation or use after completion. The licensee shall defend all
suits and claims for infringement of any patent right or rights of a
similar nature and shall indemnify and save harmless the Borough in
connection therewith.
M. The licensee shall be responsible for and shall pay all federal, state and
local taxes of every type and description incident to the performance of
its duties and obligations hereunder.
N. The licensee shall keep and perform its duties and obligations under its
personal control and supervision and shall not assign, transfer, sublet
or otherwise dispose of any right or responsibility under the license
granted, without the express written consent of the governing body of
the Borough of Closter, which consent shall not unreasonably be
withheld. [Amended 8-11-1982 by Ord. No. 1982:435]
§ 65-5 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 65-5
58:209
O. Only the Borough and the Board of Education and such other public and
private individuals, partnerships, corporations and firms which shall
have applied to and been granted permission by the Borough to connect
with the alarm console shall be permitted to use the services of the
alarm console system. The Borough of Closter, through its authorized
officials, shall have the right to suspend or terminate a permittee's
service at any time for the failure or neglect of such permittee to
comply with any requirement herein established, in which event the
licensee shall disconnect the permittee's service at no cost or expense
to the Borough or to such permittee, except that the permittee shall be
billed to the date of termination of the service.
P. Suspension or revocation of license.
(1) The license issued to the licensee hereunder may be revoked at any
time by the governing body of the Borough, upon 60 days' written
notice by ordinary mail to the licensee, for failure or neglect of the
licensee to comply with and fully perform any one or more of the
requirements or regulations herein established in a manner
satisfactory to the Borough. The licensee shall be entitled to a
revocation hearing by the governing body, provided that written
request therefor is made to the Borough Clerk within 10 days after
the mailing of the notice of termination to the licensee.
(2) The governing body may at any time and without advance notice
suspend any issued license when it shall appear to it that to do so
would be necessary in the best interests of the municipality. The
suspension shall be effective for such period of time as may be
required for the municipality to investigate the matter. The
municipality may request another individual or firm to service the
alarm console during the period of suspension and the cost therefor
shall be paid by the licensee. The licensee may continue to collect
the usual fees during any period of suspension, but not for any
period following termination.
(3) Any suspension or termination of the license as herein provided
shall be without cost, expense or liability of the municipality. In the
event of termination of the license by the municipality, the licensee
shall have the right to remove the alarm console system as may be
owned by the licensee, at no expense to the municipality, in a
manner and at the time directed by the Chief of Police [not later
than 30 days after termination date] to permit installation of a
substitute alarm system by an approved successor licensee. Any
equipment as may be owned by the licensee which is not removed
when directed by the Chief of Police shall become the property of
the municipality, and the licensee shall have no further claim or
right thereto or to any part thereof. The licensee may sell the alarm
console equipment owned by it to another individual or firm
accepted and approved as a licensee.
§ 65-5 CLOSTER CODE § 65-5
58:210
§ 65-6. Limitation of Borough's responsibility.
The Borough of Closter, its various departments, agencies and officials
shall be under no duty or obligation to any permittee or to any alarm
console licensee hereunder or to any other person or persons with respect
to the adequacy, operation, installation, repair or maintenance of the alarm
console equipment and any allied or related equipment or services and
assumes no liability in connection therewith. Upon issuance of a permit
hereunder, the permit holder hereby agrees to hold and save harmless
the Borough of Closter, its departments, agencies and officials from any
liability or damages suffered as a result of or arising out of improper or
faulty installation, operation or maintenance of any police or fire alarm
system of the permittee or the improper or faulty installation, operation or
maintenance of the alarm console at the Municipal Building.
§ 65-7. Selection of licensee.
The licensee for the alarm console in the Municipal Building shall be
selected in the following manner:
Q. All equipment installed as part of the alarm console shall either be
owned by the licensee or shall be under his or her sole and exclusive
control, unless otherwise consented to, in writing, by the governing
body of the Borough of Closter. Satisfactory proof of ownership or sole
and exclusive control shall be furnished to the municipality immediately
upon request. [Amended 8-11-1982 by Ord. No. 1982:435]
R. The licensee shall enter into a contract with the municipality in a form
approved by the Borough Attorney, which contract shall grant the
license hereunder and incorporate by reference all of the requirements
and regulations herein as an integral part thereof.
A. Any individual or firm which desires to become the licensee of the alarm
console of the municipality under the provisions of this chapter shall
complete and file an application therefor with the Borough Clerk on
forms supplied by that office. The application shall be filed no later than
the date specified for filing in the public advertisement therefor or as
posted on the bulletin board in the Municipal Building.
B. Applications for licenses shall be accepted for a reasonable period of
time, as fixed by the governing body, immediately preceding the
expiration of the then-current license, or in the event of termination of a
license to its natural expiration date, applications shall be accepted at
any time after the mailing of the notice of termination to the current
licensee.
C. The application shall require satisfactory proof of financial ability to
perform, experience, service, capability, past performance, proposed
charges and fees to subscribers and such other information as may be
required by the governing body.
§ 65-5 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 65-7
58:211
§ 65-8. General regulations.
D. The governing body or its duly authorized agent may interview one or
more applicants for the license, but shall not be required to do so.
E. The license shall be awarded to the individual or firm which the
governing body shall determine, in its sole judgment, to be the most
advantageous and in the best interests of the municipality, and the
determination of the governing body shall be conclusive. The governing
body shall take into consideration in making its determination the
financial ability of the applicant, the applicant's prior experience with
other municipal and governmental bodies, the applicant's service
capability on a twenty-four-hour basis, the proximity of the applicant's
office to the Municipal Building as bearing on service and repair
availability, the applicant's past performance in this or other
municipalities, proposed fees and charges to subscribers and such
other factors as the governing body shall deem relevant to selecting the
applicant which will be in the best interests of the municipality.
F. The governing body, if it determines it to be in the best interests of the
municipality, may grant a license to expire on December 31 of the thencurrent
calendar year rather than for a full three-year term. The grant
of a license for this abbreviated term shall be with the consent of the
proposed licensee and subject to all other applicable provisions of this
chapter.
A. Dial alarm devices shall be permitted only in accordance with § 65-9 of
this chapter.
B. In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department in a manner to be prescribed
by rules and regulations in accordance with § 65-11 of this chapter. In
addition, in the case of false alarms, the Chief of Police shall cause an
investigation to be made and shall keep a record of said alarms on file.
For such false alarms, the Mayor and Council prescribe the following
penalties: for the first through third false alarms, a warning shall be
issued; for the fourth and additional false alarms, a fine of $25 shall be
paid. For the eighth and additional false alarms, the Chief of Police or
his or her designated agent may disconnect the alarm until the alarm
device is repaired or the cause of the false alarms is corrected. Where
the investigation of the Police Department discloses continued abuse of
the privilege of connection to the alarm console and a disregard of the
permittee for failing to take remedial steps to avoid false alarms, the
Mayor and Council reserves the right to require disconnection from the
alarm console for a limited or permanent time, provided that no such
permit shall be revoked or suspended without giving the permittee an
opportunity to show cause before the Mayor and Council why such
action should not be taken. [Amended 11-24-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:397; 8-11-1982 by Ord. No. 1982:435; 9-25-1996 by Ord.
No. 1996:730]
§ 65-7 CLOSTER CODE § 65-8
58:212
§ 65-9. Dial alarm devices.
Dial alarm devices shall be permitted only under the following conditions:
C. Any unauthorized or malfunctioning equipment may be disconnected by
the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative for
noncompliance with this chapter, and any person installing or
maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be prosecuted for violation
of this chapter, and each and every day said equipment is in operation
shall be considered a separate violation. Any permittee shall, by
acceptance of the permit, be deemed as having consented to inspection
of the premises on which said alarm devices are installed at reasonable
hours by the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative.
[Amended 8-11-1982 by Ord. No. 1982:435]
D. Any licensee of the alarm console and any permittee utilizing the
services of any other alarm company connected to said console shall
provide for a representative to be on call at all times, and adequate
service shall be provided within eight hours of notification by the Police
or Fire Department of any malfunctioning or faulty equipment.
E. All alarm devices shall be installed in accordance with all applicable
municipal and governmental laws, ordinances and requirements.
F. A permittee or his or her representative shall respond to the source of a
signal or transmission from an alarm device as promptly as possible
after the actuation of such device and shall contact the Police or Fire
Department dispatched to the scene. He or she shall relieve the police
or fireman in charge whenever there is no apparent fire or criminal
activity at the scene of the alarm.
G. Any permittee shall be deemed to have consented to inspection of the
premises on which said alarm device(s) is installed at reasonable hours
by the Police or Fire Chief or his or her designated representative. This
provision shall not be construed to impose a duty on the municipality to
make inspections or to relieve the alarm owner from inspecting, testing
and maintaining his or her own alarm device(s).
H. If the location of the fire or police communications facilities should be
changed at any time, permittees or licensees under this chapter shall
not be permitted to charge the municipality with any resulting cost of
moving alarm equipment.
I. All costs and recurring charges incurred in the installation and
maintenance of alarm systems shall be borne by the permittee except
where this chapter indicates that such costs shall be paid by the
licensee.
A. All owners of dial alarms shall register the same in the manner set forth
in § 65-4B of this chapter.
§ 65-8 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 65-9
58:213
B. No dial alarm devices shall be finally registered until a test alarm has
been made by the owner in conjunction with the Chief of Police or his or
her representatives.
C. No dial alarm devices shall be permitted unless of a type approved by
the Chief of Police in accordance with the rules promulgated under
§ 65-10 of this chapter. Any such equipment must have the approval of
the New Jersey Bell Telephone Company or its successor.
D. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a special separate number, which
number can be obtained from the Chief of Police, and no dial alarm shall
be coded to dial the number of the general police switchboard of the
Borough of Closter.
E. Any dial alarm device shall be coded, as well, to notify a relative,
neighbor or other third party who will be disclosed in the registration of
said equipment as required by this chapter.
F. All dial alarm devices shall be capable of disconnection to enable the
owner to call the police switchboard to indicate that a false alarm has
occurred.
G. For dial alarm devices, the owner shall pay the Borough of Closter an
annual fee as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, to cover the
cost of registration and testing and to amortize the cost of the special
phone line or lines required in the Borough Hall along with ancillary
tape devices of the police desk necessitated by these systems.
[Amended 7-26-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:578; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
H. Owners of dial alarm devices shall be governed by the false alarm
procedures and penalties set forth in § 65-8B of this chapter.
I. In the event that any person has a dial alarm device in existence at the
time of the passage of this chapter, he or she shall have 30 days in
which to pay the annual fee. Any person not so complying shall be liable
to a penalty payable to the Borough of Closter in the amount of $50.
J. Any person having a dial alarm device which dials the general police
number, upon discovery thereof, shall receive notice, in writing, from
the Chief of Police requiring the owner to comply with the terms of this
chapter, and if the owner fails to do so within 30 days of the receipt of
said notice, he or she shall be liable to pay to the Borough of Closter a
penalty of $50.
K. The contents of any recorded message from a dial alarm device must be
intelligible and in a format approved by the Chief of Police; no such
message shall be transmitted more than three times as a result of a
single stimulus of the mechanism; messages shall not exceed 15
seconds, and the time gap between delivery shall be approximately 10
seconds.
§ 65-9 CLOSTER CODE § 65-9
58:214
§ 65-10. Local alarms. [Amended 11-24-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:397;
7-26-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:578; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663;
9-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:730; 5-23-3012 by Ord. No. 2012:1124]
Local alarms shall be registered in accordance with § 65-4 of this chapter
upon the payment of a registration fee as shall be set forth in Chapter
A301, Fees and Deposits. All local burglar alarms shall be equipped with a
five-minute automatic shutoff device; all local fire alarms shall be exempt
from this requirement and shall ring until turned off by either a member of
the Fire Department or another authorized individual. In addition thereto,
those persons having local alarms shall be required to leave with the Police
Department the names of two residents in the Borough of Closter who have
keys to the premises, and in lieu thereof, this requirement can be fulfilled by
leaving a sealed key to the premises with the Chief of Police of the Borough
of Closter, provided that in so doing the owner is willing to release the
Borough of Closter and the Police Department from any claims to damages
or loss in connection with said entry. In the event of a malfunction of the
equipment and no person can be located to secure the device, then the
owner shall be liable to pay a penalty of $25. Notwithstanding the aforesaid,
in the event that police have to respond to a false alarm, the false alarm
penalty prescribed in § 65-8B shall also apply.
§ 65-11. Rule-making authority.
The Mayor and Council may from time to time promulgate rules and
regulations supplementing this chapter in order to provide for
recordkeeping and efficient management of said system.
§ 65-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-24-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:397]
L. The sensory mechanism of such devices shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not to be actuated by impulses due to
pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind noises,
rattling or vibration of doors or windows or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
M. All components of such equipment must be maintained by the owner in
good repair, and when evidence exists that there has been failure to
comply with the operational requirements of this chapter, the Chief of
Police is then authorized to demand that such device be disconnected
until such time as compliance with current requirements is
reestablished.
N. Self-dialers shall be limited to not more than three repeats on an alarm
(sixty-minute period) and a message not to exceed 20 seconds in
duration. [Added 11-24-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:397]
A. Any permittee who fails to pay the annual fee as provided by this
chapter within 10 days of the due date shall be charged a penalty of
$10. [Amended 7-26-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:578]
§ 65-9 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 65-12
58:215
§ 65-13. Multiple alarms at central alarm station. [Added 7-26-1989
by Ord. No. 1989:578; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Notwithstanding the fees for permits established by other provisions of this
chapter, where any individual, partnership, corporation or firm has two or
more alarm devices which are received, recorded and validated at a central
alarm station from where the alarm is relayed to the Borough of Closter,
then and in that event said individual partnership, corporation or firm shall
pay an annual fee as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, for all
alarm devices connected to each central alarm station.
§ 65-14. Penalties for false fire alarms. [Added 7-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995:699]
The penalties for false fire alarms, that is, alarms to which the Fire
Department of Closter is expected to respond, shall be as follows:
Chapter 67
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 142. Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
B. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in Municipal Court of the
Borough of Closter for violation of the terms of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code. [Amended 1-3-1994
by Ord. No. 1993:663]
A. For the second false fire alarm in the same calendar year there shall be
a fine of $20.
B. For the third false fire alarm in the same calendar year there shall be a
fine of $35.
C. For the fourth false fire alarm in the same calendar year there shall be a
fine of $50.
D. For the fifth false fire alarm in the same calendar year there shall be a
fine of $75.
E. For the sixth and any subsequent false fire alarm in the same calendar
year there shall be a fine of $100.
§ 65-12 CLOSTER CODE § 65-14
58:216
ARTICLE I
Licensing and Regulations
[Adopted 11-22-1967 by Ord. No. 1967:179 as Art. I of Ch. 4 of the
1967 Code]
§ 67-1. Purpose.
This article is for the purpose of regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages
in the Borough of Closter, County of Bergen, in accordance with the
provisions of the Act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled
"An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," being Chapter 436 of the Laws
of 1933,77 and supplements and amendments thereto, and in accordance
with rules and regulations issued or to be promulgated by the State
Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control. All applications and licenses
under this article and proceedings in connection therewith shall be subject
to said Act and said rules and regulations and any laws to be hereafter
enacted.
§ 67-2. Issuance of license; authority for administration.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter shall constitute the
authority for the administration of the issuance of licenses under this
article, and it shall be unlawful to sell or distribute alcoholic beverages in
the Borough of Closter without a license granted under the provisions of
said Act.
§ 67-3. Plenary retail consumption license fee. [Amended
10-14-1970 by Ord. No. 1970:212; 10-13-1971 by Ord. No. 1971:226;
1-26-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:296: 4-12-1978 by Ord. No. 1978:329;
5-25-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:450; 1-3-1994 by 1993:663]
The annual fee for a plenary retail consumption license shall be as set
forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, and the holder of such license
shall be permitted to sell for consumption on the premises any alcoholic
beverage by open receptacle and also to sell alcoholic beverages in original
containers for consumption off the premises, according to the provisions
of law; provided, however, that the issuance of plenary retail consumption
licenses shall be limited to nine applicants.
§ 67-4. Plenary retail distribution license fee. [Amended 10-14-1970
by Ord. No. 1970:212; 10-13-1971 by Ord. No. 1971:226; 1-26-1977
by Ord. No. 1977:296; 4-12-1978 by Ord. No. 1978:329; 5-25-1983
by Ord. No. 1983:450; 1-3-1994 by 1993:663]
The annual fee for a plenary retail distribution license shall be as set forth
in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, and the holder of such license shall
be permitted to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption off the licensed
premises in original containers, subject to rules and regulations; provided,
77.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 67-1 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 67-4
58:217
however, that the issuance of plenary retail distribution licenses shall be
limited to three applicants.
§ 67-5. Club licenses. [Amended 10-14-1970 by Ord. No. 1970:212;
10-13-1971 by Ord. No. 1971:226; 1-26-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:296;
5-25-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:450; 1-3-1994 by 1993:663]
The annual fee for a club license shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees
and Deposits, and the holder of such license shall be entitled to sell only
to bona fide club members and their guests alcoholic beverages intended
for immediate consumption on the licensed premises, and to be issued in
accordance with the provisions and laws of the State of New Jersey and
rules and regulations of the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
§ 67-6. Hours.
§ 67-7. Applicability.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to permit the issuance of a
license to conduct a business for the sale of alcoholic beverages on property
in the Borough of Closter contrary to the Zoning Ordinance78 in force in
said Borough, together with amendments and supplements thereto now or
hereafter enacted.
§ 67-8. Conflict with statutory provisions.
If this article or any part thereof shall become inconsistent with any
amendment or supplement to "An Act Concerning Alcoholic Beverages,"
known as Public Laws of 1933, Chapter 436,79 then such part shall be
considered void and of no effect; provided, however, that nothing in this
article shall be affected which is not inconsistent with such Act.
A. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on licensed premises on January 1, when it is
a weekday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; on January 1,
when it is a Sunday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon; on
other weekdays, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; or on
other Sundays, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
B. During the hours that sales are hereinabove prohibited, the entire
licensed premises shall also be closed, but this closing of premises
requirement shall not apply to bona fide hotels, to restaurants, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t, or to clubs, as set forth in N.J.S.A. 33:1-12,
Subdivision 5, and State Regulation No. 7.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
79.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
§ 67-4 CLOSTER CODE § 67-8
58:218
ARTICLE II
Consumption
[Adopted 10-10-1973 as Ord. No. 1973:244 (Art. II of Ch. 4 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 67-9. Consumption prohibited in certain areas. [Amended
9-8-1976 by Ord. No. 1976:290]
§ 67-10. Consumption permitted when authorized by Mayor and
Council. [Amended 7-23-1975 by Ord. No. 1975:271]
A. No person shall consume alcoholic beverages:
(1) While in or on a public street, lane or sidewalk, public parking lot,
public or quasi-public place other than a place licensed to sell and
dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or in
a public conveyance.
(2) In a private motor vehicle or other vehicle.
(3) While upon any private property not his or her own without the
express permission of the owner or other person having authority
to grant such permission.
B. No person shall possess open containers of alcoholic beverages in any
of the places prohibited in Subsection A hereof.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions in § 67-9 of this article, the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter may by resolution permit the
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in a designated park
at a designated time or times in connection with a specific event, series
of events or observance which has been authorized by the governing
body.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions in § 67-9 of this article, the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter may by resolution permit the
possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in a quasi-public
place other than a place licensed to sell and dispense alcoholic
beverages for consumption on the premises where the permission of
the owner of such quasi-public place has been obtained and where such
possession or consumption shall be in connection with a designated
time or times for a specific event, series of events or observance which
has been authorized by the governing body.
C. Any person or persons granted permission hereunder by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter or the Borough Administrator shall
comply with all statutory provisions and regulations of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Commission and obtain any and all necessary
licenses or permits. [Amended 8-24-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:311]
D. Notwithstanding the provisions in § 67-9 of this article, the Borough
Administrator of the Borough of Closter is hereby authorized to grant a
§ 67-9 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 67-10
58:219
§ 67-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by 1993:663]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
permit allowing the possession or consumption of beer only between
the hours of 12:00 noon and 10:30 p.m. in a designated public park
or in a part thereof, where the possession or consumption of said beer
is to take place in a designated park at a designated time or times
in connection with a specific event, series of events or observance.
[Added 8-24-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:311]
E. Every permit issued by the Borough Administrator pursuant to § 67-10D
shall be in the possession of the person or persons to whom such permit
is issued when such person or persons are in the possession of or
consuming alcoholic beverages in a designated public park or in a part
thereof. The person or persons to whom the permit is issued shall
exhibit the permit when requested to do so by any police officer or
magistrate, while in the performance of the duties of his or her office.
[Added 8-24-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:311]
§ 67-10 CLOSTER CODE § 67-11
58:220
ARTICLE III
Sale to Minors
[Adopted 4-23-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:350 (Art. III of Ch. 4 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 67-12. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, distribute, transfer, give or by
any other means supply any beer, wine or alcoholic beverage to any person
under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages in any public or quasipublic
place or while in or on a public street or thoroughfare or while in
a parked vehicle on any street or public thoroughfare in the Borough of
Closter, except transfers between a parent and his or her minor child.
§ 67-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
Any person who violates any provision contained in § 67-12 above shall,
upon conviction thereof in the Municipal Court in the Borough of Closter, be
subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 67-12 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 67-13
58:221

ARTICLE IV
Consumption by Persons Under Legal Age
[Adopted 4-24-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:862]
§ 67-14. Prohibitions; exceptions.
§ 67-15. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall offer or serve any alcoholic beverage to a person under
legal age in any public or quasi-public place within the Borough of
Closter. No person who has ownership or control of any premises,
whether public or quasi-public, or supervision of any event, shall
permit, suffer or allow the consumption of an alcoholic beverage by a
person under legal age in or upon any such premises or at any such
event within the Borough of Closter.
B. It is unlawful for any person under the legal age to consume alcohol or
to, without legal authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an
alcoholic beverage on private property.
C. The prohibition contained in Subsection B shall not prohibit an
underaged person from consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage
in connection with a religious observance, ceremony or rite or
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and
with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained
the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
D. As used in this section, "guardian" means a person who has qualified as
a guardian of the underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court
appointment. "Relative" means the underaged person's grandparent,
aunt or uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
E. Nothing contained in this Article IV shall prohibit possession of
alcoholic beverages by any such underaged person while actually
engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is licensed
under Title 33 of the revised statutes of the State of New Jersey, or
while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational
school or post secondary educational institution; however, nothing in
this section shall be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty
under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-21, or any other section of law against a
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
A. Any violation of Article IV shall be punished by a fine of no less than
$250 nor more than $1,000 for the first offense and no less than $350
nor more than $1,000 for the second offense. [Amended 6-13-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012:1126]
B. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the
§ 67-14 SEXUAL HARASSMENT § 67-15
58:223
defendant. Upon the conviction of any person, any suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward
a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day
of the suspension or postponement imposed by the court pursuant to
this section. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is
less than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including
a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized
bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall
run for a period of six months after the person reaches the age of 17
years.
C. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division with the report. If for any
reason the license cannot be collected, the court shall include in the
report the complete name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of
the person, as well as the first and last date of the license suspension
period imposed by the court.
D. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-30. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of violation
of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If the person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Division the required report. The court shall not collect
the license of a nonresident convicted under this section. Upon receipt
of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the appropriate
officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
§ 67-15 CLOSTER CODE § 67-15
58:224
Chapter 69
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 69-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the business of amusement
devices so as to prevent the creation of a nuisance to the public, a fire
hazard from overcrowding or poor egress, the promotion of gambling,
loitering or the creation of an unhealthy atmosphere for the youth of the
community or other foreseeable undesirable effects of such devices.
§ 69-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT OR ENTERTAINMENT GAME OR DEVICE — Any automatic,
mechanical, computer, or electronic game, machine, contrivance or device
of skill or entertainment, which is or are operated or set in motion by the
deposit therein of any coin or coins, tokens or slugs or the like thereof,
purchased for cash. This term shall also include any such device which is
operated or set in motion by the insertion of a computer card, credit card,
any similar contrivance or any other electronic means. This term shall also
include any such device which is operated or set in motion by fees paid for
the use thereof or by the renting of time for the use of said device. This term
shall include any device which registers a score or not and shall further
include, without limitation, such devices as computers, pinball machines,
bagatelle machines, pong or other types of electronically operated game
devices, skillball, mechanical games, operations or transactions similar
thereto, by whatever names they may be called. Excluded from this
definition are music machines, commonly known as "jukeboxes," as well as
vending machines.[Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:876]
OPERATOR — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which leases, rents out or places
under any kind of arrangement, within the Borough of Closter, one (1) or
more amusement or entertainment machines or devices displayed for public
patronage or which is placed or kept for operation by the public.
OWNER-OPERATOR — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or any other business entity which owns or controls premises
or a location within the Borough of Closter in which any amusement or
entertainment machine or device, which is owned by said natural person,
partnership, firm, association, corporation or any other business entity, is
§ 67-15 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 69-2
69:225
displayed for public patronage or is placed or kept for operation by the
public.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation.
§ 69-3. License required; exceptions.
§ 69-4. Number of licenses; fees; application information.
A. No person shall maintain, operate or possess in any store, building or
other place where the public may enter or in any building or other place
wherein any club or organization meetings are held, within the Borough
of Closter, any automatic amusement device without first obtaining a
license therefor.
B. Any persons who own or lease automatic amusement games covered by
this chapter and who are nonprofit, charitable or religious
organizations are exempted from the fee and payment requirements of
obtaining a license or licenses upon said amusement games, but such
organizations shall remain subject to all other provisions of this
chapter.
C. No license shall be issued to any person under eighteen (18) years of
age.
A. Maximum number of licenses. A license shall be issued for the
placement, installation, maintenance, operation or possession of
amusement devices in or about any single premises or location. Each
device shall be allotted a minimum floor area of 100 square feet for its
sole use so as to prevent overcrowding. These devices shall be
considered an accessory use incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the premises. [Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:876]
B. License fees. A license fee for each device licensed hereunder shall be
payable annually by the licensee for the calendar year or any part
thereof. Said fee shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and
Deposits. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
C. The application for the license shall contain the following:
(1) The name, address, social security number and telephone number
of the applicant and, if a firm, corporation, partnership or
association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses,
social security numbers and telephone numbers, including the two
(2) previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of
the applicant or officer thereof submitting the application.
(2) The name under which the place of business is being operated.
(3) The number and type of machines sought to be licensed.
§ 69-2 CLOSTER CODE § 69-4
69:226
§ 69-5. Issuance or denial of license; expiration.
(4) The location where each automatic amusement game is to be
located, to be shown on a detailed scale drawing showing all exits
and windows, scale to be one (1) inch equals four (4) feet.
(5) The name and address of the person from whom each device is to
be purchased, rented or otherwise obtained.
(6) A description of each automatic amusement game sought to be
licensed, including, for each device, the name of the manufacturer,
model number and serial number.
(7) A sworn statement indicating whether the owner of the machine, if
other than the applicant, the applicant or any person connected
with operation of the place of business wherein the game or device
is to be installed has ever been convicted of any crime or found
guilty of the violation of any ordinance pertaining to gambling or
gaming.
(8) Any other information which the Mayor and Council may deem
reasonably necessary and proper for the full protection of the
interest of the public in the application.
A. Licensing standards. Upon receipt of all reports and information, in
accordance with the standards and requirements set forth, the Mayor
and Council may grant or refuse the license or may grant the license as
to one or more but not all of the amusement or entertainment devices
and refuse the license as to the rest. If the license is granted, the
Borough Clerk shall forthwith issue the license. The Clerk shall ensure
that the license application and attachments thereto are complete,
accurate and truthful and that the persons whose names are required to
be disclosed on the license application are all persons capable of
owning, controlling and conducting the proposed business of owning
and/or operating amusement or entertainment devices within the
Borough of Closter, in a manner consistent with public safety, good
morals and general welfare of the community; that all those persons
whose names are required to be disclosed on the license application can
reasonably be expected to own, control and manage or operate the
proposed business in accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations and free from gambling, immoral or illegal
conduct or activity and free from unnecessary or unwanted noise or
commotion and no criminal element is in direct or indirect control or
management of the business of the applicant; that the granting of the
application and the issuance of the license thereunder will not create an
unwarranted burden on the law enforcement officers or agencies; and
that the applicant has properly executed all agreements and consents
required by this chapter and has agreed to conduct his business in
accordance with all the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. No operator's
license shall be granted hereunder unless the licensed premises shall
§ 69-4 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 69-5
69:227
§ 69-6. Posting of license; sketch plan.
§ 69-7. Restrictions on location.
§ 69-8. Operation of devices; other requirements.
meet all requirements of all fire regulations and the housing, building,
sanitary, electric and plumbing codes of the Borough of Closter.
[Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:876]
B. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. Upon expiration
of the license, the holder shall surrender the license card forthwith to
the Borough Clerk.
A. An operator's license granted pursuant to this chapter shall:
(1) Be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for which said
license was granted.
(2) State the name and address of the licensee.
(3) State the manufacturer, model number and serial number for each
and every mechanical amusement game for which said license was
issued.
B. A sketch plan showing the machine locations shall be posted next to the
license.
A. No machine, game or device under the provisions of this chapter shall
be used, placed, maintained or operated in any area other than the
Business Area Zone of the Borough of Closter defined in the Zoning
Code.80
B. No machine, game or device under the provisions of this chapter shall
be used, placed, maintained or operated in any premises within five
hundred (500) feet of any school, church or place of religious worship
nor within two hundred (200) feet of any residential use.
A. Any licensee who shall suffer, permit or approve of the use of any
amusement device for gambling purposes shall be deemed in violation
of this chapter. [Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:876]
B. It shall be unlawful to install, maintain and use any such amusement
device for the purpose of giving, directly or indirectly, any prize, return
or profit for the use of such device. [Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:876]
C. A bicycle rack to accommodate two (2) bicycles per amusement device
shall be provided by the licensed operator. This rack shall be located on
operator's premises, and if space is not available on the public sidewalk
in a manner approved by the Police Chief, the bicycle rack shall be
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 69-5 CLOSTER CODE § 69-8
69:228
located so as not to interfere with vehicle parking or impede the safe
passage of pedestrians. The style and design of the bicycle rack is
subject to approval by the Building Official.
D. A readily visible sign shall be installed indicating that the use of
machines or devices by persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall
not be permitted during normal school hours. The use of machines or
devices during this time by persons under sixteen (16) years of age shall
cause the license to be revoked. The time period shall be 8:30 a.m. to
3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except during the months of July and
August.
E. The licensee shall at all times maintain good order and shall not permit
any disturbance, congestion or loitering upon the licensed premises.
F. No amusement device shall be operated in a manner which will enable
it to be heard outside of the premises. [Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002:876]
G. There shall be an eight-foot-wide aisle maintained beyond the depth of
four and one-half (4 1/2) feet in front of each device.
H. Each device shall be located a minimum of twelve (12) feet from any
entranceway to the premises in which it is located.
I. Whenever a premises has ten (10) or more machines, there must be
provided at least one (1) bathroom facility for the exclusive use by the
patrons.
J. The licensee shall provide on-site parking for at least one (1)
automobile per amusement device.
K. It shall be unlawful to have fewer than two (2) emergency exit doors per
one thousand (1,000) square feet on amusement device premises.
L. No amusement device shall be placed to expose the back thereof to a
window.
M. No food or beverages shall be sold or consumed on the premises.
N. No amusement device business may be open to the public before 9:00
a.m., nor shall it close later than 11:00 p.m. Moreover, minors shall be
accompanied by an adult after 8:00 p.m.
O. All requirements of the Fire Underwriters Code and the Uniform
Construction Code of the State of New Jersey shall be complied with.
P. Location of more than five (5) machines shall be a principal use of the
subject premises requiring a certificate of occupancy for that separate
use.
Q. Any operator of an amusement device who was duly licensed prior to
December 31, 1980, is exempt from this section. However, any change
§ 69-8 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 69-8
69:229
§ 69-9. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended 1-3-1994
by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code. This chapter shall be enforced by
the Police Department.
Chapter 71
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
in the location or number of said devices must meet the requirements
of this section. [Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:876]
§ 69-8 CLOSTER CODE § 69-9
69:230
ARTICLE I
Dogs and Cats; Kennels
[Adopted 11-27-1967 by Ord. No. 1967:179 as Arts. I and II ofCh. 7
of the 1967 Code]
§ 71-1. Impoundment of cats at large. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord.
NO. 1993:663]
§ 71-2. Authorization to enter property while in pursuit of cat;
exception.
Any officer or agent authorized to perform any duty under this Article is
hereby authorized to go upon any property to seize for impounding any cat
or cats which he or she may lawfully seize and impound, when such officer
is in immediate pursuit of such cat or cats, except upon the premises of the
owner of the cat or cats if said owner is present and forbids the same.
§ 71-3. Interference prohibited.
No person shall harm, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under §§ 71-1 through 71-3 herein.
§ 71-4. Compensation for services; contract. [Amended 1-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 1993:663]
The compensation to be paid for the performance of any duties under
§§ 71-1 through 71-3 herein or for the services of the Animal Control Officer
or any person or organization designated or appointed for the purpose by
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter may be fixed on a salary
or fee basis as determined by the Mayor and Council, and the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter may enter into contract for such services.
A. The Animal Control Officer or any person or organization designated or
appointed for the purpose by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Closter shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into
custody and impounded and thereafter destroyed or offered for
adoption, as provided in this Article, any cat off the premises of the
owner, person or organization keeping or harboring said cat which said
Animal Control Officer, person or organization designated or appointed
for the purpose or any agents thereof have reason to believe is a stray
cat.
B. Any cat so taken into custody shall be impounded, destroyed or offered
for adoption in the same manner as provided for impounding,
destroying or offering for adoption dogs in the N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 and
the amendments thereto and supplements thereof.
§ 71-1 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 71-5
69:231
§ 71-5. Dog license and registration required. [Amended
11-24-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:398]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog within the Borough of
Closter on and after January 1, 1942, shall apply for and procure for said
dog a license and official metal registration tag, which license shall be
obtained from the Board of Health of the Borough of Closter.
§ 71-6. Licenses required for animal businesses. [Amended
11-24-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:398]
Any person who shall keep or operate or propose to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound shall secure a license entitling him or her to keep or
operate such establishment, which license shall be obtained from the Board
of Health of the Borough of Closter.
§ 71-7. Adoption of state law by reference.
The regulations for the owning, keeping or harboring of dogs and securing
licenses for dogs and kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds in the Borough
of Closter shall be as set forth in Chapter 151 of the Laws of 1941,81 insofar
as said law shall relate to the Borough of Closter.
§ 71-8. Registration and license fees. [Amended 10-13-1971 by Ord.
No. 1971:226; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
The annual fees to be paid by the owners of dogs or kennels, pet shops,
shelters or pounds shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
§ 71-9. Dogs and cats at large prohibited. [Amended 12-10-1986 by
Ord. No. 1986:537; 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:903]
A. In addition to the license fee, there shall be charged a registration fee
as required by the State of New Jersey to cover the cost of rabies
control. [Amended 1-26-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:296; 10-24-1979
by Ord. No. 1979:366; 11-24-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:398]
B. All licenses and license fees required by this Article shall be payable on
January 1 of each year, and the licenses issued pursuant to the Code of
the Borough of Closter as further provided for in this Article shall be
valid from January 1 of each year until December 31 of the same year, at
which time they shall expire and be renewable. All fees for said licenses
shall be paid on or before January 1 for the following year. [Added
5-24-1972 by Ord. No. 1972:235]
A. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or cat shall suffer or
permit it to run at large upon the public streets or in any public park or
in any public building or in any other public place within the borough
unaccompanied by its owner or its owner's representative.
81.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-1 et seq.
§ 71-5 CLOSTER CODE § 71-9
69:232
§ 71-10. Committing of nuisances; curbing of dogs and cats. [Added
6-9-1976 by Ord. No. 1976:281; amended 12-10-1986 by Ord. No.
1986:537; 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:903]
§ 71-11. Enforcement. [Added 12-10-1986 by Ord. No. 1986:537;
amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:903]
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the local Police
Department , the Municipal Health Officer and the Animal Control Officer.
§ 71-12. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-10-1986 by Ord. No.
1986:537; amended 9-10-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:903; 8-24-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005:950]
Any person found guilty of violating or refusing to comply with any of the
provisions of §§ 71-8 through 71-10 shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $200 for each offense according to the discretion of the Municipal
Judge.
B. All dogs shall be leashed, except when on the owner's property. Any dog
or cat found running at large shall be deemed to be doing so with the
permission of the owner, keeper or harborer, and such person shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
A. No person owning, keeping or harboring or in charge of any dog or cat
shall cause, suffer or allow such dog or cat to soil, defile, defecate on or
commit any nuisance on any sidewalk, passageway, bypass, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk or upon any public
property without the permission of the owner of said property.
B. The restrictions herein shall not apply to that portion of the street lying
between the curblines, which shall be used to curb such dog or cat
under the following conditions:
(1) The person in charge of said dog or cat shall have in his or her
possession and visibly carry appropriate sanitary means to remove
feces so deposited, including but not limited to implements such as
a shovel, scoop, container, plastic bag or any other sanitary means
of removing all feces or droppings deposited by such dog.
(2) The person who is in charge of said dog or cat shall immediately
remove all feces deposited by such dog or cat. Disposal of pet waste
is also regulated by state law. See Chapter 170, Article I, Pet Waste.
[Amended 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:950]
(3) The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall
be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in
charge of any dog or cat curbed in accordance with the provisions
of this article in a sanitary manner.
(4) No blind person in charge of a guide dog shall be subject to the
provisions of this section.
§ 71-9 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 71-13
69:233
§ 71-13. Zoning Ordinance applicable to animal businesses.
The operation of a dog kennel, pet shop, pound or shelter, as defined by
state law, shall be construed as the operation of a business and shall be
governed by the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Closter.82
§ 71-14. Animal Control Officer; appointment; reports. [Amended
1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:633]
§ 71-15. Placing unclaimed dogs in homes. [Amended 1-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 1993:633]
The Chief of Police, Animal Control Officer or other official designated may,
in his or her discretion, place an unclaimed dog in a legitimate home after
seven days, as provided by statute, but no dog shall be sold or given away
for experimental purposes.
§ 71-16. Dogs prohibited in food establishments.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow a dog to
enter any food establishment, including any place used in the production,
preparation, manufacture, packing, storage, transportation or handling of
food or foodstuffs intended for sale or distribution.
§ 71-17. Authority to enact quarantine proclamation.
The Mayor and Borough Council or the Board of Health may by
proclamation require all dogs to be quarantined during such period or
periods in each year as to them may seem advisable.
§ 71-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:633]
Except as set forth otherwise in § 71-12, any person violating any of the
provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
A. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article and the
state law controlling dogs, the Mayor shall annually appoint an Animal
Control Officer, subject to the approval of the Borough Council. In lieu
of an appointment of an Animal Control Officer, the Mayor may, subject
to approval of the Council, appoint an organization or society to
perform the duties of an Animal Control Officer.
B. The Animal Control Officer or other official or agent shall make monthly
and annual reports to the Borough Council as to all matters concerning
this Article and the control of dogs in the borough. He or she shall
include in such report particular mention of any dog picked up by such
Animal Control Officer or other official on more than two occasions
within any quarter-annual or three-month period.
82.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 71-13 CLOSTER CODE § 71-18
69:234
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations
and Penalties, of this Code. If the provisions of this penalty clause shall be
in any way inconsistent with the laws of the State of New Jersey regulating
dogs, the penalty shall be as construed by the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 71-18 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 71-18
69:235

ARTICLE II
Keeping and Housing of Animals
[Adopted 3-31-1975 as Ord. No. 1975:263 (Art. IV of Ch. 7 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 71-19. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CLASS I: AN ANIMAL OF CLASS I — A lion, tiger, bear or any other animal
of large size belonging to the biological order of Carnivora or any other
undomesticated mammal or reptile of large size.
CLASS II: AN ANIMAL OF CLASS II — A horse or any other animal
belonging to the biological order of Perissodactyla.
CLASS III: AN ANIMAL OF CLASS III — A cow, sheep, pig, goat or any other
animal belonging to the biological order of Artiodactyla.
§ 71-20. Exceptions.
Domestic cats and domestic dogs are specifically excluded from the
definitions of animals herein. For purposes of this exclusion:
§ 71-21. Keeping of Class I animals prohibited.
No animal of Class I shall be kept or maintained in the Borough of Closter.
§ 71-22. Shelter and corral required.
No animal or animals of Class II and Class III shall be kept or maintained
in the Borough of Closter unless such animal or animals have a building for
shelter and a fully enclosed corral or coop for containment.
§ 71-23. Location restrictions.
No building, stable, outhouse or accessory building used for housing an
animal or animals of Class II and Class III shall be located within 100 feet
of any adjoining building nor within 20 feet of the adjacent property line.
§ 71-24. Size of enclosure.
The keeping or maintaining of any animal or animals of Class II and Class
III shall be forbidden unless such animal is kept on land of sufficient area
A. A domestic cat is a member of the Felidae family long kept by man as a
pet, but not including members of the Felidae family that usually live in
a wild state.
B. A domestic dog is a member of the Canidae family long kept by man as a
pet, but not including members of the Canidae family usually living in a
wild state.
§ 71-19 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 71-24
69:237
so that there shall be 40,000 square feet for each animal with an additional
20,000 square feet required for each additional animal. There shall also be
provided a pen or enclosure of at least 1,600 square feet for each animal,
with 400 square feet of pen or enclosure required for each additional
animal. Within the pen there must be provided a stable or similar roofed
enclosure having an area of at least 100 square feet for each animal to be
held therein.
§ 71-25. Maintenance of structure.
In the keeping or maintaining of any animal or animals of Class II and Class
III, the following rules and regulations shall be followed:
§ 71-26. Health of animal.
Each animal must be free from sickness and disease. Should the Borough
Health Officer question the health of any animal, he or she shall have the
authority to require an examination by a doctor of veterinary medicine, such
examination to be at the expense of the owner.
§ 71-27. Declaration of nuisance.
In accordance with the purposes set forth in the introductory clauses, a
violation of §§ 71-21, 71-22, 71-23, 71-24 and 71-25 of this article will be
deemed to constitute a condition that will endanger the health, safety and
welfare of the public and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Such
nuisance is subject to abatement at the expense of the property owner.
A. All structures and accessory buildings shall be painted inside at least
every twelve (12) months with nonabsorbent, lead-free paint.
B. All stables and accessory buildings shall be treated at least twice a
week with a substance which is designed to kill flies and rodents. The
name of this substance, as well as the record of such treatment with the
signature of the person performing this work, shall be posted
conspicuously in the stable.
C. All stables shall have a sufficient supply of water for cleaning and
flushing purposes. All stables, accessory buildings and corrals shall be
cleaned of all manure, feculent matter and waste at least once daily.
D. All manure, feculent matter and waste must be placed in sealed,
nonporous containers or a closed manure pit of such design and
construction that flies, insects or rodents cannot have access to the
contents thereof and that noxious odors do not emanate therefrom. No
such container or pit shall be placed within 40 feet of an adjoining
dwelling or property line.
§ 71-24 CLOSTER CODE § 71-28
69:238
§ 71-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:633]
Any person who shall do an act or omit to do an act which is in violation of
any operative provision of this article shall be in violation of the law and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 71-29. Administration of provisions.
The Health Officer of the Borough of Closter is charged with the
responsibility of administering this article.83
83.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Feeding of Wildlife, adopted 8-24-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:677, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 8-24-2005 by Ord. No.
2005:950. See now Ch. 170, Art. IV, Wildlife Feeding.
§ 71-28 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 71-29
69:239

ARTICLE III
Sale of Dogs and Cats
[Adopted 11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1232]
§ 71-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter,
maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality,
whose mission and practice is, in whole, or significant part, the rescue and
placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which
has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant
part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — A member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale
of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — A retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold,
exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public
at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization, as defined.
§ 71-31. Restrictions on sale of animals.
A. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with an animal care facility
or an animal rescue organization.
B. A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger than eight
weeks old.
C. This article will not affect a consumer's ability to obtain a dog or cat of
his or her choice directly from a hobby breeder where the consumer
can see directly the conditions in which the dogs or cats are bred, or
can confer directly with the hobby breeder concerning those conditions.
§ 71-30 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 71-31
69:241
Chapter 75
BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 71-31 CLOSTER CODE § 71-31
69:242
ARTICLE I
(Reserved)84
§ 75-1. through § 75-14. (Reserved)
84.Editor's Note: Editor’s Note: Former Art. I, Bicycles, adopted 6-25-1975 by Ord. No.
1975:270 (Ch. 13 of the 1967 Code), as amended, was repealed 6-9-2010 by Ord. No.
2010:1068.
§ 75-1 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 75-1
69:243

ARTICLE II
Skateboards, Roller Skates and Other Human-Powered Recreational
Locomotion Devices
[Adopted 5-13-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:621; amended in its entirety
7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:627]
§ 75-15. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROLLER SKATES — Shoes or boots mounted on wheels or metal frames
mounted on wheels which can be fitted to the soles of shoes, used for
skating over a hard surface.
SKATEBOARD — A platform or other board which is mounted on wheels
or a board with roller skate wheels or other similar wheels affixed to the
underside, having no other mechanism or other device with which to steer
or control the direction or movement thereof while being used, operated or
ridden.
§ 75-16. Use prohibited.
§ 75-17. Safety rules and regulations.
A. No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skateboards, roller skates
or other human-powered recreational locomotion devices, including
roller blades, on the portions of streets, highways or other public areas
designated for motor vehicle use within the Borough of Closter.
B. No person shall operate a skateboard, roller skates or other humanpowered
recreational locomotion device, including roller blades, upon
the sidewalks in any District No. 3 Business Area, District No. 4
Commercial Area, District No. 4A Office Area A or District No. 4B Office
Area B, provided that proper signs are installed.
C. Skateboards, roller skates, roller blades and other human-powered
recreational locomotion devices may be used on streets located in
District 1 Residence Area A and District 2 Residence Area B except if
such street is a county road. [Added 9-11-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:727]
D. Any person under 14 years of age shall not operate or ride upon such
device unless that person is wearing a properly fitted and fastened
helmet which meets the standards of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI Z90.4 bicycle helmet standard) or the Snell Memorial
Foundation's 1984 Standard for Protective Headgear for Use in
Bicycling. [Added 9-11-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:727]
A. Whenever any person is riding a skateboard, roller skates or other
human-powered recreational locomotion device, including roller
§ 75-15 AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 75-17
69:245
§ 75-18. (Reserved)85
§ 75-19. Violations and penalties.
blades, upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian.
B. No operator of a skateboard, roller skates or other human-powered
recreational locomotion device, including roller blades, shall leave a
skateboard, roller skates or other human-powered recreational
locomotion device, including roller blades, lying on or standing upon a
sidewalk or street in such manner as to hinder or impede or cause a
danger to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
A. Any person seventeen (17) years of age and under who violates any of
the provisions of this Article shall, for the first offense, be reprimanded
in writing by the Closter Police Department. Such reprimand shall be
addressed to the parents or guardians of the offender and to the
offender, stating the nature of the violation and a warning that a
repetition of the violation or any other violation must be prevented or
the offender may be turned over to the Closter Youth Guidance Council.
On a second offense and any subsequent offense, the offender may be
summoned to appear before the Youth Guidance Council accompanied
by a parent or guardian, and after a hearing of the violation, the Youth
Guidance Council is hereby authorized to take any appropriate action.
B. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or over who violates any
provision of this Article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not
exceeding fifty dollars ($50.) or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding fifteen (15) days or by a period of community service not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or all of the above, in the discretion of the
Judge imposing the same.
85.Editor’s Note: Former § 75-18, Police inspection and impoundment, as amended, was
repealed 6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010:1068.
§ 75-17 CLOSTER CODE § 75-19
69:246
Chapter 79
BOROUGH PROPERTY
§ 75-19 BOROUGH PROPERTY § 75-19
79:247

ARTICLE I
Private Construction
[Adopted 8-24-1977 as Ord. No. 1977:310 (Ch. 21 of the 1967
Code)]
§ 79-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEGAL OR BENEFICIAL INTEREST — Any interest in real property,
including but not limited to fee, easement, option, license, tenancy,
mortgage or life estate, but shall not include a tax lien or tax sale certificate
unless such tax sale certificate is foreclosed by the Borough of Closter.
STRUCTURE — Any building, fence, fixture, sidewalk, pool, accessory or
other man-made object intended to be left in place for more than fourteen
(14) days.
§ 79-2. New structures.
No owner, tenant, lessee or person occupying or in possession of any real
property in the Borough of Closter or any other person, corporation or
association shall erect, construct, place or cause or suffer to be erected,
constructed or placed any structure upon any real property in which the
Borough of Closter has a legal or beneficial interest, unless prior thereto
permission for such erection, construction or placement shall be obtained,
in writing, from the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter.
§ 79-3. Existing structures.
No owner, tenant, lessee or person occupying or in possession of any real
property in the Borough of Closter or any other person, corporation or
association shall enlarge, extend, reconstruct, repair or otherwise modify
or alter or cause to be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, repaired or
otherwise modified or altered any existing structure situate upon any real
property in which the Borough of Closter has a legal or beneficial interest,
unless prior thereto permission for the enlargement, extension,
reconstruction, repair or other modification or alteration thereof shall be
obtained, in writing, from the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter.
§ 79-4. Violations and penalties.86
Any person, corporation, association or partnership violating any provision
of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 79-1 BOROUGH PROPERTY § 79-4
79:249
Chapter 81
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 59.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 147.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 171.
§ 81-1. Required maintenance by private parties. [Amended
7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:628]
A. The owners, tenants or persons in possession of any lands within the
Borough shall keep all brush, hedges and other plant life growing
within 10 feet of any roadway and, where two or more roadways
intersect, 25 feet of the edge of the roadway pavement adjacent to the
affected property cut or trimmed to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet
above the roadway grade, where it shall be determined by the Police
Chief or his or her designee (hereinafter "Police Chief") that such
cutting or trimming is necessary and expedient for the preservation of
the public safety. The Police Chief shall, if he or she makes the
determination pursuant to this subsection, give notice, in the manner
hereinafter provided, that such brush, hedges or other plant life shall
be cut or trimmed within 10 days of receipt of such notice.
B. Tree limbs and branches.
(1) The owners, tenants or persons in possession of any lands within
the Borough shall keep all trees and tree limbs, branches, leaves or
other vegetation which overhangs into a right-of-way cut or
trimmed where it shall be determined by the Closter Police Chief
that such cutting or trimming is necessary and expedient for the
preservation of public safety and whenever there is an obstruction
of sight distance, traffic control device, traffic sign, street sign or
other sign or marking legally in said right-of-way. The Police Chief
shall, if he or she makes the determination pursuant to this
subsection, give notice, in the manner hereinafter provided, that
such tree or vegetation be cut or trimmed within 10 days of receipt
of such notice, unless Subsection B(2) below is applicable.
(2) If the tree or its limbs, branches or leaves determined to be in need
of cutting or trimming are located in the right-of-way and within the
jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission, the Police Chief shall
give notice to the Shade Tree Commission
§ 79-4 CLOSTER CODE § 81-2
79:250
§ 81-2. Written notice; service. [Amended 9-23-1981 by Ord. No.
1981:420; 7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:628]
Any notice required hereunder shall be in writing and may be served either
personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon the owner,
tenant or person in possession of any premises affected by said notice.
§ 81-3. Failure to comply; Borough prerogative. [Amended
7-22-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:628]
In the event that any owner, tenant or person in possession fails to cut any
brush, hedges or other plant life or to cut or trim any tree or vegetation
after notice given, as set forth in § 81-2, the same shall be cut or trimmed
under the direction and supervision of the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works, who shall certify the cost thereof to the
governing body. The governing body shall examine the certification of such
costs and, if found correct, shall cause the costs as shown thereon to be
charged against the affected property. In the event that such costs are
deemed excessive, the governing shall cause reasonable costs to be charged
against said property. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien
upon the affected property and shall be added to and become and form
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the affected property,
the same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and which shall
be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as
taxes.
§ 81-4. Word usage.
The terms "owner," "tenant" or "persons in possession" shall include any
individual, corporation, association or individuals, firm or partnership.
§ 81-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-22-1992 by Ord. No.
1992:628; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Anyone who violates, permits or takes part in any violation of this chapter
shall, upon conviction of each and every violation thereof, be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations
and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 81-6. Enforcement officer. [Added 9-23-1981 by Ord. No.
1981:420; amended 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1009]
The Chief of Police, the Construction Code Official and members of the
Borough of Closter Police Department shall have authority to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter 81 of the Code of the Borough of Closter, and
each of them shall hereinafter be referred to as an "enforcement officer."
§ 81-2 BOROUGH PROPERTY § 81-6
79:251
Chapter 85
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 81.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 147.
§ 85-1. Findings.
It is hereby found and declared that the existence or occupation of any
building or buildings or parts thereof in the Borough of Closter which are so
old, dilapidated or have become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use are
inimical to the welfare and dangerous and injurious to the health and safety
of the residents of the Borough of Closter and that a public necessity exists
for the repair, closing or demolition of such building or buildings, or parts
thereof.
§ 85-2. Exercise of powers.
Whenever the proper officials of the Borough of Closter designated herein
find that there exists in the Borough of Closter any building or buildings
which are unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use due to dilapidation,
defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, lack of
ventilation, light or sanitation facilities or due to other conditions rendering
such building or buildings or parts thereof unsafe or unsanitary or
dangerous or detrimental to the health or safety or otherwise inimical to the
welfare of the residents of the Borough of Closter, the officials designated
shall exercise the power vested under this chapter and under the law of
the State of New Jersey to repair, close or demolish or cause or require the
repairing, closing or demolition of such building or buildings or part thereof
in the manner set forth in this chapter.
§ 85-3. Definitions.
The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this chapter, shall have
the following respective meanings for the purposes of this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof, whether used
for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouses and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter.
OWNER — The holder or holders of the title in fee simple.
§ 81-6 CLOSTER CODE § 85-3
85:252
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a building and any who are in actual
possession thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any officer who is in charge of any department
or branch of the government of the Borough of Closter relating to health,
fire, building regulations or to other activities concerning buildings in the
Borough of Closter.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Construction Code Official or Building
Official.[Amended 6-14-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:576]
§ 85-4. Powers of Building Committee; Chairman.
The Chairman of the Building Committee of the Council is hereby
designated and appointed to exercise the powers set forth in this chapter.
In the event that the Chairman of the Building Committee is unable to act,
then any member of said Committee may act in his or her place and stead.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter may from time to time, by
resolution, designate any other person or persons to act in the place of the
Chairman of the Building Committee.
§ 85-5. Filing of petition; serving of complaint; hearing. [Amended
10-6-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:391]
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or
by at least five (5) residents of the Borough of Closter charging that any
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use or whenever it
appears to the public officer that any building is unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his or her preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the public officer or his or her designated agent
at a place therein fixed not less than seven (7) days nor more than thirty
(30) days after the serving of said complaint and that the owner and parties
in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and
to appear in person or otherwise and give testimony at the place and time
fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall
not be controlling in hearings before the public officer.
§ 85-6. Order to correct, vacate or demolish.
A. After notice and hearing, if the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he or she shall state, in writing, his or her findings of fact in
support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order requiring the
repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be made by the
owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
§ 85-3 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 85-6
85:253
§ 85-7. Failure to repair or vacate.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or to
be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on the
main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following words:
"This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use or
occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 85-8. Failure to demolish or remove.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof after
advertisement for and receipt of bids therefor.
§ 85-9. Costs to constitute municipal lien. [Amended 10-6-1980 by
Ord. No. 1980:391]
order, or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have said building
vacated and closed within the times set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish said
building within a reasonable time as specified in said order of removal.
A. The amount of the cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witnesses
fees, search fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this chapter determined in favor of the
Borough of Closter and the cost of such repairs, alterations or
improvements or vacating and closing or removal or demolition, if any,
or the amount of the balance thereof remaining after deduction of the
sum, if any, realized from the sale of materials derived from such
building or from any contract for removal or demolition thereof shall be
a municipal lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer,
he or she shall sell the materials of such building. There shall be
credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof the
proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived from any
contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If there are no
such credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of such
credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so
due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian of
the records of tax liens, and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded
to the owner by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceed such
costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court
by the public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be
§ 85-6 CLOSTER CODE § 85-9
85:254
§ 85-10. Determination of unfitness.
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he or she finds that conditions exist in
such building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents or the Borough of Closter; such conditions may include but shall
not be limited to defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident
or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
dilapidation or disrepair; structural defects; or uncleanliness.
§ 85-11. Service of complaint. [Amended 10-6-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:391]
A complaint or order issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail, but
if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
and the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving
of such complaint or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once in a newspaper printed and published in the Borough of
Closter or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published
in Bergen County and circulating in the Borough of Closter. A copy of such
complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on premises
directed by such Court and shall be disbursed according to the order
or judgment of the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by
final order or judgment of such Court; provided, however, that nothing
in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power
of the Borough of Closter to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any
owner or party in interest may, within thirty (30) days from the date
of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in
the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
B. If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened
collapse of any fire-damaged or other structurally unsafe building, the
public officer may, after taking such measures as may be necessary to
make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in summary
proceedings for the demolition thereof.
C. Nothing in this section shall be constructed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to
cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or
otherwise, nor is anything in this chapter intended to limit the authority
of the enforcing agency or construction official under the State Uniform
Construction Code Act, P.L. 1975, c. 217 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.),
or any rules or regulations adopted thereunder.
§ 85-9 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 85-11
85:255
affected by the complaint or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall
be duly recorded or lodged for record with the Clerk of Bergen County.
§ 85-12. Powers of public officer.
The public officer or other official designated under this chapter may
exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out
and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the
following powers in addition to others herein granted:
Chapter 87
BUSINESS AND RESIDENTIAL CERTIFICATES OF
OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89. Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 87-1. Purpose. [Amended 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:898]
There is a need to have an inspection requirement of all business upon
sale, transfer or change of ownership, vacancy and reoccupancy regardless
if the business remains the same use to ensure that all of the Borough of
Closter's municipal ordinances are being complied with and no change of
use has occurred. If a change in use has occurred, a business certificate
of continued occupancy can not be issued. Instead, the requirements of
all Closter Zoning Codes and the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
certificate of occupancy shall be met. There is also a need to have an
inspection requirement of all residences upon sale, transfer or change of
ownership or vacancy and reoccupancy.
A. To investigate the building conditions in the municipality in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses and to
receive evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter to
such officers and agents as he or she may designate.
§ 85-11 CLOSTER CODE § 87-2
85:256
§ 87-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS — Any corporation, partnership, firm, enterprise, franchise, sole
proprietorship or any legal entity conducting any activity or use occupying
or intended occupancy of any space other than a strictly residential use.
BUSINESS CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY — A certificate
issued by the Construction Code Official to indicate a continued use that
would require no additional review, approval or code requirements of
zoning or the Uniform Construction Code to operate or occupy the space.
CHANGE IN USE — Any change in use defined by Closter Zoning Code or
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — A person who has to be appointed by
the Mayor and Council to enforce the municipal ordinances of Closter.
RESIDENTIAL CERTIFICATE OF CONTINUED OCCUPANCY — A
certificate issued by the Construction Code Official to indicate that all the
conditions outlined herein for continued residential use or occupancy have
been met.[Added 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:898]
USE — As defined by the Closter Zoning Code and the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.
§ 87-3. Business certificate required. [Amended 5-28-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003:898]
From the effective date of this chapter, a business shall, prior to sale,
transfer or change of ownership or reoccupancy, apply and be issued from
the Closter Construction Office, a business certificate of continued
occupancy.
§ 87-4. Residential certificate required. [Added 5-28-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003:898]
No person shall occupy, rent, lease, transfer title, or inhabit as a tenant or
tenants or occupy as a new owner of any residential use unless and until the
current owner or representative of such owner has applied for and secured
a certificate of continued occupancy from the Building Department of the
Borough of Closter.
§ 87-5. Conditions. [Added 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:898;
amended 9-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013:1150]
A certificate of smoke detector installation shall be issued by the Closter
Fire Prevention Bureau before a certificate of continued occupancy may
be issued. Proper and legal installation of carbon monoxide detectors is
required before a certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued. An
inspection shall be conducted by the Construction Code Official or his
designee to ensure that there are no violations of law or orders of the
§ 87-2 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 87-5
85:257
Construction Official pending and it is established after inspection and
investigation of available municipal records that the alleged use of the
building and structure has lawfully existed. The inspection shall also ensure
that the sump pump, if any, is redirected out of sanitary sources. Any
construction work for which a Uniform Construction Code permit was
issued shall be inspected and closed.87
§ 87-6. Application. [Added 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:898]
The current owner, landlord or agent of any residential premises, about to
be sold or newly occupied, as indicated, shall apply on forms provided by
the Closter Building Department for a certificate of continued occupancy.
All information requested shall be provided to be a complete application.
Upon receipt and review of said complete application by the Code
Enforcement Official or his/her designee, shall, within 21 days, either issue
a certificate of continued occupancy or a written report of the reason for
denial.
§ 87-7. Temporary certificate of continued occupancy. [Added
5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:898]
A temporary certificate of continued occupancy may be issued at the
request of the current owner with money held in escrow as established
to cover any and all requested conditions for a permanent certificate of
continued occupancy. Escrow monies will be held in accounts of attorneys
of record, as agreed. The term of temporary certificate will not exceed 90
days unless extenuating circumstances can be shown.
§ 87-8. Responsibility of owners [Added 5-28-2003 by Ord. No.
2003:898]
The owner, landlord or agent of all residential premises shall be responsible
for notification to the Closter Building Department of pendency of any new
tenancy or ownership and for obtaining the required certificate of continued
occupancy.
§ 87-9. Enforcement. [Added 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:898]
The Code Enforcement Official or his/her designee shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 87-10. Fees. [Added 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:898]
A nonrefundable fee is required at time of application for inspection to be
scheduled and a certificate to be issued as specified in Chapter A301, Fees
and Deposits.
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Uniform. Former § 87-5.1, Special
conditions applicable to certain two-family residences, added 10-13-2004 by Ord. No.
2004:926 and which immediately followed this section, was removed 9-13-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006:974 after Ord. No. 2004:926 was invalidated by order of the the Supreme Court
filed 6-23-2006, Docket No. BER-L-7852.05.
§ 87-5 CLOSTER CODE § 87-11
85:258
§ 87-11. Violations and Penalties. [Added 5-28-2003 by Ord. No.
2003:898]
Any person or entity who violates any of the provisions of this section, upon
conviction therefor, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
Chapter 89
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough-owned property — See Ch. 79.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 85.
Driveways — See Ch. 92.
Fences — See Ch. 103.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 108.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 173.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 176.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 89-1. Enforcing agency established; subcode officials designated.
A. There is hereby established in the Borough of Closter a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as "BOCA," consisting
of a Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode
Official, Electrical Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official
and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief administrator of the
enforcing agency.
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,88 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217,89 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
88.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
89.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 87-11 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 89-2
89:259
§ 89-2. Appointed positions.90 [Added 12-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:886]
The Mayor and Council may appoint the position of Technical Assistant and
any other assistants that the governing body may from time to time deem
necessary and proper. Said appointments will be for a maximum term of one
year. Nothing herein is meant to prohibit reappointment of any individual to
additional terms by the Mayor and Council.
§ 89-3. Fees. [Amended 1-2-1978 by Ord. No. 1978:323; 2-25-1980
by Ord. No. 1980:370: 9-9-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:419; 9-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 1989:585; 9-11-1991 by Ord. No. 1991:614; 1-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 1993:663]
A. The fees for a construction permit shall be the sum of subcode fees
listed in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, and shall be paid before the
permit is issued.
(1) For combinations of renovations and additions, the sum of fees
computed separately as renovations and additions.
(2) The fee set forth for swimming pools shall be exclusive of the
permit fee for any accessory structure to be used in connection
with such pool.
(3) Plan review. The amount paid for this fee shall be credited to the
amount of the fee to be charged for the construction permit, but
shall not be refundable.
B. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter,
biannually, a report recommending a fee schedule based on the
operating expenses of the agency and any other expenses of the
municipality fairly attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform
Construction Code Act.
C. Surcharge fee. In order to provide for the training, certification and
technical support programs required by the Uniform Construction Code
Act and the Regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition
to the fees specified above, a surcharge fee per cubic foot of volume of
new construction as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits. Said
surcharge fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection,
Department of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal
quarters ending September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30,
not later than one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for
which it is due. In the fiscal year in which the regulations first become
effective, said fee shall be collected and remitted for the third and
fourth quarters only.
90.Editor's Note: Former § 89-2, Construction Board of Appeals, was repealed 12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:853.
§ 89-2 CLOSTER CODE § 89-3
89:260
§ 89-4. Fire limits.
§ 89-5. Elevator Inspector. [Added 10-26-1977 by Ord. No.
1977:318; amended 11-9-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:319]
There is hereby established in the Borough of Closter the position of
Elevator Inspector. The Elevator Inspector shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the Borough Council. The Elevator Inspector
shall be a qualified agent or agency and shall be approved by the Building
Subcode Official. The Elevator Inspector shall hold office for one year from
the time of his or her appointment and until his or her successor shall have
qualified. The Elevator Inspector shall be paid for his or her services 80% of
the fees prescribed in § 89-7 of the Code of the Borough of Closter.
D. Construction Board of Appeals fee. The fee for filing an application with
the Construction Board of Appeals shall be as set forth in Chapter A301,
Fees and Deposits. In addition, the applicant shall post a sufficient
escrow to cover the cost of an attorney to represent the Construction
Board of Appeals, should the Board require the services of an attorney
for the application. The attorney for the Board of Appeals shall be paid
at a fee equal to the hourly fee of the Borough Attorney. If the escrow
fee posted is insufficient, the applicant shall pay the rest of the costs
incurred by the Construction Board of Appeals within 10 days of
receiving a bill from the Board. In paying the attorney representing the
Board, if the escrow posted exceeds the amount expended by the Board
for attorney's fees, the balance remaining in escrow shall be returned to
the applicant. The amount of the escrow fee to be posted initially shall
be determined by the Secretary to the Board, and the escrow shall be
posted simultaneously with the application fee.
A. The following fire limits are established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23:
industrial, commercial and business properties as they exist in
accordance with the Zoning Map, Borough of Closter, prepared by
Alfred C. Hobelman, Borough Engineer, dated March 8, 1961, revised
by Azzolina Engineering Co., Borough Engineer, July 2, 1971.91
B. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter, biannually, a report reevaluating the
delineation of the fire limits. This report shall indicate the
recommendations of the Construction Official, the Building Subcode
Official and the Fire Subcode Official regarding those areas which
should be designated as within fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
91.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 89-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 89-6
89:261
§ 89-6. Duties of Inspector. [Added 10-26-1977 by Ord. No.
1977:318]
The duties of the Elevator Inspector shall be in accordance with the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code, specifically Article 16 of the BOCA Basic
Building Code/1975, including all revisions and amendments thereto.
§ 89-7. Fees for testing and inspection. [Added 10-26-1977 by Ord.
No. 1977:318]
The fees for conducting acceptance tests, maintenance tests and periodic
inspections shall be paid prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance.
The fees shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code.
§ 89-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-26-1977 by Ord. No.
1977:318]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, specifically Article
16 of the BOCA Basic Building Code/1975, including all amendments and
revisions thereto, fail to comply with any order by the Elevator Inspector or
the enforcing agency or make a false or misleading statement or omit any
required information or statement in any application or request for approval
to the Elevator Inspector or the enforcing agency shall, upon conviction
therefor, be subject to a fine of not more than $500.
Chapter 92
DRIVEWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 59.
Construction and repair of sidewalks and
curbs — See Ch. 93.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 171.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 92-1. Permit required. [Amended 12-14-1983 by Ord. No.
1983:465; 6-23-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:799; 5-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009:1039]
No private driveway entering a public street shall be hereafter constructed,
repaired or altered in the Borough of Closter unless either a zoning permit
for a conforming private driveway or an authorization to repair or restore
a nonconforming private driveway shall have first been secured from the
Zoning Officer for such construction, alteration or repair. With each
application, a sketch shall be provided showing the exact location of the
proposed driveway construction and curb cuts on the entire piece of
§ 89-6 CLOSTER CODE § 92-1
89:262
property. In the case of a nonconforming driveway, the requirements of
§ 92-2E must also be met.
§ 92-2. Construction requirements.
The permit to be issued for the construction, alteration or repair of a private
driveway shall be issued upon the following conditions which shall be set
forth in the permit or incorporated therein by reference:
A. No blacktop, macadam or asphalt pavement shall be laid over existing
hard-surface sidewalks.
B. All driveways to be constructed, altered or repaired shall follow the
grade or level of existing sidewalks and highways which they intersect
and shall be constructed in such a manner that they will not in any way
obstruct or block existing surface drainage.
C. Where the construction, alteration or repair of a driveway shall involve
the breaking of existing curbing, the curb section shall be replaced in a
manner satisfactory to the Borough Engineer. [Amended 12-14-1983
by Ord. No. 1983:465]
D. No private driveway shall be installed, constructed, altered or repaired
which shall involve the destruction or removal of any shade tree, unless
and until written consent for such removal shall have first been
procured from the Shade Tree Committee.92 [Amended 12-14-1983
by Ord. No. 1983:465; 6-23-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-799]
E. In all residential zones, no newly constructed driveway shall be
installed that will cover an area in excess of 25% of the property. No
driveway shall be located closer than two feet from the property line in
Residential Zone B and five feet in Residential Zone A sideline. No curb
cut shall exceed 21 feet and shall not be closer than 20 feet to another
curb cut and no closer than 25 feet to an intersection. All construction
shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in § 173-48, Table
X-4, entitled “Driveway Widths, Depressed Curbs and Curb Return
Radius Standards.” Notwithstanding these requirements, the Zoning
Official shall be authorized to approve a repair or replacement to any
nonconforming private driveway in a residential zone on the following
conditions: [Amended 9-27-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:583; 9-8-1999
by Ord. No. 1999:808; 5-14-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1012]
(1) Prior to the repair or replacement of a nonconforming private
driveway in a residential zone, the property owner shall submit to
the Zoning Official a survey, sealed by a New Jersey licensed
surveyor, showing the residential lot and the dimensions of the
nonconforming private driveway.
92.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1999:816, adopted 11-22-1999, repealed former § 59-1,
which established the Shade Tree Committee. See now § 59-1 of Ch. 59, Shade Tree
Commission.
§ 92-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 92-2
89:263
§ 92-3. Fee and performance deposit. [Amended 10-31-1971 by Ord.
No. 1971:226; 1-26-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:296; 12-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1983:465; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
A fee as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, shall be paid for
the issuance of a permit under this chapter. In addition to the payment
of such fee, the applicant shall deposit with the Construction Official a
deposit as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, for any curb
to be constructed, altered or repaired, which deposit shall be held by
the Construction Official to insure the proper completion of said work, in
accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter.
(2) The repair or replacement of a private driveway in a residential
zone shall not cause an enlargement of the aforementioned
driveway.
(3) After the repair and replacement of the aforementioned private
driveway, a new survey and/or survey inspection, sealed by a New
Jersey licensed surveyor, showing the residential lot and the
dimensions of the aforementioned driveway that was repaired or
replaced shall be submitted to the Zoning Official so that the
Zoning Official can determine that the nonconforming private
driveway that was repaired or replaced was not enlarged beyond
the dimensions that existed prior to its repair or replacement.
(4) For the purposes of this section, “repair or replacement” shall be
interpreted to mean “repair or restoration” within the meaning of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 and shall be based upon the determination of a
partial destruction of the driveway. [Added 5-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009:1039]
(5) Proofs regarding repair or replacement shall be presented to the
Zoning Officer, who in turn will determine what proposed work
constitutes a voluntary total destruction or the restoration
necessitated by a partial destruction. A determination must be
made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68. [Added 5-27-2009
by Ord. No. 2009:1039]
(6) Any appeal of the Zoning Officer’s determination shall be to the
Closter Board of Adjustment. [Added 5-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009:1039]
(7) The tangible authorization permitting a repair or replacement of a
nonconforming driveway shall not be in the form of a zoning
permit. The formal authorization permitting a repair or
replacement shall be designated "authorization to repair or restore
a nonconforming private driveway." [Added 5-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009:1039]
§ 92-2 CLOSTER CODE § 92-4
89:264
§ 92-4. Inspection; return of deposit. [Amended 12-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1983:465; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663; 6-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999:799]
Upon the completion of the construction, alteration or repair of any private
driveway, the same shall be inspected by the Borough Engineer and, if the
Borough Engineer shall determine that the work has been completed in
compliance with the terms of this chapter, the deposit shall be returned to
the property owner to whom such permit was issued, less any inspection fee
required by the Borough Engineer.
§ 92-5. Failure to complete; Borough prerogative; cost to owner.
[Amended 12-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:465]
Upon the failure of the property owner to complete the construction,
alteration or repair of any private driveway or curb cut for which a permit
has been issued, in accordance with the terms of this chapter, the
Construction Official may, after 10 days' notice to such property owner,
cause such work to be done outside of the property line of the owner
extending into the public street or highway as shall be necessary either to
restore the property to its original condition or to complete the construction
in accordance with the terms and provisions of this chapter and charge the
cost of such work to the property owner.
§ 92-6. Existing substandard driveways; violation notice; timely
correction. [Amended 12-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1989:465]
Any private driveway heretofore constructed which shall violate the
requirements of this chapter and shall obstruct or block existing surface
drainage shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter,
and the owner of the property on which the same shall exist shall
reconstruct said driveway within 60 days after notice shall have been served
upon him or her by the Construction Official notifying such owner that
the construction of such driveway at its intersection with the sidewalk or
highway constitutes a violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter.
No penalty for such violation shall accrue unless the owner shall fail to
remove the faulty condition within the period of time specified in the notice.
§ 92-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-14-1983 by Ord. No.
1983:465; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Every person who shall construct, pave, improve, alter or repair or assist
in the constructing, paving, improving, alteration or repair of a private
driveway for which a permit shall not have been issued as required herein
or who shall fail to reconstruct, repair or alter the same, after notice so
to do, as herein provided shall, upon conviction therefor, be subject to a
penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations
and Penalties, of this Code. The within code shall be enforced by the
Construction Official.
§ 92-4 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 92-8
89:265
§ 92-8. Appeals from Zoning Officer. [Added 6-26-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:718; amended 6-23-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:799]
Any interested party may appeal a decision of the Zoning Officer with
regard to this chapter by filing an appeal with the Borough of Closter
Zoning Board of Adjustment within 20 days of the decision of the Zoning
Official, specifying the grounds of such appeal. Such appeal shall be
considered by the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the
standards and the time limitations as contained in the New Jersey Municipal
Land Use Act.93
§ 92-9. Appeals from Construction Official. [Added 6-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999:799]
Any interested party may appeal a decision of the Construction Official with
regard to this chapter by filing an appeal with the Construction Board of
Appeals within 20 days of the decision of the Construction Official.
Chapter 93
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS AND CURBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Driveways — See Ch. 92.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 147.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 171.
§ 93-1. General requirements.
A. No person shall construct or cut, break or remove any sidewalk,
curbing or street signage or cause to have cut, broken or removed any
sidewalk or curbing in the Borough without first obtaining a permit to
do such work from the office of the Construction Code Official.
B. The permit fees shall be determined by the Borough Engineer or the
Construction Code Official.
(1) The cash bond/escrow amounts shall be waived by the Construction
Official if the work to be performed is being undertaken by the
owner/occupant of the premises.
(2) In the case of complexes which contain several buildings with
several street addresses, only one permit fee shall be charged.
C. All work shall be done under the supervision of the Borough Engineer
and/or the Construction Code Official and in accordance with Borough
specifications in effect at the time of such work. Forms shall be
93.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 92-8 CLOSTER CODE § 93-1
89:266
§ 93-2. Curb details.
inspected by the Borough before any concrete is poured. All debris
and surface material shall be promptly removed upon completion of the
work. All signs shall be reinstalled at the original or approved alternate
locations.
D. In the case that the proposed construction is on a street where concrete
curbs and sidewalks do not exist, it shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to submit a plan depicting line and grade of the new curb and/
or sidewalk for review. The applicant may choose to have the Borough
Engineer establish line and grade, in which event the applicant shall
post an appropriate escrow in accordance with the Borough Engineer's
determination.
E. The applicant shall maintain the premises in a safe manner and shall
provide adequate barricades and lights at his own expense to protect
the safety of the public use in the adjacent streets or sidewalks and
shall indemnify the Borough and hold it harmless from and against any
claim, liability, damage or expense, including attorney fees arising out
of his operations.
A. Curbs shall be of Belgian block or concrete.
B. Existing Belgian block curbs shall be retained or removed and reused if
possible, and no Belgian block curb shall be cut or destroyed without
prior approval of the Borough Engineer and/or the Construction Code
Official, who shall authorize such cutting or destruction only if he
determines that reuse of such curb is not possible.
C. Belgian block curbing which cannot feasibly be reused at the location
from which it is removed but which can feasibly be reused elsewhere in
the Borough shall be delivered by the person removing the same to
such location within the Borough as shall be designated by the Borough
Engineer and/or the Construction Code Official, to be stored there
under the supervision of the Director of Public Works for subsequent
sale or for the purpose of having the same installed at some other
location on a public street within the Borough.
D. Concrete curbs shall have a minimum twenty-eight-day strength of
4,000 pounds per square inch with air entrainment of 4% to 6%.
E. The dimensions of newly installed curbs (except for usable or reusable
granite curbs) shall be as follows:
(1) The depth shall be at least 20 inches.
(2) The width shall be nine inches at the bottom and six inches at the
top.
(3) The length of each section shall be 10 feet with the expansion joints
at intervals of not more than 10 feet.
§ 93-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 93-2
89:267
§ 93-3. Sidewalk details.
(4) At driveways, curbs shall be depressed 4 1/2 inches, resulting in a
drop in the curb of 1 1/2 inches.
F. Curb elevations on newly constructed streets (and on existing streets,
where feasible) shall extend six inches above the adjacent roadway
pavement, provided that where, because of special drainage conditions
or other topographic conditions, such dimensions are not feasible or
undesirable, or where the condition of an existing street renders such
dimensions not feasible or undesirable, or where the paved roadway
exceeds 30 feet, the Borough Engineer may authorize variations from
the above-described design in accordance with New Jersey Department
of Transportation requirements.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, pavement within the
sidewalk area shall conform to the following specifications:
(1) All concrete sidewalks shall have a minimum twenty-eight-day
strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch with air entrainment of
4% to 6%; shall be at least six inches thick in areas crossed by
vehicles and at least four inches thick in other areas; shall include a
subgrade of compacted dense-graded aggregate not less than four
inches thick; and shall be a least four feet wide.
(2) Sidewalks shall have an extension joint installed at intervals of not
more than 10 feet, with an alternating dummy groove joint at
intervals of not more than five feet.
(3) Driveway aprons must be four-thousand-pound concrete, six inches
thick, with six by six WWM, and the subbase should be a minimum
four-inch crushed stone base not exceeding 3/4 inch in diameter;
the apron shall be separated from the curb cut with expansion
joints.
B. The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, in connection with its
review of a site plan application, or the Borough Engineer and/or
Construction Code Official, in a matter which does not require site plan
review, may grant exceptions to the requirements of this section in the
event that compliance therewith is not possible or if such compliance
would be excessively costly or burdensome and if the noncompliance
will have no adverse effect on the condition of the sidewalk involved or
the adjacent street and will not be inconsistent with the overall intent
and purpose of this section. However, in that case of new construction
of an improvement upon vacant land which does not require site plan
approval, the waiver procedures detailed § 171-29A(2) supercede this
provision.
C. The owner or occupant of premises abutting any blue stone or concrete
sidewalk shall maintain such sidewalk at all times in good and passable
condition at a grade which will prevent water accumulating thereon
§ 93-2 CLOSTER CODE § 93-3
89:268
§ 93-4. Notice to repair; violations.
and shall replace any flagstones which become broken and shall
maintain the flagstones so that the joints thereof are even. The surface
of all concrete sidewalks shall be kept properly roughened so as not to
become smooth and slippery.
D. During the time that any such sidewalk shall be removed, provisions
shall be made by the permittee for safe and convenient means of
passage by pedestrians.
A. In case any sidewalk becomes out of repair, the owner or occupant of
the lands abutting such sidewalk shall forthwith, upon receipt of
written notice from the Construction Code Official, repair or cause the
same to be repaired and made in a good and passable condition.
(1) Notice to repair. Whenever it shall appear, upon written report of
the Building Subcode Official, that any curb or sidewalk on any
street or road of the Borough is dilapidated or in need of repair or
reconstruction, the Construction Code Official may cause a notice,
in writing, to be served upon the owner or occupant of the lands
abutting the curb or sidewalk requiring the necessary specified
work to the curb or sidewalk to be done by the owner or occupant
within a period of not less than 30 days from the date of service of
such notice. All repairs should be done to the satisfaction of the
Construction Code Official.
(2) Service of notice whenever any abutting lands are unoccupied and
the owner cannot be found within the Borough. In such case, the
aforesaid notice may be mailed, postage prepaid. In case such
owner is a nonresident of the Borough or his or her post office
address cannot be ascertained, then the notice may be inserted,
once a week for two consecutive weeks, in one of the official
newspapers designated by the Borough.
(3) Failure to comply with notice. In case the owner or occupant of
such abutting lands shall not comply with the requirements of such
notice, it shall be lawful for the Construction Code Official, upon
filing due proof of the service or publication of the aforesaid notice
in the office of the Borough Clerk, to cause the required work to be
done and paid for out of the municipal funds available for that
purpose. The cost of such work shall be certified by the
Construction Code Official to the Tax Collector. Upon the filing of
the certificate, the amount of the cost of such work shall be and
become a lien upon the abutting lands in front of which the work
was done to the same extent that assessments for local
improvements are liens and shall be collected in the manner
provided by law for the collection of other assessments and shall
bear interest at the same rate.
§ 93-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 93-4
89:269
Chapter 95
DUMPSTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 169.
§ 95-1. Intent.
This chapter is adopted for the protection and promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare of the community by regulating the
storage of garbage and other waste materials as well as the use,
maintenance and operation of bulk garbage containers referred to as
"dumpsters."
§ 95-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
ASHES — Residue from fires used for cooking and heating and incineration;
residue of coal or any other fuel which has been consumed.
DUMPSTER — Any bulk storage container constructed of metal or approved
materials for the collection of garbage, waste materials, ashes or paper
stored on premises and dumped or collected by mechanical or manual
means, having a tight-fitting cover.
B. No person shall place any bridging over any gutter or any pipe or other
obstruction in any gutter without first having secured the consent of the
Mayor and Council.
C. No person shall place or permit to be placed upon any sidewalk or
sidewalk area any object or thing that shall in any manner encumber or
obstruct such sidewalk or sidewalk area or render travel upon such
sidewalk or sidewalk area dangerous or unsafe. No steps, walls, fences,
driveway curbs or similar features shall extend into the sidewalk area,
nor shall hedges or shrubbery be permitted to project into a sidewalk
area so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
D. No person shall lower a concrete curb for the purpose of providing a
driveway across a sidewalk without a permit. The concrete curb shall
not be broken off at pavement level in order to construct a driveway.
The necessary section of the curb shall be removed and a new curb
constructed, providing a full depth drop section for the driveway.
E. Any person who damages any portion of the street shall be responsible
for its repair. Said repair shall not be final until approved by the
Construction Code Official or Borough Engineer.
§ 93-4 CLOSTER CODE § 95-2
95:270
GARBAGE — Any waste material in the process of or subject to
decomposition or decay incident to an ordinary domestic or business use or
purpose, and shall include, among other things, kitchen refuse, animal or
vegetable matter and decaying and decomposing substances.
PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Person, firm or corporation, its employees and/
or agents, appropriately licensed by the Public Utility Commissioners and
having a contact agreement with any other person, firm or corporation
in the borough for the collection or removal of ashes, garbage or waste
materials.
WASTE MATERIALS — Includes all categories of materials to be disposed
of, excluding garbage, and including but not limited to garden refuse,
rubbish and trash.
§ 95-3. Collection vehicles.
All vehicles used by private collectors shall be metal, enclosed automaticloading-
type trucks with a tight body. All vehicles shall be kept clean and
shall be thoroughly washed inside and outside and disinfected once a week.
No private collector shall permit any such vehicle at any time to become
offensive either through odor, appearance or for any reason.
§ 95-4. Preparation for collection.
§ 95-5. Maintenance.
§ 95-6. Spilling waste.
Private collectors shall use all means necessary to prevent any material
from being spilled in or on the premises. Any and all spillage, during
A. All ashes, garbage and waste materials placed in dumpsters shall be
thoroughly drained of all water and wrapped securely.
B. The dumpster shall not be filled to the extent that the cover cannot be
securely closed. The dumpster cover shall be kept closed at all times
except when in operation.
A. No owner, lessee, tenant or other occupant of any privately owned
building where a dumpster is in use shall permit said dumpster at any
time to become offensive, through odor, appearance or for any reason.
B. Ashes, garbage and waste materials must be completely contained
within the dumpster. No accumulation will be permitted outside the
confines of the dumpster.
C. Dumpsters shall be kept in good repair, be structurally sound and
leakproof and be easily opened and closed.
D. Dumpsters shall have the name of the owner of said dumpster clearly
printed and visible in letters at least three (3) inches high.
§ 95-2 DUMPSTERS § 95-6
95:271
collection and transportation, shall be gathered and replaced in the vehicle
and the place of collection and/or spillage rendered clean.
§ 95-7. Unauthorized use on private premises.
No person shall place any ashes, garbage or waste materials or any other
substance, object or thing in a dumpster unless authorized by the owner,
tenant, lessee or other occupant of a privately owned building where a
dumpster is in use.
§ 95-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 95-9. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Borough of Closter
Health Department and Health Officer.
Chapter 100
(RESERVED)
Chapter 103
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 176.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 103-1. Erection of fences in residential zones. [Amended
10-12-1997 by Ord. No. 1977:314; 6-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:718;
12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:883]
The term "fence" as used in this section means an artificially constructed
barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose,
screen or separate areas. All fences erected in residential zones in the
Borough of Closter shall be subject to the following:
A. A zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Official for all fences,
except living fences, erected in the Borough. Except as provided in
Subsection F, none of the other restrictions or provisions shall apply to
living fences.
§ 95-6 CLOSTER CODE § 103-1
100:272
B. No fence erected on or around a residential lot or parcel of land shall
exceed six (6) feet in height. Preconstructed fences of a standard sixfoot
height must be installed as close to the ground as possible. The
total height of the fence will not include any slight undulations of the
ground, provided that eighty percent (80%) of the fence does not
exceed the maximum height of six (6) feet.
C. No fence shall be erected in a front yard of any lot in a residential zone
or along a public right-of-way unless the fence is less than fifty percent
(50%) solid and is not more than four (4) feet in height.
D. Fences must be constructed with the face or finished side away from
the property and the structural side toward the interior.
E. Fences which are painted shall be painted in only one (1) color
harmonious with the surrounding area. Multicolored fences are
prohibited.
F. Living fences or screening shall be planted no closer than three (3) feet
to the property line. Living fences shall be maintained in a neatly
trimmed condition and shall not interfere with visibility on corner lots.
G. Fences shall be erected in a manner so as to permit the flow of natural
drainage and shall not cause surface water to be blocked or dammed to
create ponding.
H. Fences higher than six (6) feet, such as those required around a tennis
court, may be permitted in a residential zone by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. However, such a fence will be considered a structure,
requiring a building permit, and shall meet minimum side and rear yard
requirements for an accessory building.
I. For fences required around a swimming pool, see § 176-5 of the Code of
the Borough of Closter.
J. The following fences and fencing materials are specifically prohibited:
barbed wire fences, short pointed fences, canvas, cloth, electrically
charged fences, poultry netting, temporary fences such as snow fences,
expandable fences and collapsible fences at any location on the lot upon
which a dwelling or structure is situated, except during construction on
such property.
K. Every fence shall be maintained in a safe, sound, upright condition and
in accordance with the approved plan on file with the Zoning Official or
Code Enforcement Official.
L. All fences must be erected within the property lines, and no fences shall
be erected so as to encroach upon a public right-of-way or to interfere
with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or with visibility on corner lots.
M. If the Zoning Official or the Code Enforcement Official, upon inspection,
determines that any fence or portion of any fence is not being
maintained in a safe, sound, upright condition, he shall notify the owner
§ 103-1 (RESERVED) § 103-1
100:273
§ 103-2. Appeals. [Added 6-28-1978 by Ord. No. 1978:336; amended
6-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:718; 12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:883;
3-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1154]
Any interested party may appeal a decision of the Zoning Official or the
Code Enforcement Official with regard to this chapter by filing an appeal
with the Borough of Closter Planning Board within 20 days of the decision
of the Official, specifying the grounds of such appeal. Such appeal shall he
considered by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the standards
and time limitations as contained in the New Jersey Municipal Land Use
Act.94
of such fence, in writing, of his findings and state briefly the reasons
for such findings and order such fence or portion of such fence repaired
or removed within 10 days of the date of the written notice. Each day
the person fails to obey the order referred to above shall constitute a
separate violation of this chapter.
N. No fence permit shall be issued by the Zoning Official until the
applicant provides the Zoning Official with a set of plans or description
of the proposed fence and a sketch or survey showing the proposed
location of the fence. The proposed fence shall be constructed in
conformity with the plans or description and shall be located as shown
on the sketch or survey. If the Zoning Official or Code Enforcement
Official, upon inspection, determines that any fence has not been
constructed according to the plans or description or has not been
located as shown on the sketch or survey, he shall notify the owner of
such fence, in writing, of his findings and order such fence to be
constructed according to the plans or description or order the fence to
be located as shown on the sketch or survey. Such owner shall either
remove the fence or comply with the order of the Zoning Official within
10 days of the date of receipt of the written notice. Each day the owner
fails to obey the order referred to above shall constitute a separate
violation of this chapter.
O. Notwithstanding any other limitations in this subsection, deer fencing
may be permitted under the following circumstances: fencing may be
no higher than eight feet, must be made of black mesh material, must
be located in the back yard of the property, must be at least six feet
from the property edges and must be used to enclose fruit and/or
vegetable gardens only. A permit for deer fencing shall be required. The
permit may be obtained from the Zoning Official. An applicant for a
deer fence permit must supply a survey of his/her property with a
sketch, to scale, of the proposed location of the garden and deer fence.
[Added 6-10-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1042]
94.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 103-1 CLOSTER CODE § 103-3
100:274
§ 103-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
Chapter 106
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 21.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 65.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Fire lanes and fire zones — See Ch. 183, Part
5.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 103-3 (RESERVED) § 103-3
100:275

ARTICLE I
Truss Construction
[Adopted 2-13-1991 as Ord. No. 1991:603 (Art. III of Ch. 39A of the
1967 Code)]
§ 106-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING/STRUCTURE — Used or intended for supporting or sheltering
any use or occupancy, including but not limited to commercial, residential,
educational, governmental or any other place of public assembly.
FIRE OFFICIAL — The Borough of Closter Fire Official or his or her
designated representative as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:18-1.5 (Uniform Fire
Code).
OWNER/OCCUPANT — Any natural person or individual or any firm,
partnership, association, limited partnership, sole proprietorship,
corporation, other business entity or any government agency on its own.
TRUSS-TYPE CONSTRUCTION — A single-plane framework of individual
structural members connected at their ends to form a series of triangles to
span a distance greater than would be possible with any of the individual
members on their own.
§ 106-2. Regulations.
A. Upon inspection and identification of a building of such truss
construction, the owner/occupant shall be notified by the Fire Official
or his designee of the requirements of this Article in accordance with
the Uniform Fire Code of the State of New Jersey. Any question
concerning whether a truss-type structure, as defined by this Article,
must meet the provisions of this section shall be decided by the Fire
Official.
B. Upon notification, the owner/occupant will be required to permanently
affix a Closter Bureau of Fire Prevention approved emblem. The
emblem shall be placed to the left side of the main entrance,
approximately six feet zero inches to eight feet zero inches above
ground level, or at other approved location(s) as designated by the Fire
Official.
C. The emblem shall be an isosceles triangle 18 inches across the base
with a height of nine inches. The triangle shall be constructed of a
permanent material and be colored fluorescent orange or white,
whichever contrasts with the building color. Along the base of the
triangle there shall be three-fourths-inch-high black lettering
containing the words "FIRE DEPT." Above that in the center of the
triangle there shall be a minimum one-and-three-eighths-inch-high
black letter(s) corresponding to the truss-type construction as
§ 106-1 (RESERVED) § 106-2
100:277
§ 106-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
The owner or occupant of any building who fails to comply with the
provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties,
of this Code.
§ 106-4. Form of identification.
The form of identification is attached hereto marked as Exhibit A;95 said
exhibit is also on file in the Fire Prevention Bureau. The form of
identification emblem can be changed by the Borough of Closter at any
time upon reasonable notice to the property owner/occupant. Any cost
associated relating to the change of the emblem shall be borne by the
owner/occupant.
§ 106-5. Exemptions.
All residential structures are hereby exempted from the provisions of this
section.
designated by the Fire Official (R = Roof; F = Floor; R/F = Roof and
Floor) and the letter "S" to designate if the building is protected by a
sprinkler system.
D. The owner/occupant shall be required to install and maintain said
emblem. The emblem shall be installed within 30 days of receipt of
written notice from the Fire Prevention Bureau. Missing or damaged
emblems shall be replaced within 10 days of written notice from the
Fire Prevention Bureau.
95.Editor's Note: Consult municipal records for said Exhibit A.
§ 106-2 CLOSTER CODE § 106-5
100:278
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Uniform Fire Code
[Adopted 12-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:637]
§ 106-6. Adoption of Uniform Fire Code by reference.
For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous
to life and property from fire or explosion, the Mayor and Council hereby
adopts by reference, as if set forth herein at length, the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code ("Uniform Fire Code"), N.J.A.C. 5:18-1.1 et seq., which Code
is promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department of Community
Affairs pursuant to the authority of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 106-7. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202, the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-192 et seq., and the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:18-1.1. et seq.,
and all of the provisions of this Article shall be locally enforced in the
Borough of Closter.
§ 106-8. Designation of enforcing agency; duties.
The Closter Fire Prevention Bureau is hereby created and designated to
enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code and all
of the provisions of this chapter in all buildings, structures and premises
within the Borough of Closter and shall comply with the requirements of the
Uniform Fire Safety Act and Uniform Fire Code.
§ 106-9. Organization of the Closter Fire Prevention Bureau.
The Closter Fire Prevention Bureau established by § 106-8 hereof shall
be under the direct supervision and control of the Fire Official. The Fire
Prevention Bureau shall consist of the Fire Official and other employees
(inspectors, secretaries, etc.), the Fire Chief and all other line officers of the
Closter Fire Department.
§ 106-10. Appointment of officials; terms of office; removal.
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be appointed by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter upon the recommendation
of the Fire Chief and the Fire Prevention Bureau. The candidate shall be
certified by the New Jersey Bureau of Fire Safety as qualified to
perform the duties of Fire Official. Preference shall be given to
members of the Closter Fire Department and New Jersey State Exempt
Fire Fighters who meet the qualifications of this section.
B. Term of office for the Fire Official. The Fire Official shall serve for a
term of two (2) years. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired
term.
§ 106-6 (RESERVED) § 106-10
100:279
§ 106-11. Board of Appeals. [Amended 10-8-2003 by Ord. No.
2003:905]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127, any person
aggrieved by any order of the Borough of Closter Fire Prevention Bureau
shall have the right to appeal to the Bergen County Construction Board of
Appeals.
§ 106-12. Non-life-hazard uses.
C. Appointment of inspectors and other employees. Such inspectors and
employees as may be necessary for the Fire Prevention Bureau to carry
out its responsibilities shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council,
upon the recommendation of the Fire Official and the Fire Chief. Before
appointment, any candidate for the position of Fire Inspector must be
certified by the New Jersey Bureau of Fire Safety as qualified to
perform the duties of Fire Inspector.
D. Term of office for Fire Inspectors and other employees. Fire Inspectors
shall be appointed annually, with the term of office expiring at the first
regular meeting of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter
each year. All other employees shall be employed as necessary by the
Mayor and Council, upon the recommendation of the Fire Official and
Fire Chief.
E. Removal from office. The Fire Official, inspectors and any other
employees of the Bureau shall be subject to removal by the Mayor and
Council for inefficiency, misconduct or other good cause consistent with
applicable law. The Fire Official, inspector or employee subject to such
removal shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the Mayor and
Council or a hearing officer designated by the Mayor and Council.
A. In addition to the registration of life-hazard uses required by the
Uniform Fire Code, the following non-life-hazard uses shall annually
register with the Closter Fire Prevention Bureau and pay a fee as set
forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits. [Amended 1-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 1993:663]
(1) Mercantile Use Group. This group shall include all uses categorized
in Use Group M, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:18-1.5(14).
(2) Business Use Group. This group shall include all uses categorized
in Use Group B, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:181.5(7).
(3) Storage Use Group. This group shall include all storage uses
categorized in Use Groups S-1 and S-2, as defined in N.J.A.C.
5:18-1.5(18) and (19).
(4) Factory Use Group. This group shall include all factory uses
categorized in Use Group F, as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:18-1.5(9).
§ 106-10 CLOSTER CODE § 106-12
100:280
§ 106-13. Permits required.
§ 106-14. Life-hazard uses; registration fees; miscellaneous permit
fees.
The annual fee for registration of life-hazard uses, as required by N.J.A.C.
5:18-2.4, shall be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.8(a) and (b). The fees
for permits required pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.7 shall be as set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.8(c).
§ 106-15. Certificate of smoke detector compliance; application fee.
[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
The application fee for a certificate of smoke detector compliance as
required by N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.20, shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees
and Deposits.
(5) Residential Use Group. This group shall include all uses
categorized in Use Group R-2 and R-3 (except owner-occupied oneand
two-family dwellings), as defined in N.J.A.C. 5: 18-1.5(16) and
(17).
B. R1 Class shall be inspected only upon sale or a change of occupancy.
The registration fee shall be additional to the certificate of smoke
detector compliance fee.
C. Uses not classified above will be classified as a business use.
D. Uses required to register with the Bureau of Fire Safety as a life-hazard
use shall not be required to register under this section.
E. Mixed use occupancies will be charged the registration fee of the
largest use and 1/2 the fee of any additional uses, except that no
additional fee shall be charged for an incidental use, as that term is
defined in N.J.A.C. 5:18-1.5.
F. Vacant buildings which are completely devoid of all chattels or personal
property shall not be required to annually register and pay a fee.
However, vacant buildings which contain chattels or personal property
shall register and be charged according to the building's last use.
A. In addition to the permits required under N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.7, permits
shall also be required to engage in any of the businesses or activities set
forth with the fees therefor in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
B. This section shall apply to all uses, including life-hazard uses required
to be registered pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.4.
§ 106-12 (RESERVED) § 106-16
100:281
§ 106-16. Certificate of fire code status; fees. [Amended 1-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 1993:663]
In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.18, any owner or bona fide purchaser of
a building or structure may request a certificate of fire code status from the
Closter Fire Prevention Bureau. The fee for such certificate shall be as set
forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
§ 106-17. Scope.
The provisions of § 106-18 shall supplement the Uniform Fire Code herein
adopted and to be enforced in the Borough of Closter.
§ 106-18. Supplement to N.J.A.C. 5:18-3.3, General Precautions
Against Fire.
A. In addition to the requirements set forth at N.J.A.C. 5:18-3.3(f), all
buildings or parts thereof used for the storage and handling of
hazardous materials shall have placards affixed to the exterior of such
buildings in accordance with the specifications of NFPA Standard 704.
Said placards shall indicate the most hazardous material on the
premises and the quantity thereof. The Fire Official shall direct the
placement of such placards.
B. In addition to the general precautions set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:18-3.3(a)
through (v), the following precautions shall also be taken:
(1) A high-security key vault shall be installed, as follows, to permit the
Fire Department to gain access without force during a fire:
(a) In buildings containing fire alarm systems and/or fire
suppression systems, excluding owner-occupied one- and twofamily
dwellings.
(b) In buildings where visual inspection for fire is obstructed,
excluding owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings.
(c) In life-hazard use buildings.
(2) The limits in which storage of flammable liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited and the limits in which bulk
storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted are hereby
established as follows: All that area beginning at a point on the
northerly side of High Street, distant 250 feet westerly from the
center line of Old Closter Dock Road, running thence northerly and
always 250 feet southerly from the center line of Old Closter Dock
Road and Main Street to the easterly side of West Street, distant
250 feet southerly from the center line of Main Street; thence
northerly and along the easterly side of West Street to a point 250
feet northeasterly from the center line of Old Closter Dock Road;
thence southerly and parallel with the center line of Old Closter
Dock Road and always 250 feet distant northeasterly therefrom to
§ 106-16 CLOSTER CODE § 106-18
100:282
§ 106-19. Additional requirements.
The following additional requirements are hereby adopted and shall become
part of the Uniform Fire Code of the Borough of Closter.
§ 106-20. Authority at fires.
The Fire Chief or duly authorized representatives as may be in charge at
the scene of a fire or other fire-related emergencies involving the protection
of life and/or property shall direct such operations as may be necessary to
extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks or other
hazardous conditions or situations and shall take any other action necessary
in the reasonable performance of their duty. The Fire Chief may prohibit
any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene of a fire or other
emergency and may remove or cause to be removed from said scene any
person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations
of the Fire Department. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall
do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so
by the Fire Chief.
§ 106-21. Interference with Fire Department operations.
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to
interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel
of any Fire Department emergency vehicle in any way or to interfere with,
obstruct or hamper any Fire Department operation.
§ 106-22. Authorized emergency vehicle defined.
"Authorized emergency vehicles" shall mean those which are so defined and
authorized under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
§ 106-23. Unlawful boarding or tampering with Fire Department
emergency equipment.
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the Fire Officer in
charge of said Fire Department emergency equipment, cling to, attach
himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any Fire Department
emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest; or sound the
siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon; or manipulate or
tamper with or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves,
switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective
clothing on or a part of any Fire Department emergency vehicle.
the northerly side of High Street; thence westerly along the
northerly side of High Street to the point or place of beginning.
§ 106-18 (RESERVED) § 106-24
100:283
§ 106-24. Damage or injury to Fire Department equipment or
personnel.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface or attempt to
conspire to damage or deface any Fire Department emergency vehicle at
any time or to injure or attempt or conspire to injure Fire Department
personnel while performing departmental duties.
§ 106-25. Blocking fire hydrants and Fire Department connections.
It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection
for the pressurization of fire-suppression systems, including fire hydrants
and Fire Department connections that are located on public or private
streets and access lanes or on private property. If, upon the expiration of
the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments
are not removed, the Fire Chief or Fire Official shall proceed to remove
the same. Cost incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be
paid from the municipal treasury upon certification of the Fire Chief or Fire
Official, and with the approval of the Borough Administrator, the Borough
Attorney shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs
against the person or persons in violation of this section.
§ 106-26. Hydrant use approval.
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for the use of
the Fire Department for fire-suppression purposes unless such person first
secures a permit for such use from the Fire Official and the water company
having jurisdiction. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants
by a person employed by and authorized to make such use by the water
company having jurisdiction.
§ 106-27. Public water supply.
The Fire Official shall recommend to the Borough Administrator the location
or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the placement or
replacement of water mains located upon public property and deemed
necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution pattern. A fire
hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by
the Fire Official.
§ 106-28. High fire or life-hazard uses.
All new and existing oil storage plants, lumberyards, amusement or
exhibition parks and educational or institutional complexes and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire or life-hazard uses and which are
located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities
of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system
shall be provided with fire hydrants supplying flow and placed as required
by the Fire Chief or Fire Official. Such fire hydrants shall be connected
to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The
§ 106-24 CLOSTER CODE § 106-28
100:284
Fire Chief or Fire Official may require the installation of sufficient fire
hose and equipment houses in accordance with the approved rules and
may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard
involved requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into
or removed from service until approved by the Fire Official.
§ 106-29. Identification lights. [Added 7-26-1995 by Ord. No.
1995:700]
Where sprinkler and/or standpipe systems exist or are required to be
installed, all Fire Department connections shall be identified by a red light.
This light shall be installed directly above the connection, at least six feet
but not more than eight feet above ground level. Illumination shall be with
a twenty-five-watt bulb and shall be in operation at all times. It shall be the
responsibility of the property owner to install and maintain this equipment.
§ 106-30. Unsupervised public fires prohibited. [Added 7-13-2011
by Ord. No. 2011:1099]
Open public fires on Borough property or any public property within the
Borough is hereby prohibited unless under the supervision of the Fire Code
official or his designee.
§ 106-28 (RESERVED) § 106-30
100:285
Chapter 108
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Subdivision of land and site plan review --See
Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 106-30 CLOSTER CODE § 106-30
100:286
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 3-23-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:446 (Ch. 41 of the 1967
Code)]
§ 108-1. Findings of fact.
§ 108-2. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 108-3. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Closter may be subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges, located
in areas of special flood hazard.
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993-663]
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard.
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 108-1 (RESERVED) § 108-3
100:287
§ 108-4. Definitions. [Amended 3-11-1987 by Ord. No. 1987:539]
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging or other development which may
increase flood damage.
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEAL — A request for review of the Chief Construction Official's
interpretation of any provisions of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO Zone on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to
three feet, a clearly defined channel does not exist, the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate and velocity flow may be evident.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain
within the community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
§ 108-3 CLOSTER CODE § 108-4
100:288
operations or storage of equipment or materials within the area of
special flood hazard.[Amended 7-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995:701]
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of
a building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the
elevated floor or, in the case of a building in a coastal high-hazard
area, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of
pilings, columns (posts and piers) or shear walls parallel to the flow of
the water and adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of
the base flood. In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building"
also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal high hazard, "elevated
building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of
"elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by means of
breakaway walls.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of
inland or tidal waters and/or the usual and rapid accumulation or runoff
of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as
well as the Flood Boundary - Floodway Map and the water surface
elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.[Added 7-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995:701]
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than two-tenths (0.2) foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE [Added 7-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995:701]
— Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
(1)
§ 108-4 (RESERVED) § 108-4
100:289
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area,
including the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure,
usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's "lowest
floor," provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of other applicable nonelevation design
requirements.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commences on or after the effective date of this chapter.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — (for other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
P.L. No. 97-348) — Includes substantial improvements and means the
date the building permit was issued, provided that the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement
or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
"actual start" means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or
any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start" of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 108-4 CLOSTER CODE § 108-4
100:290
§ 108-5. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Closter, County of Bergen and State of New
Jersey.
§ 108-6. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
[Amended 7-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995:701; 7-13-2005 by Ord. No.
2005:942]
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Flood Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled the "Flood
Insurance Study of Bergen County, New Jersey" with accompanying Flood
Insurance Rate Map Panels 182, 201, 202, 203, 204 and 206 of 332, dated
September 30, 2005, is hereby adopted by reference and declared the be
part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file in the office of the
Municipal Clerk at the Borough Hall.
building, whether or not that alteration effects the external dimensions
of the building.[Amended 7-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995:701]
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a mobile home or a gas
or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.[Added 7-26-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995:701]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT [Amended 7-26-1995 by Ord. No.
1995:701] — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start or construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state of local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement officer and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
(2)
§ 108-4 (RESERVED) § 108-7
100:291
§ 108-7. Penalties for offenses. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties, of this Code and, in addition, shall pay all costs and
expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
Borough of Closter from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 108-8. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 108-9. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 108-10. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood
hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the
Borough of Closter, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damage that results from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 108-11. Development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in § 108-6.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
A. Considered as minimum requirements.
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body.
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 108-7 CLOSTER CODE § 108-11
100:292
by the Chief Construction Official and may include, but not be limited to,
plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and elevations of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 108-12. Designation of administrator.
The Chief Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 108-13. Duties and responsibilities of administrator. [Amended
3-11-1987 by Ord. No. 1987:539]
A. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including
basement, of all structures.
B. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 108-16B.
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Duties of the Chief Construction Official shall include but not be limited
to:
(1) Review of all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review of all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review of all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway and, if located in the
floodway, assurance that the encroachment provisions of § 108-17A
are met.
B. Use of other flood data. When base flood elevation and floodway data
has not been provided in accordance with § 108-6, Basis for
establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Chief Construction
Official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source in order to administer § 108-16A and B.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained. The Chief Construction
Official shall:
§ 108-11 (RESERVED) § 108-13
100:293
§ 108-14. Variance procedure.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved
structures and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea
level.
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 108-11C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses. The Chief Construction Official shall:
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection prior to any alteration of a watercourse
and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse, so that the flood-carrying
capacity is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. The Chief Construction Official
shall make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of
the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual
field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in § 108-14.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Planning Board, as established by the Borough of Closter, shall
hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or
determination made by the Chief Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Chief Construction Official,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decisions to the Borough
Planning Board as provided in this section.
§ 108-13 CLOSTER CODE § 108-14
100:294
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage.
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development.
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area.
(i) The safety of access to the property in time of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Planning Board shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half ( 1/2)
§ 108-14 (RESERVED) § 108-14
100:295
§ 108-15. General standards for flood hazard reduction. [Amended
3-11-1987 by Ord. No. 1987:539]
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required:
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided
that the provisions of Subsection A(4)(a) through (k) have been
fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half ( 1/
2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure. [Amended 7-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995:701]
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause.
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c.
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance would not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense or create nuisances or
cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in
Subsection A(4) or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. The proposed
lowest floor elevation and the lowest opening must be at least 1.0
feet above the base flood elevation which must be established for
each given location.
§ 108-14 CLOSTER CODE § 108-15
100:296
A. Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to the
flood damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters.
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities,
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.
E. Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and
exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either
be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or must
meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
§ 108-15 (RESERVED) § 108-15
100:297
§ 108-16. Specific standards for flood hazard reduction. [Amended
3-11-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-539]
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 108-6, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 108-13B, Use of other flood data, the following
standards are required:
§ 108-17. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 108-6 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than
one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above
grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor
elevated to at least one foot above base flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor elevated to at least one foot
above the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water.
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 108-13C(2).
A. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, shall be prohibited, unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not result
§ 108-15 CLOSTER CODE § 108-17
100:298
in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
B. If the provisions of Subsection A are satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §§ 108-15 and 108-16.
C. (Reserved)96
D. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
96.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, which prohibited the placement of mobile homes
outside of mobile home parks, was repealed 7-26-1995 by Ord. No. 1995:701.
§ 108-17 (RESERVED) § 108-17
100:299

ARTICLE II
Zero Increase in Stormwater Runoff
[Adopted 4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:789]
§ 108-18. Findings.
§ 108-19. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 108-20. Applicability.
This article shall apply to:
A. It is in the best interest of the Borough of Closter to establish as a
minimum requirement that all applications involving the tearing down
of an existing one- or two-family residence for the purpose of
constructing a new one- or two-family residence or an application for
the expansion of an existing one- or two-family residence in which the
completed structure shall have a roof surface 1/3 or larger than the
existing roof surface shall provide for a zero increase in stormwater
runoff.
B. Recent development of property within the Borough of Closter has
increased the discharge of stormwater.
C. The Borough of Closter's stormwater system has been impacted by the
increase in the discharge of stormwater which, if unregulated, will
severely impede the operation of the stormwater system.
D. Stormwater runoff created by development not subject to Planning
Board review is currently unregulated.
A. Protect human life and health.
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges, located
in areas of special flood hazard.
E. Help maintain a stable tax base by avoiding over utilization of municipal
stormwater utilities.
A. All applications for building permits for the construction of a one- or
two-family residence or involving the tearing down of an existing oneor
two-family residence.
§ 108-18 (RESERVED) § 108-20
100:301
§ 108-21. Provisions.
§ 108-22. Severability.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article.
§ 108-23. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed
to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 108-24. When effective.
This article shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
as required by law.
B. All applications for building permits for the enlargement or addition to
an existing one- or two-family residence in which the completed
development shall have a roof surface area 1/3 or larger than the
existing roof surface area.
A. All applications for a building permit for properties to which this article
applies shall contain a plan or certification providing for a zero increase
in stormwater runoff for the completed project. As part of this
application, permanent property markers are required. [Amended
8-23-2006 by Ord. No. 2006:973]
B. The Borough Engineer shall review each application for a building
permit for properties to which this article applies and approve same as
providing for a zero increase in stormwater runoff for the completed
project.
C. No building permit shall be issued for any project to which this article
applies when, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, the applicant fails
to provide for a zero increase in stormwater runoff.
D. At the time of the application for a building permit for any project to
which this article applies, the applicant shall deposit $2,500 in escrow if
applying for new construction to cover or defray the cost of the Borough
Engineer’s review of the application relative to stormwater runoff and/
or other site-work related items; or $600 in escrow if there is an
increase of existing roof area by 1/3 or more to cover or defray the cost
of the Borough Engineer’s review of the application relative to
stormwater runoff. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:991;
6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1192]
§ 108-20 CLOSTER CODE § 108-24
100:302
Chapter 110
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 110-1. Issuance of license.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-51, the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Closter may issue a license to any qualified organization, as
that term is defined in N.J.A.C. 13:47-1.1, to hold and operate the specific
kind of game or games of chance commonly known as a "raffle" or "raffles"
played by drawing for prizes or the allotment of prizes by chance, by
the selling of shares or tickets or rights to participate in such game or
games and by conducting the game or games accordingly when the entire
net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational,
charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses and, in the case of
senior citizen associations and clubs, to the support of these organizations
and for any such organization or association, church, congregation, society,
club, company or squad when so licensed (or without any license when a
senior citizen association or club holds, operates and conducts games of
chance solely for the amusement and recreation of its members under a
special license issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-51.1) to hold, operate and
conduct such game of chance by its active members pursuant to law and
such license in the Borough of Closter and to sell shares or tickets or rights
to participate in such game or games of chance therein and under such
conditions and regulations for the supervision and conduct thereof as shall
be prescribed by the rules and regulations duly adopted from time to time
by the Legalized Games of Chance Control Commission, but only when the
entire net proceeds thereof are devoted to the uses aforestated, and for
any person or persons to participate in and play such games of chance
conducted under any such license.
§ 110-2. Games to take place on certain days.
The above provision shall apply to games of chance as stated therein seven
(7) days a week, including Sundays.
§ 110-3. Application for license. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
2015:1197; 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
Each applicant for a license shall file with the Borough Clerk a written
application as provided for in N.J.S.A. 5:8-52 and N.J.A.C. 13:47 (Form 2R-A).
State license fees shall be as set forth in N.J.S.A. 5:8-53. Municipal fees shall
be as set forth in N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.9 and N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.10; except that the
fee for a one-year license for an instant raffle game shall be $20.
§ 108-24 (RESERVED) § 110-4
100:303
§ 110-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993-663]
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
Chapter 111
GARAGE SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertisements and Utility Poles — See Ch.
171, Art. II.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 111-1. Intent and purposes.
The governing body of the Borough of Closter finds and declares that:
§ 111-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and
words in the singular number the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
GARAGE SALES — Includes all general sales open to the public conducted
from or on a residential zone, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance,97 for the
purpose of disposing of personal property, including, but not limited to all
sales entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard,"
"patio," "flea market" or "rummage" sale. This definition shall not include a
situation where no more than five specific items are held out for sale and all
advertisement of such sale specifically names those items to be sold.
A. The provisions in this chapter are intended to prohibit the infringement
of any businesses in any established residential areas by regulating the
terms and frequency of garage sales so as not to disturb or disrupt the
residential environment of the area.
B. The provisions of this chapter do not seek control of sales by individuals
selling a few of their household or personal items.
C. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained are enacted not
to prevent but to regulate garage sales for the safety and welfare of the
citizens of the borough.
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 110-4 CLOSTER CODE § 111-2
111:304
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, utilized and maintained
by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the
normal course of living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include
merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
§ 111-3. Property permitted to be sold.
It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, under authority
granted by this chapter, property other than personal property.
§ 111-4. Permit required.
No garage sale shall be conducted unless and until the individuals desiring
to conduct such sale shall obtain a permit therefor from the Construction
Code Official. Members of more than one residence may join in obtaining a
permit for a garage sale to be conducted at the residence of one of them.
§ 111-5. Written statement required.
Prior to issuance of any garage sale permit, the individuals conducting such
sale shall file a written statement with the Construction Code Official, at
least 10 days in advance of the proposed sale (mailed applications must
be postmarked at least 15 days in advance of the sale), setting forth the
following information:
§ 111-6. Permit fees.
There shall be an administrative processing fee as set forth in Ch. A301,
Fees and Deposits, for the issuance of such permit.
§ 111-7. Permit conditions.
The permit shall set forth and restrict the time and location of such garage
sale. No more than two such permits may be issued to one residence or
family household during any calendar year. If members of more than one
residence join in requesting a permit, then such permit shall be considered
as having been issued for each and all of such residences.
A. Full name, address and phone number of applicant.
B. The location at which the proposed garage sale is to be held.
C. The date or dates upon which the sale shall be held.
D. The date or dates of any other garage sales within the current calendar
year.
E. A sworn statement that the property to be sold was owned by the
applicant as his own personal property and was neither acquired or
consigned for the purposes of resale.
§ 111-2 GARAGE SALES § 111-8
111:305
§ 111-8. Hours of operation.
Such garage sale shall be limited in time to 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, on two consecutive days.
§ 111-9. Prepermit investigation.
Before issuing a permit, the Construction Code Official may conduct an
investigation as may reasonably be necessary to determine if there is
compliance with this chapter.
§ 111-10. Display of sale property.
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in
a garage, carport or in a yard. No personal property offered for sale at a
garage sale shall be displayed in any public right-of-way. However, a vehicle
offered for sale may be displayed on a permanently constructed driveway.
§ 111-11. Display of permit.
Any permit in possession of the holder or holders of a garage sale shall be
posted on the premises in a conspicuous place so as to be seen by the public.
§ 111-12. Advertising; signs.
A. Signs permitted. Only the following specified signs may be displayed in
relation to a pending garage sale:
(1) Two signs permitted. Two signs of not more than three square feet
each shall be permitted to be displayed on the property of the
residence where the garage sale is being conducted.
(2) Directionally signs. Two signs of not more than two square feet
each are permitted, provided that the premises upon which the
garage sale is conducted is not on a major thoroughfare and
written permission to erect said signs is received from the property
owners upon whose property such signs are to be placed.
(3) No signs shall be placed on utility poles or on any public property,
including trees.
B. Time limitations. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be
exhibited for more than one day prior to the day such sale is to
commence.
C. Removal of the signs. Signs must be removed each day at the close of
the garage sale activities or by the end of daylight, whichever first
occurs.
§ 111-8 CLOSTER CODE § 111-13
111:306
§ 111-13. Public nuisance.
The individual to whom a permit is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such individual
may permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit
vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area
of such premises. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of
any member of the Police or Fire Departments of the borough in order to
maintain the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 111-14. Inspection; arrest authority of inspector.
A police officer or any other official designated by any municipal ordinance
to make inspections under the licensing or regulating ordinance or to
enforce the same shall have the right of entry to any premises showing
evidence of a garage sale for the purpose of enforcement or inspection
and may close the premises from such a sale or arrest any individual who
violates the provision of this chapter.
§ 111-15. Parking.
All parking of vehicles shall be conducted in compliance with all applicable
laws and ordinances. Further, the Police Department may enforce such
temporary controls to alleviate any special hazards or congestion created
by a garage sale.
§ 111-16. Revocation and refusal of permits.
False information. Any permit issued under this chapter may be revoked or
any application for issuance of a permit may be refused by the Construction
Code Official if the application submitted by the applicant or permit holder
contains any false, fraudulent or misleading statement.
§ 111-17. Exemptions.
The provision of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following:
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the borough or under the
protection of the nonconforming use section thereof or any other sale
conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor and which sale would be
conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise prohibited
in other ordinances.
§ 111-13 GARAGE SALES § 111-17
111:307
§ 111-18. Separate violations.
Every article sold and every day a sale is conducted in violation of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 111-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person conducting any such sale or similar activity without being
properly licensed therefor or who shall violate any of the other terms and
regulations of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000 or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period
not to exceed 90 days from each violation.
Chapter 112
GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 164.
D. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization when the proceeds from the
sale are used directly for the institution or organization's charitable
purposes and the goods or articles are not sold on a consignment basis.
§ 111-17 CLOSTER CODE § 111-19
112:308
ARTICLE I
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 10-14-1987 by Ord. No. 1987:550 (Art. I of Ch. 45 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 112-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is the regulation of the hours of operation
of gasoline service stations within the Borough of Closter in the interest
of residential districts and residential dwellings in or near the vicinity of
presently existing gasoline service stations, it being an objective of this
article to:
§ 112-2. Prohibited hours of operation. [Amended 8-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 1997:744]
All gasoline service stations in the Borough of Closter are prohibited from
being open for business during the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m.
local standard time (2400 and 0600 hours) on any day in the interest of the
health, welfare and protection of the citizens of the borough.
§ 112-3. Construal of provisions.
No part of this article should be construed as prohibiting emergency towing
or on-the-road repairs.
§ 112-4. Bell signals to be used only during operating hours.
All bell signals or alert devices utilized for notice of vehicle access to a
gasoline service station shall be disconnected during the prohibited hours
of operation as set forth in § 112-2 of this article.
§ 112-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
Any person who shall violate a provision of this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 112-6. Enforcement officer designated.
The Chief of Police and members of the Borough of Closter Police
Department shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this article, and
each of them shall hereinafter be referred to as an enforcement officer.
A. Eliminate the source of any annoyance through light or noise to the
residents of the borough during their hours of rest and to otherwise
ensure the continued peaceful enjoyment of their homes.
B. Protect the health and safety of any persons who would otherwise be
employed in a cash business during predawn hours.
§ 112-1 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS § 112-6
112:309
Chapter 114
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE COSTS RECOVERY
§ 114-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, leaking, dumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or
dumping of a hazardous substance into the air or waters or onto the lands of
the state or into the air or waters outside the jurisdiction of the state when
damage may result to the lands, waters, air or natural resources within the
jurisdiction of the state.
EXPENDABLE ITEMS — Any items used to extinguish any fire or stop or
contain any discharge involving any hazardous substance which cannot
be reused or cannot be replenished without cost after that particular fire
or discharge. These include, but are not restricted to, fire-fighting foam,
chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand recovery drums
and specialized protective equipment, including but not limited to acid
suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective clothing.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance defined as such pursuant to
the New Jersey Spill Compensation and Control Act, P.L. 1976, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b).
VEHICLE — Any motorized equipment, registered or unregistered,
including but not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, trucks, tractortrailers,
construction equipment and farm machinery.
VESSEL — Any container, drum, box, cylinder or tank used to hold or
contain or carry or store any hazardous substance.
VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATION — Any volunteer fire, ambulance, first aid,
emergency or rescue company or squad.
§ 114-2. Purpose.
A. This chapter provides for the reimbursement for or the replacement of
the specialized and sometimes nonreusable equipment required by
state and federal regulations to be made available in the borough in
case of fire or discharge involving any hazardous substance.
B. This chapter provides for the reimbursement for or the replacement of
any and all equipment utilized by the Borough of Closter, without
regard to ownership, for the purpose of mitigating, controlling or
containing any incident in which a hazardous substance is involved in a
fire or discharge or where the potential thereof exists or for the
prevention of the same.
§ 112-6 CLOSTER CODE § 114-2
114:310
§ 114-3. Hazardous substance discharge prohibited.
§ 114-4. Persons responsible for reimbursement.
Any person who has discharged a hazardous substance or is in any way
responsible for the discharge of a hazardous substance shall be strictly
liable, jointly and severally, without regard to fault, to the Borough of
Closter or a volunteer organization for all costs associated with the
replacement of damaged or lost equipment, expendable items and vessels
and all costs associated with the investigation, cleanup, abatement and
removal of the hazardous substance and shall be liable for the wages
(regular and overtime) paid and the costs of medical and hospital treatment
for injuries incurred by any agent, servant or employee of the Borough of
Closter or any member of a volunteer organization.
§ 114-5. Reimbursement for services.
Any person causing any hazardous substance to be discharged must provide
reimbursement for services rendered by any recovery company, towing
company or any other technical assistance called for by the Borough of
Closter to handle such incident. In the event of a vehicle having been
responsible for an incident, such vehicle shall be impounded until such
time as it has been deemed safe to proceed by the incident commander in
conjunction and cooperation with the Bergen County Hazardous Materials
Unit and until such time as arrangements have been made to reimburse all
parties entitled to reimbursement under the terms of this chapter for their
expenditures.
§ 114-6. Enforcement.
C. This chapter also provides for the reimbursement for the expenses
incurred by the Borough of Closter for the wages (regular or overtime)
paid to its employees, agents, servants or any entity that provides
technical assistance (i.e., recovery company or towing company) as a
result of an incident involving a hazardous substance, fire or discharge
of a hazardous substance and for the costs of medical and hospital
treatment for injuries incurred by agents, servants and employees of
the Borough of Closter.
D. This chapter entitles the Borough of Closter to reimbursement for any
expendable item used by the borough or any of its agencies in
extinguishing any fire or stopping, controlling, containing and
mitigating any discharge of a hazardous substance.
A. The discharge of a hazardous substance is prohibited.
B. Whenever any hazardous substance is discharged, the Borough of
Closter may, in its discretion, act to remove or arrange for the removal
of such discharge.
§ 114-2 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE COSTS RECOVERY § 114-6
114:311
§ 114-7. Violations and penalties.
The person or entity responsible for any discharge of a hazardous substance
who or which fails to reimburse the borough within the time required shall
be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.) nor more than five
hundred dollars ($500.) per day or to imprisonment for a period of not more
than six (6) months, or both.
Chapter 116
HUNTING AND TRAPPING
A. A volunteer organization of the Borough of Closter responding to the
emergency caused by the discharge of a hazardous substance shall
keep a detailed record of the costs attributable thereto and certify that
record to the governing body within which the discharge occurred.
B. A volunteer organization of the Borough of Closter responding to the
discharge of a hazardous substance may request the Borough Attorney
to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction for recovery of
costs permitted pursuant to this chapter against the persons
responsible for causing or allowing the unauthorized discharge. Upon
receiving such a request, the Borough Attorney shall submit a written,
itemized claim for the total certified costs incurred by each volunteer
organization to the responsible persons with a written demand that
those costs be paid not less than thirty days (30) before bringing a civil
action for recovery of those costs.
C. A volunteer organization responding to the emergency caused by the
discharge of a hazardous substance may, in its discretion, settle any
claim for costs permitted pursuant to this chapter in such amount as
may appear appropriate and equitable under all of the circumstances.
D. Any recovery of costs shall be credited to the appropriate funds of each
volunteer organization from which moneys were expended in
responding to the emergency caused by the discharge of a hazardous
substance.
§ 114-6 CLOSTER CODE § 114-7
116:312
ARTICLE I
Hunting
[Adopted 11-22-1967 by Ord. No. 1967:179 as Art. I of Ch. 51 of the
1967 Code]
§ 116-1. Hunting prohibited.
No person shall at any time hunt for, take, kill or pursue with a gun or any
firearm of any kind or character or with bow and arrow any game, wild bird,
animal or fowl within the Borough of Closter.
§ 116-2. Discharge of firearms across roadways.
No person shall, for the purpose of hunting, taking or killing any game,
wild bird, animal or fowl, discharge any firearm upon or across any state or
county highway or any street or road within the Borough of Closter.
§ 116-3. Owner or lessee of property excepted.
No person, except the owner or lessee of the property shall, for the purpose
of hunting, taking or killing any bird or animal, discharge a firearm while
within three hundred (300) feet of any occupied dwelling in the borough.
§ 116-4. Discharge of firearms prohibited; exception.
No person shall at any time discharge any gun or firearm anywhere in the
Borough of Closter for any purpose whatsoever, including target practice.
Notwithstanding this provision, target practice may be conducted or
otherwise engaged in by persons authorized so to do by the Chief of Police
on the premises commonly known as the "Police Pistol Range" and in
accordance with the rules and regulations for the use thereof as laid down
by the Mayor and Council or the Chief of Police.
§ 116-5. Violations and penalties.98
Any person who violates any provision of this Article, upon conviction,
shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
98.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 116-1 HUNTING AND TRAPPING § 116-5
116:313

ARTICLE II
Trapping
[Adopted 4-22-1970 as Ord. No. 1970:205 (Art. II of Ch. 51 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 116-6. Trapping prohibited.
No person shall at any time set or use a trap of any kind designed or
intended to take, hold, capture or kill any bird or animal within the limits of
the Borough of Closter, except as specifically permitted by § 116-7.
§ 116-7. Exceptions.
In order to protect property or health, the owner or tenant of any property
within the Borough of Closter may trap birds or animals within any building
located on the property of which he or she is the owner or tenant by
any means or may trap any bird or animal by means of a cage-type trap
commonly called "cage trap," "cage-door trap" or "live trap," designed to
capture animals alive.
§ 116-8. Traps to be confiscated.
Whenever a trap, the use of which is prohibited by § 116-6, shall be found
within the confines of the Borough of Closter, the same may be confiscated
by any police officer of the Borough of Closter or by any New Jersey Fish
and Game Warden.
§ 116-9. Violations and penalties.99
Any person who violates any provision of this Article, upon conviction,
shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 116-6 HUNTING AND TRAPPING § 116-9
116:315
Chapter 120
JEWELRY, SECONDHAND
§ 120-1. Records required.
Every dealer in old gold and/or secondhand jewelry shall keep a complete
record of each article purchased or received by him or her, with the price
paid therefor, together with the name, residence, occupation, age and
correct description of the person from whom he or she received the same.
These records shall at all times be open to the inspection of any police
officer of the Borough of Closter.
§ 120-2. Daily submission of records.
Every dealer in old gold and/or secondhand jewelry doing business in the
Borough of Closter shall deliver to the Chief of Police of said borough
every day before 11:00 a.m. a legible and correct transcript of the records
of the transactions of the previous day; said transcript shall be on forms
prescribed by the Chief of Police.
§ 120-3. Restrictions on disposal.
No dealer in old gold and/or secondhand jewelry shall sell, melt, change the
form of or dispose of any article bought or received by him or her within five
(5) days after said article is reported to the Chief of Police.
§ 120-4. Violations and penalties.100
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
Chapter 125
LIBRARY MATERIALS
§ 125-1. Return of materials; delinquency notice.
No person shall detain or fail to return any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic representation, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any
article borrowed from the library on a card issued by the library (hereinafter
referred to as "library card") contrary to the rules and regulations of said
library or a member library of the Bergen County Cooperative System
(herein referred to as "member library") after delinquency notices have
been issued and after thirty (30) days have elapsed since the date of posting
by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a final notice demanding
100. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 116-9 CLOSTER CODE § 125-1
120:316
return thereof, addressed to said person at the last address furnished to the
library.
§ 125-2. Damage to materials.
No person shall willfully or maliciously cut, tear, deface, disfigure, damage
or otherwise destroy any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction,
phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any other article or any part
thereof which is owned by or in the custody of or is borrowed from the
library or a member library.
§ 125-3. Removal of materials.
No person shall remove any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic
reproduction, phonograph recording, audiovisual material or any other item
from the library building without complying with the rules, regulations and
procedures of said library for borrowing such items or articles.
§ 125-4. Use of library card; false information.
No person with intent to defraud shall register or furnish a false name or
address or use any other library card other than the one issued to said
person for the purpose of borrowing any book or other material from the
library or member library.
§ 125-5. Enforcement.
The Library Director is authorized to file a complaint against any person
violating this chapter in the Municipal Court or any other court of
competent jurisdiction under the following conditions:
§ 125-6. Violations and penalties.101
Any person who violates or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
A. A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;
B. A certified letter, return receipt requested, has been sent by the library
administration as a final notice after six (6) weeks has elapsed since the
original date due, informing the borrower that unless the material is
returned or, if lost, paid for or fines paid within thirty (30) days, a
summons will be issued under the provisions of this chapter; or
C. In the case of minors, the letter or complaint shall be directed to the
parents or guardians of the minor involved.
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 125-1 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 125-6
125:317
Chapter 127
LICENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 125-6 CLOSTER CODE § 125-6
125:318
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Licenses
[Adopted 11-22-1967 by Ord. No. 1967:179 as Arts. I and II of Ch.
55 of the 1967 Code]
§ 127-1. License required; exceptions.
A. Any person or persons, corporation or corporations desiring to operate
and open any public place of amusement, dance hall, moving-picture
show, traveling or other show, street exhibition, circus or bowling alley
within the limits of the Borough of Closter shall be required to take out
a license therefor before operating or opening any such show or place
of amusement, and if any such show or place of amusement shall be
open or in operation at the time of the passage of this article without a
license or permit having been granted therefor by the Borough Council
or its agents duly authorized, the proprietors thereof or person or
corporation operating the same shall take out such license within 10
days after the final passage of this article; provided, however, that
nothing in this section shall apply to shows, entertainments or
exhibitions for charity or instruction.
B. No person or persons, corporation or corporations shall conduct or
maintain a restaurant or place of supplying meals or eatables to be
eaten or consumed on the premises or conduct or maintain a
refreshment stand without having first taken out a license for the same,
and if any restaurant or refreshment stand or place of supplying meals
or eatables as aforesaid shall be open at the time of the passage of this
article, then such license shall be taken out within 10 days after the
final passage of this article.
C. Stores and food markets or establishments. [Added 4-1-1973 by Ord.
No. 1972:241]
(1) No person or persons, corporation or corporations shall conduct or
maintain a store or retail or wholesale outlet for the sale of meats,
groceries, provisions or any food products, including but not
limited to meat markets, bakeries, delicatessens, food markets,
whether or not they manufacture and make their own products,
caterers and confectionery stores which shall be deemed to include
any stores for the sale of candy, ice cream, soda and related
products, without first having obtained a license for the same, and
if any such establishment shall be open at the time of the passage
of this article then such license shall be taken out within 10 days
after the final passage of this article. All licenses shall be issued by
the Borough Council upon application for the same signed by the
applicant and stating where the store or establishment is to be
conducted, including the street and number where the store or
establishment is located or to be conducted. All licenses shall be
subject to compliance with the regulatory provisions of the
§ 127-1 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 127-1
125:319
§ 127-2. Issuance; license data.
All licenses mentioned above shall be issued by the Borough Council upon
application for the same, signed by the applicant and stating the place
where public amusement is to be conducted or given and, if such application
is for permission to conduct and maintain a restaurant or refreshment
stand, that application shall state the street and number where such
restaurant or refreshment stand is to be conducted.
§ 127-3. Fee; expiration date; revocability. [Amended 10-13-1971 by
Ord. No. 1971:226; 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 1972:241; 1-26-1977 by
Ord. No. 1977:296; 2-23-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:302; 1-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 1993:663]
Borough of Closter Board of Health regulations.102 [Amended
1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
(2) The license fee for the establishments described in Subsection C(1)
above shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits,
based upon inside dimensions of the square feet of floor space.
[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
D. No person or persons, corporation or corporations shall operate a
motor vehicle or other vehicle equipped for serving, selling or
dispensing food within the Borough of Closter without first obtaining a
license for the same and subject to compliance with the provisions of
the Borough of Closter Board of Health regulations.103 The license fee
therefor shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
[Added 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 1972:241; amended 1-3-1994 by
Ord. No. 1993:663]
A. The fee for licenses required in connection with businesses or places of
amusement described in § 127-1A of this chapter shall be as set forth in
Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
B. The license fee for restaurants, which shall include luncheonettes,
diners, taverns, pizza kitchens and all similar establishments which
provide for the serving of food to the public, shall be as set forth in
Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
C. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December in each year. Any
license so granted shall be revocable at any time by a majority vote of
the Borough Council upon complaint being made and a hearing had
thereon.
D. The annual fee for licenses for restaurants which provide entertainment
on a regular basis shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and
Deposits.
102. Editor's Note: The Board of Health regulations are contained in a separate volume.
103. Editor's Note: The Board of Health regulations are contained in a separate volume.
§ 127-1 CLOSTER CODE § 127-4
125:320
§ 127-4. Refreshment stand requirement; license fee. [Amended
1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
No license for a refreshment stand shall be granted unless such stand
shall be erected a sufficient distance back from the street line to permit
automobiles to drive entirely off the street when stopping to patronize said
stand. The license fee for each refreshment stand shall be as set forth in
Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, which fee is imposed for the purpose of
revenue.
§ 127-5. License record book.
The Borough Clerk shall record all licenses issued by the Borough Council
under this article in a book to be kept by him for such purpose.
§ 127-6. Peddlers, hawkers, solicitors and canvassers; license
required; application. [Amended 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 1972:241;
1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663; 11-8-1995 by Ord. No. 1995:705;
8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:945; 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:858;
5-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:935; 2-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1027;
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018:1244]
A. Purpose. The Mayor and Council recognize that a person may have a
right to go from place to place selling one's wares, but not to remain
indefinitely at a fixed location. Abutting property owners, tenants and/
or lawful occupiers of land and buildings have a right to unobstructed
access to their property and the public has a right of passage over
streets and sidewalks. A peddler, as defined in this section, does not
have the right to operate from a fixed place of sale nor on a sidewalk.
Furthermore, because of the transient nature of their business,
peddlers pose special problems to their customers. A customer who
wishes to complain ought to be able to verify a purchase from an
examination of the receipt at the time he or she locates a peddler.
(1) The Mayor and Council further recognize that persons have a
constitutional right to engage in certain expressive activities, but
also that door-to-door canvassing and solicitation creates unique
and legitimate concerns among residents of the Borough about
unwanted intrusions into privacy, potential criminal and/or
fraudulent activities, and overall safety within the community. This
section is enacted under the municipality's general policy to ensure
the safe and orderly flow of pedestrians and vehicular traffic,
protect consumers and avoid altercations between consumers and
peddlers, prevent unwelcome intrusions into residents' privacy, and
promote the general safety and welfare of the community.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
§ 127-4 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 127-6
125:321
CHARITABLE and PHILANTHROPIC — Includes political, patriotic,
religious, eleemosynary, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal
associations, societies and alike.
CONTRIBUTION — Includes the giving of alms, foods, clothes, money,
subscriptions, pledges or property of any nature or kind.
PEDDLER — Any person, whether a resident of the Borough or not,
traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or any other type of
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street to
street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, foods, ice cream, fruit ices, soda water,
garden farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for
sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. "Hawkers,"
"huskers" and "vendors" are included within this definition.
PERSON, ORGANIZATION or INDIVIDUAL — Any individual, firm,
partnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class or league.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Any person traveling from house to
house or from street to street either taking or attempting to take orders
for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, subscriptions or personal
property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to
be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not the individual
has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of such or whether he is
collecting advance payment on such sales or not; any person engaged in
soliciting information and going from house to house or from street to
street for the purpose of conducting a poll, survey or similar activity for
any purpose; any person conducting a solicitation, as defined herein, or
requesting contributions of any kind and going from house to house or
from street to street on the public streets.
SOLICIT and SOLICITATION — The request, directly or indirectly, for
the donation of money, property, anything of value or financial
assistance of any kind, and shall include the selling or offering for sale
of any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of
value or not, including but not limited to goods, books, tags, service
emblems, tickets, publications or subscriptions to publications or
brochures, and conducted from house to house or on the public streets.
A solicitation is complete when the solicitation is communicated to
any individual then located within the corporate limits of the Borough.
"Canvass" and "canvassing" are included within this definition,
regardless of whether or not the person engaged in canvassing
requests money, credit, property, financial assistance, support, or any
other thing of value.
C. No peddler shall station, place, set up or maintain his cart or vehicle or
allow it to remain on any sidewalk or public right-of-way nor shall a
peddler locate his cart or vehicle in such a way as would:
(1) Substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the
pedestrian's right-of-way;
§ 127-6 CLOSTER CODE § 127-6
125:322
(2) Substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the
ingress or egress from the abutting property;
(3) Create or become a nuisance;
(4) Increase traffic congestion, cause or increase traffic delay or
hazard; or
(5) Cause or create or constitute a danger to life, health or property.
D. A peddler shall not:
(1) Sell food, drinks, ice cream or confections of any kind for
immediate consumption unless he has available for public use his
own litter receptacle which shall be clearly marked and maintained
for his patron's use, nor shall any peddler leave any location
without first picking up, removing and disposing of any trash or
refuse remaining from sales made by him.
(2) Station, place, set up or maintain his car or vehicle if to do so would
reduce the unobstructed pedestrian right-of-way to less than five
feet.
(3) Engage in the business of peddling within 10 feet of any location
where the curb had been depressed to facilitate pedestrian or
vehicle movement.
(4) Engage in the business of peddling on or along any sidewalk or
street within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, crosswalk or driveway.
(5) Station, place, set up or maintain his cart or vehicle or goods
against display windows of a fixed location business nor shall they
be within 20 feet from any entrance to any building, store, theater,
library, school, museum, movies house, sports arena or other place
of public assembly.
(6) Engage in the business of selling at any location without giving a
written receipt to each customer or engage in the business of
selling at any location without maintaining on his person or at the
cart or vehicle receipts showing the sales made during the
preceding week. The receipts shall show clearly the seller's name,
bona fide business address, license number, description of the
merchandise sold and the purchase price and shall be sequentially
numbered.
(7) Park a vehicle upon a public roadway or street for the purpose of or
during the process of soliciting sales or business, displaying goods
for sale or selling or offering to sell for delivery of goods or
merchandise to buyers, consumers or other persons who are
occupants of a vehicle standing or moving on the public streets or
highways.
(8) (Reserved)104
§ 127-6 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 127-6
125:323
(9) Engage in the business of selling any merchandise within three
blocks of a currently established business in the Borough of Closter
already engaged in selling the same or similar merchandise. The
Chief of Police shall make the determination of the three-block
restriction pertaining to a licensed hawker or peddler.105
E. Inspection of equipment. The equipment used or employed by peddlers
of ice cream, foods, beverages, confections and other related
commodities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner and be
subject to the inspection of the Board of Health or its authorized agents.
Any violations found and not immediately corrected shall be grounds
for revocation of the license.
F. Unlawful solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person directly or
through an agent or employee, or for a peddler, solicitor or canvasser,
to ply or conduct his trade or solicitation within the Borough of Closter
without having first obtained a license from the Borough Clerk as
hereinafter provided.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, individually or as the agent or
employee of a person, or for any peddler, solicitor or canvasser to
ply or conduct his trade or solicitation within the Borough unless
his principal or employer has received a license, as hereinafter
provided.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person or for any peddler, solicitor, or
canvasser to ply or conduct his trade or solicitation within the
Borough without visibly displaying an identification card issued to
that person by the Chief of Police, as hereinafter provided.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or canvasser to ply or
conduct his trade or to solicit before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. or
on Sundays or holidays.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or through an agent or
employee, or for any peddler, solicitor, or canvasser to ply or
conduct his trade or to solicit within the Borough of Closter after
expiration of any license.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation or for any
peddler, solicitor, or canvasser to knock at the door or ring the
doorbell of any home, apartment, or any other dwelling unit in the
Borough which is either listed on the Borough's Do-Not-Knock
Registry or upon which is clearly displayed at the entrance a notice
or sign which reads "No Solicitations" or which otherwise clearly
purports to prohibit solicitation on the premises, unless such
104. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(8), regarding peddling at certain times, was repealed
8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018:1244.
105. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(10), regarding property marked or listed as “No
Solicitors,” which immediately followed, was repealed 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018:1244.
§ 127-6 CLOSTER CODE § 127-6
125:324
person is or has been invited upon the premises by the occupant
thereof.
G. Application for license required. All persons, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter or by law, desiring to solicit for charitable or
other purposes or to peddle, solicit, or canvass within the Borough shall
file with the Police Department prior to any solicitation a solicitation
application on forms provided by the Police Department containing the
following information:
(1) The name of the person applying and desiring to solicit or peddle,
solicit, or otherwise canvass.
(2) Whether the person applying is a natural person, partnership, or
corporation and:
(a) If a natural person, the business and residence address and
telephone number must be given;
(b) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal
business address and telephone number of each partner must
be given;
(c) If a corporation, the person registering must state whether it is
organized under the laws of New Jersey or is a foreign
corporation and must state the mailing address, the business
location, the telephone number, and the name of the individual
in charge of the local office of such corporation.
(3) The name, address, date of birth, social security number, personal
photograph(s) and complete driver's license information of the
person or persons who shall be conducting the solicitation or
otherwise peddling, soliciting or canvassing.
(4) A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold or services to be performed for which funds are to be solicited
and an explanation of the intended use of the funds toward that
purpose.
(5) The time period within which the solicitation or the peddling,
soliciting, or canvassing is to be conducted, giving the date of the
commencement and termination of the effort.
(6) If a vehicle or vehicles are to be used in the solicitation, a
description of the same, including, year, make and model, together
with a license plate number, registration certificate information
and liability insurance information or other satisfactory means of
identification.
(7) The names of any other municipalities in which the person applying
has solicited or otherwise peddled, solicited, or canvassed within
the previous 12 months.
§ 127-6 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 127-6
125:325
(8) Whether a license or certificate of registration has ever been
revoked by a municipality.
(9) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of a
felony under the laws of this state or any other state or federal law
of the United States.
H. Review of application; duty of police to enforce.
(1) The Police Department shall review the license application to
determine its compliance with the terms of this chapter within 48
hours after receipt of same. If the person applying for the license
registering has not complied with the requirements of this chapter,
the Chief of Police will notify the applicant and specifically point
out the information that has not been furnished or that is required
before the application can be submitted to the governing body for
approval. Thereafter, upon receipt of a completed application and
payment of the prescribed fee (or in the event the applicant who is
not required to pay a fee), the Borough Clerk shall place the
approval of the application on the governing body's next scheduled
council meeting for consideration. The Chief of Police shall
thereafter issue a license within 48 hours of governing body
approval, or notify the person applying for the license either that
the application has been denied or that it still does not comply with
the requirements of this chapter and specifically point out the
information that has not been furnished or that is required before a
license can be issued.
(2) Disapproval of application.
(a) The Chief of Police may, upon review of the application, refuse
to issue a license to the applicant for any of the following
reasons:
[1] The location and time of the activities described in the
application do not conform to the requirements of this
chapter or would endanger the safety and welfare of the
applicant or its customers;
[2] An investigation reveals that the applicant falsified
information on the application;
[3] The applicant has been convicted of a felony,
misdemeanor, or ordinance violation involving a sex
offense, trafficking in controlled substances, or any violent
acts against persons or property; or
[4] The applicant is a person against whom a judgment based
upon, or conviction for, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation
has been entered within the five years immediately
preceding the date of application.
§ 127-6 CLOSTER CODE § 127-6
125:326
(b) The disapproval of the Chief of Police and the reasons for
disapproval shall be noted on the application and the applicant
shall be notified that his application is disapproved and that no
permit will be issued. Notice shall be mailed to the applicant at
the address shown on the application form, or at the
applicant's last known address.
(3) It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough to require
any persons seen peddling, and who is not known by such officer to
be duly licensed, to produce its solicitors/peddlers license and to
enforce the provisions of this section against any person found to
be in violation of the same.
I. All peddler's and solicitor's licenses shall expire one year after the date
of issuance. The license shall state the date of expiration thereof The
license shall also state the purpose for which the same is granted, the
number of the license and the name of the person to whom the license is
issued.
(1) Every licensee, when requested by any officer or person of like
power and authority while in the performance of carrying on his
trade or business, as aforesaid, shall exhibit said license to said
officer. Any person actually carrying on the trade or business, as
aforesaid, who shall fail to produce a license provided by this
article shall be subject a fine as set forth herein.
(2) The fee for a peddler's license shall be as set forth in Ch. A301,
Fees and Deposits.
J. Exemptions. The following are exempt from peddler's license
requirements:
(1) The delivery of milk, eggs, bread, newspapers or other necessary
and perishable articles of food or merchandise of the type
commonly delivered on a house-to-house basis on intervals of less
than once a week.
(2) Federal census takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to
federal, state or local laws; however, such individuals are required
to exhibit an identification badge from the Police Department
which shall be provided without charge. [Amended 5-25-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005:935]
(3) Candidates for elective office which must comply with any federal
or state election contribution on expenditure; however, such
individuals are required to exhibit an identification badge from the
Police Department which shall be provided without charge.
[Amended 5-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:935]
(4) Any veteran of the United States Armed Forces or any exempted
fireman possessing a licensed issued in conformity with N.J.S.A.
45:24-9 et. seq.; provided, however, that such person exhibits such
§ 127-6 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 127-6
125:327
license to and obtains an identification badge from the Police
Department which shall be provided without charge.
(5) Any public utility employee, where said public utility is subject to
regulation by the State Board of Public Commissioners; provided,
however, that such employee shall display the identification badge
or card issued by the employer.
(6) Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise
or other articles or things in the regular course of business to the
premises of persons who had previously ordered the same or are
entitled to receive the same by reason of the proper agreement.
(7) Any person who sells any farm products of their own raising on
farms within the Borough of Closter.
(8) Door-to-door canvassing or solicitation or other entry upon private
property by persons seeking to engage in anonymous political or
religious speech or advocating political, religious, social or
charitable causes but whose primary purpose is not to request
money, credit, property, financial assistance, support, or any other
things of value, as well as persons representing any charitable and
philanthropic entity which qualifies for tax-exempt status under the
Internal Revenue Code; qualifies for exemption from property tax
under N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6; qualifies for exemption from sales tax
under N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9; or was created under or is otherwise
subject to the provisions of Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes,
shall be exempt from the licensing provisions of this chapter. Such
exempt persons shall be subject to the time and place restrictions
on canvassing in this chapter, including adherence to the Do-Not-
Knock Registry, and shall obtain a copy of the Borough's Do-Not-
Knock Registry from the Borough Clerk upon request.
K. Do-Not-Knock Registry. The Borough Clerk shall prepare a list of
addresses of those premises where the owner and/or occupant has
notified the Clerk that transient merchants, itinerant merchants,
itinerant vendors, peddlers, canvassers, solicitors and door-to-door
sales enterprises are not permitted on the premises (hereinafter
referred to as the "Do-Not-Knock Registry").
(1) Notification shall be by completion of a form available at the
Borough Clerk's office during normal business hours. The registry
shall be updated from time to time but at least by January 1 of each
year.
(2) Any owner and/or occupant who has requested enlistment on the
Do-Not-Knock Registry shall be able to purchase from the Clerk's
office, for a nominal fee, a sticker for display at his or her or its
premises indicating enlistment on the Do-Not-Knock Registry.
(3) The Borough Clerk shall submit the Do-Not-Knock Registry list to
the Chief of Police at least biannually to be distributed to applicants
§ 127-6 CLOSTER CODE § 127-6
125:328
§ 127-7. (Reserved)106
§ 127-8. (Reserved)107
§ 127-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663; 12-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:858]
Any person or persons or their agents violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code. Any officer before whom any person or persons violating any of the
sections of this article may be brought, on conviction, may impose any fine
in the discretion of such officer to the maximum herein fixed or imprison for
any term less than the term fixed. Notwithstanding and in addition to the
foregoing, any hawker or peddler licensed hereunder who shall violate any
of the provisions of this article shall permanently have said license revoked
by the Chief of Police upon conviction in Municipal Court.
for a permit to peddle, canvass, itinerant vend or otherwise door-todoor
sell or canvass pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The
licensee shall not peddle, solicit canvass, itinerant vend or conduct
door-to-door sales or solicitations at any premises identified on the
then current Do-Not-Knock Registry.
(4) Any canvasser, peddler, itinerant vendor, itinerant merchant,
solicitor or door-to-door sales person or canvasser who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be:
(a) Subject to the maximum fines as provided in this article;
(b) Subject to a one-year revocation of any license issued pursuant
to the within chapter; and
(c) Ineligible to receive a new license pursuant to this chapter for
a one-year period coinciding with the terms of one-year
revocation noted in Subsection K(4)(b) above.
106. Editor’s Note: Former § 127-7, Charitable solicitations, adopted 12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:853, was repealed 5-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:935. Ordinance No. 2001:835 had also
provided for the redesignation of the previous § 127-7, Expiration; license date; renewal,
as § 127-6H.
107. Editor's Note: Former § 127-8, Exemptions, was redesignated as § 127-6I 2-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:858.
§ 127-6 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 127-9
125:329

ARTICLE II
Builders and Contractors
[Adopted 9-27-1978 by Ord. No. 1978:340 (Art. III of Ch. 55 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 127-10. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business related to
the construction, alteration, demolition, insulation, roofing or reroofing,
including gutters and leaders, siding or residing or refinishing of any
building or to engage in any business related to the laying or paving of any
road, driveway, curb, sidewalk or patio or to perform any excavation for any
purpose without having first obtained a license therefor as provided herein.
§ 127-11. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage.
(1) Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, words used in the
present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall
include the plural; and the plural shall include the singular.
(2) The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory; the word "may" is
permissive.
B. Terms defined. As used in this article, the following words shall have
the meanings indicated:
BUILDER or CONTRACTOR — Any person who, in any capacity other
than employee of another receiving wages as sole compensation,
undertakes or offers to undertake or claims to have the capacity to
undertake or accepts an order or contract for a consideration of any
kind, whether in money or other consideration, or submits a bid or
offer to construct, erect, alter, repair, add to, raze in whole or in part,
move or remove, roof or reroof, side or reside, insulate, coat or apply
any substance other than paint to any building, structure, project or
improvement or who submits a bid or offers to construct, replace,
repair or lay any road, driveway, curb, sidewalk or patio or who submits
a bid or offer to excavate any land or to change the contour of any land
for any purpose or who erects any scaffolding, staging, bridging, gate
or fence in connection therewith.
BUILDING — Any structure, whether fully enclosed or partially open,
erected for the protection of persons or animals or for the storage of
chattels or property of any kind.
LICENSING OFFICER — The Construction Code Official of the Borough
of Closter.
PERSONS — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or
corporation.
§ 127-10 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 127-12
125:331
§ 127-12. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 127-13. License required for firms engaged in building
contracting.
No firm, association or corporation shall engage in building contracting in
the Borough unless at least one officer or member of said firm, association
or corporation has been licensed according to the provisions of this article
and has a license issued to it in the name of the firm, association or
corporation as herein provided. Such license shall be valid and in effect only
while the individual so licensed is still a member or officer of such firm,
association or corporation.
§ 127-14. Administration.
This article shall be administered by the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Closter, with the Construction Code Official being the licensing officer
thereof. The licensing officer shall propose rules and regulations as may be
necessary to administer this article for its approval, including the design of
application forms and the procedures for issuing of licenses. The rules and
regulations shall provide a procedure by which the licensing officer may
refuse to grant a license for cause and the manner in which an appeal may
be taken from such refusal to the Mayor and Council.
§ 127-15. Acquisition of license required.
Any person who shall undertake or bid upon work, as defined in § 127-11
hereof, or who shall be in a category as described in the definition of
"builder" or "contractor" in § 127-11B hereof, whether or not such person
operates as a general contractor, contractor, subcontractor or specialty
contractor in a specific area or in a specific trade, must acquire a license.
§ 127-16. Application.
Applications for licenses under this article shall be made to the
Construction Code Official, in writing, on forms as provided for in § 127-14
hereof.
A. Any person or authorized representative of any governmental unit.
B. Any person who shall act as his or her own contractor with respect to
his or her own property or to property which is owned by an entity
controlled by such person.
C. Any specialized trade for which a license is required by statute.
D. Landscape contractors who shall not perform any excavation or land
contour alteration work.
E. House painters who may use scaffolding or staging in their operations.
§ 127-12 CLOSTER CODE § 127-16
125:332
§ 127-17. Fee. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
The annual fee for a license under this article shall be as set forth in Chapter
A301, Fees and Deposits, for a term of one year and shall be renewable on
September 1 of each year.
§ 127-18. Suspension and revocation of license.
The Mayor and Council shall have the power to revoke a license issued
under this article, and the Construction Code Official shall have the power
A. The application forms shall be signed, under oath, by the applicant, and
the license shall be issued to such applicant either in his or her own
name, in the case of an individual, or in the corporate or firm name, in
the case of a corporation, partnership or an individual trading under a
properly registered business name.
(1) In the case of a corporation, the application shall state the date and
state of incorporation, the full corporate name, the address of the
corporation, the name and address of its registered agent and the
name and address of the person who shall receive the license for
the corporation.
(2) In the case of a partnership, the application shall state the names
and addresses of each of the partners, the business address of the
firm and the name under which the business is being conducted
and the name and address of the person to whom the license shall
be issued.
(3) In the case of an individual, the name and address of the individual
and the address at which the business is conducted and the trade
name, if any, under which the business operates.
B. When one or more individuals, corporations, firms or associations shall
engage in any project as joint venturers or otherwise, each individual,
corporation, partnership or firm shall be required to be licensed.
C. The application form shall be filled out to the satisfaction of the
Construction Code Official and shall include the following information:
(1) The time in years that the applicant has been engaged in the
business for which a license is sought and a short resume of his
experience.
(2) Whether the applicant carries public liability insurance and
workmen's compensation insurance and the names and addresses
of the insurors.
(3) Whether the applicant has been refused a similar license in any
other municipality or political subdivision or whether a similar
license has ever been revoked.
§ 127-16 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 127-18
125:333
to suspend any license issued hereunder for one or more of any of the
following acts or omissions:
§ 127-19. Filing of complaint; hearing.
A. Fraud or misrepresentation as to any statement in the license
application.
B. Violation of any applicable building code or of any ordinance of the
Borough of Closter relating to any work covered by this article.
C. The filing of a voluntary or involuntary petition in bankruptcy or an
action in any court leading to receivership of the licensee.
D. Failure to comply with any regulation or directive of any governmental
agency.
A. The Construction Code Official, any contractee or the Mayor and
Council may prefer charges against any licensee under the terms of this
article by the filing of a written and sworn complaint that shall state the
substance of the charges. Such complaint shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk, who shall advise the Mayor and Council that a
complaint has been filed. The Mayor and Council shall appoint a
committee of its membership, which may include the Engineer, to
investigate the charges within 30 days of the time of filing of the
complaint. If the committee's report states that there is probable cause
that this article has been violated, the Mayor and Council shall cause a
statement, in writing, to be forwarded by regular mail to the licensee at
the address shown on the application for a license. Such writing shall
contain a statement of facts relating to the charges and shall specify the
particular violation of this article, any applicable building code or any
applicable ordinance or statute.
B. The statement shall advise the licensee of the time and place of a
hearing to be held, not more than 20 days from the date of the mailing
of the statement, and that the licensee must appear at such hearing to
show cause why his license shall not be revoked or suspended.
C. At the hearing, the licensee shall have the right to appear personally or
by counsel, to cross-examine witnesses against him and to produce
witnesses and evidence in his behalf.
D. Failure of the licensee to appear at the hearing may be deemed to be an
admission by the licensee of the truth of the allegations of the complaint
or of the statement of the investigative committee or of the statement of
the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall have the power to
suspend or revoke the license in such case. In the event that the license
is suspended, the Mayor and Council shall schedule a final hearing
within 30 days at which a final determination shall be made, either
revoking the license, revoking a suspension or deciding that there is no
cause for suspension or revocation.
§ 127-18 CLOSTER CODE § 127-20
125:334
§ 127-20. Effect of revocation.
§ 127-21. Building permits.
The Construction Code Official shall not issue a building permit for any
activity which would require a license under this article until such license is
issued.
§ 127-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
Any person who shall violate the terms or provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
A. After revocation of a license for any cause set forth herein, such license
shall not be reissued nor any new license issued for a period of one year
from the date of revocation.
B. The Construction Code Official shall not issue a license to any
individual, firm, association or corporation when he or she has reason
to believe that the application includes any person, firm or corporation
to whom a license had been issued and such license had subsequently
been suspended or revoked or to any individual, firm or corporation
where there is an unsettled claim arising from a transaction, as the
result of which a license was suspended or revoked.
§ 127-20 LIBRARY MATERIALS § 127-22
125:335
Chapter 129
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 183. Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 129-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIMOUSINE SERVICE — Includes any automobile or motor car service
with a carrying capacity of not more than 14 passengers, not including the
driver, for carrying passengers for hire which is held out, announced or
advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over any of the
streets or public highways of this state, and which is hired by charter or
for a particular contract, or by the day or hour or other fixed period, or to
transport passengers to a specified place or places, or which charges a fare
or price agreed upon in advance between the operator and the passenger.
Nothing in this chapter contained shall be construed to include taxicabs,
hotel buses or buses employed solely in transporting school children or
teachers or autobuses.[Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:875]
§ 129-2. Municipal consent required; insurance requirements.
A. No limousine service, the owner of which has his principal place of
business in the Borough of Closter, shall be operated along any street in
the borough until the owner thereof shall have obtained the consent of
the Borough Council.
B. No consent by the Borough Council to the owner of a limousine or livery
whose principal place of business is the Borough shall become effective
until the owner of such limousine or livery shall have filed with the
Municipal Clerk an insurance policy or certified copy of a policy written
by an insurance company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of the state, conditioned for the payment of the sum of
not less than $1,500,000 against loss to satisfy all claims for damages
by reason of bodily injury or death suffered by any persons and damage
to property of others as the result of an accident occurring by reason of
the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such limousine or
livery upon the public streets of the Borough of Closter. Said insurance
policy shall contain a clause that, should it be canceled, materially
amended or nonrenewed, or should any of the vehicles herein be
removed or substituted from the policy, the insurance company shall
mail beforehand for cancellation, material amendment and/or
nonrenewal and after for removal or substitution 30 days' notice to the
Municipal Clerk, certified mail, return receipt. Any consent to operate a
§ 127-22 CLOSTER CODE § 129-2
129:336
§ 129-3. Power of attorney.
The owner of each limousine service shall execute and deliver to the
Borough Clerk concurrently with the filing of the insurance policies herein
required a power of attorney, wherein and whereby the owner shall appoint
the Borough Treasurer his true and lawful attorney for the purpose of
acknowledging service of any process of a court of competent jurisdiction to
be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the
insurance policies required hereunder.
§ 129-4. Certificates required; application.
No limousine service which has its principal place of business within the
Borough of Closter shall be operated along any street in the borough until
the owner or operator of said limousine service shall have obtained a
limousine certificate for each limousine so operated.
§ 129-5. Certificate fees.
All certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on December 31 of the year for which they are issued and shall be
limousine which has been granted by the Borough Council shall become
void and of no effect in the event that the aforementioned insurance
policies are canceled or for any reason become ineffective. [Amended
10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:875]
A. Written application for such certificate shall be made to the Borough
Clerk on forms furnished by the Borough Clerk. Each application shall
be accompanied by the requisite fees as herein fixed for the certificate
applied for. Each application shall set forth under oath or affirmation:
(1) The type, maker's name, seating capacity, weight, year of
manufacture, factory number, vehicle registration number and
engine number of each vehicle.
(2) The principal location of each vehicle when not being operated
upon the streets as a limousine.
(3) The home and business addresses of the owner of the vehicle.
(4) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a crime and, if the applicant has been convicted of a crime, a
complete statement concerning dates and disposition thereof. In
case of a corporate applicant, the statement shall be completed as
to each officer, director and owner of more than 10% of the stock of
the corporation.
B. Based on a review of the information obtained in the application in
Subsection A above, the Borough Clerk may deny the applicant a
certificate if all the information is not presented.
§ 129-2 LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE § 129-5
129:337
nontransferable. The fee for a certificate for each limousine or livery shall
be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
§ 129-6. Grounds for revocation or suspension of certificates.
Any certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked or suspended (without refund of fees) by the Borough Clerk for
any violation of this chapter. The person or corporation affected by such
revocation or suspension shall have the opportunity for a public hearing
before the Borough Administrator in a summary manner in order to contest
the suspension or revocation. Pending hearing and decision by the Borough
Administrator, the revocation or suspension shall remain in effect. In order
to obtain a hearing from a summary revocation or suspension of a
certificate, the holder of the certificate shall be required to request the
hearing in writing within 10 business days of the effective date of the
suspension or revocation imposed by the Borough Clerk.
§ 129-7. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter are hereby repealed as to such inconsistencies.
Chapter 132
NEWSRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 171.
§ 132-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — The person responsible for placing and maintaining a
newsrack on a public right-of-way.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the
United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation or any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law.
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit
or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers only.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designated or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.
§ 129-5 CLOSTER CODE § 132-1
132:338
SIDEWALK — A paved, surfaced or leveled area, paralleling and usually
separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway.
STREET — All that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes
and shall include but not be limited to roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks.
§ 132-2. Standards for maintenance and installation.
Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon or over any roadway,
street or sidewalk shall comply with the following standards:
A. No newsrack shall exceed sixty (60) inches in height, twenty-four (24)
inches in width or twenty (20) inches in thickness.
B. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than those dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the
newspaper sold therein.
C. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event that he or she is unable to receive a publication paid for. The
coin-return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
D. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in
the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism or to give the
notices provided for in this chapter.
E. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so
that:
(1) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible, unpainted
metal areas thereon.
(3) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications thereon are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes and discolorations.
(4) The paper or cardboard parts of inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
(5) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
§ 132-1 NEWSRACKS § 132-3
132:339
§ 132-3. Location and placement of newsrack.
Any newsrack that rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of a
public roadway, street or sidewalk or which projects onto, into or over any
part of a public roadway, street or sidewalk shall be located in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
A. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests, wholly
or in part, upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
B. No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any public
sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property;
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicle;
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
C. Any newsrack or newsracks shall be chained, bolted or otherwise
secured so as to prevent their being blown down or around the public
street or roadway and shall not be secured by the use of a traffic sign or
signal, mailbox, fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other
emergency facility.
D. Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of
newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than four (4) feet along a
curb, and provided further that no newsrack or group of newsracks
shall be within two hundred (200) feet from the nearest newsrack or
group of newsracks.
E. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within three (3) feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within twelve (12) feet of a curb return of any unmarked crosswalk.
(3) Within five (5) feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box
or other emergency facility.
(4) Within five (5) feet of any driveway.
(5) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is thereby reduced to less than thirty (30) inches.
(6) Within three (3) feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, scrubs, trees or other landscaping.
§ 132-3 CLOSTER CODE § 132-3
132:340
§ 132-4. Violations and penalties.108
Any person or persons, firm, partnership, association or corporation or
employee thereof who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
§ 132-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the members of the Police Department.
Chapter 134
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 71.
§ 134-1. Nuisances.
It is hereby declared a nuisance and it is unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to:
(7) Within two hundred (200) feet of any church, park, playground or
school. Said two hundred (200) feet shall be measured in the
normal way that a pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest
entrance of said church, park, playground or school to the location
of the newsrack.
A. Make, continue, permit or cause to be made, continued or permitted
any noise or any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which either
unreasonably annoys or disturbs or injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace, rest, safety or welfare of others.
B. Make, cause, suffer or permit to be made upon any premises owned,
occupied or controlled by him or her or it or in any public place or upon
any public highway, street or thoroughfare in the Borough of Closter
any unnecessary noises or sounds, either by the human voice or any
other means or methods which are physically annoying to persons or
which are so harsh or so prolonged or so loud or so unnatural or so
unusual in their use, time or place as to cause or occasion discomfort or
which are injurious to the lives, health, peace, comfort and welfare of
the inhabitants of the borough.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 132-3 NEWSRACKS § 134-2
132:341
§ 134-2. Volume regulated. [Amended 10-8-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1175]
No person shall use or operate any facility, machine or instrument or
produce or cause to be produced any sound in the Borough when the same
produces noise, the sound pressure level of which, measured at the point
of annoyance complained of, exceeds 90 decibels. Nothing herein contained
shall be construed to prohibit playing by a band or orchestra in a hall,
building or in the open air. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5, certain exceptions
to noise control apply, including but not limited to:
§ 134-3. Sound on streets and public places.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation for advertising
purposes or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the passing
public to play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any
radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound
amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound on the streets or public places of the Borough of Closter or in any
place where the sound therefrom is cast directly upon the streets or public
places or which is so placed and operated that the sound therefrom can be
heard to the annoyance or inconvenience of travelers upon any street or
public places or of persons in neighboring premises.
§ 134-4. Permits required for audible advertising devices; issuance
and duration.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as principal,
agent or employee, to play, use or operate, for advertising purposes or
for any other purpose whatsoever, in public places or on or upon the
public streets, alleys or thoroughfares in the Borough of Closter any device
A. Emergency release devices.
B. When public health and safety is involved, emergency road work to
provide electricity, water, or other public utilities and to conduct
emergency roadwork or demolition.
C. National Warning System (NAWAS).
D. Noise of aircraft flight operations.
E. Public celebrations that are government-sponsored or governmentpermitted
events.
F. Use of explosive devices regulated by the 1960 Explosives Act (N.J.S.A.
21:1A-1 to 21:1A-21).109
G. Emergency generators at an industrial, commercial, or community
service facility during an electrical outage.
109. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 21:1A-128 et seq.
§ 134-2 CLOSTER CODE § 134-4
132:342
known as a "sound truck," "loudspeaker" or "sound amplifier" or a radio or
phonograph with a loudspeaker or sound amplifier or any other instrument
known as a "calliope" or any instrument of any kind or character which
emits therefrom loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon
any vehicle operating or standing upon said streets or public places
aforementioned without a special permit therefor. Permits shall be issued
by the Borough Clerk upon application and shall be issued only to persons,
firms or corporations engaged in charitable activities or in a purpose not
for pecuniary profit. Such permits shall be issued for a maximum period of
two calendar days during the periods of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and not
thereafter.
§ 134-5. Vehicle warning devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sound any horn or
warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle except
when required by law or when necessary to give timely warning of the
approach of the vehicle or as a warning of impending danger to persons
driving other vehicles or to persons upon the street. No person shall sound
any horn or warning device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other
vehicle which shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound or for any
unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
§ 134-6. Animals and birds.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, harbor
or maintain any animal or bird which shall cause or make or emit any
frequent or long-continued noise which shall disturb the peace, comfort,
rest or repose of any person in the vicinity.
§ 134-7. Construction or repair; definitions. [Amended 11-23-1987
by Ord. No. 1987:552]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform
excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration work before
7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. Mondays through Fridays; before 9:00 a.m.
or after 7:00 p.m. Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Construction work
can be performed before or after these specified times so long as the
noise levels do not exceed those outlined in § 134-32. Also, in the case
of urgent necessity or in the interest of public health or safety, the DPW
Superintendent, Police Chief, Fire Chief or Construction Code Official
may grant a permit for excavation, demolition, construction, repair or
alteration work for a period not to exceed three days, by the terms of
which, such work may be carried on between hours otherwise
prohibited by this section. [Amended 5-11-2016 by Ord. No.
2016:1205]
B. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 134-4 NEWSRACKS § 134-7
132:343
§ 134-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-23-1987 by Ord. No.
1987:552; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties,
of this Code.
§ 134-9. Enforcement. [Added 11-23-1987 by Ord. No. 1987:552]
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
Chapter 141
OUTDOOR CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 67.
Noise — See Ch. 134.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 171.
Vending machines — See Ch. 185.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 141-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a procedure and authorize
rules and regulations thereunder for the licensing of outdoor cafes in the
Business Zone District of the Borough of Closter.
§ 141-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed in this section:
CONSTRUCTION — Any activity at or on the building, excavation or
demolition site, including but not limited to the delivery of materials,
movement of heavy equipment or use of gas or electric power
equipment.
HOLIDAYS — New Year's Day, January 1; Memorial Day, last Monday in
May; Independence Day, July 4; Labor Day, first Monday in September;
Thanksgiving Day, fourth Thursday in November; and Christmas Day,
December 25.
REPAIR or ALTERATION — Does not include activities, including but
not limited to painting or wallpapering, which do not create a nuisance
as set forth in § 134-1 of this chapter.
§ 134-7 CLOSTER CODE § 141-2
132:344
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks
immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place of business
where food and/or other refreshments are served, or where permitted on
private property pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 200).
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing an eating
establishment.
§ 141-3. License required.
§ 141-4. Unobstructed area to be maintained; food preparation;
areas to be kept clean. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012:1134]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred
to as "person") to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be
engaged in the business of conducting an outdoor cafe upon the
sidewalks of the Borough of Closter, or on private property, unless such
person shall hold a currently valid license issued pursuant to the terms
of this chapter.
B. The outdoor cafe shall be operated in accordance with the layout plan
as finally approved and by the same person who operates and maintains
the restaurant. [Added 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1134]
C. Should the restaurant apply for an outdoor cafe license, the following
regulations would apply in addition to all other rules and regulations
applicable to restaurants and outdoor cafes: [Added 12-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012:1134]
(1) The outdoor cafe is only permitted to operate during the period of
April 15 to October 15 of each calendar year; and
(2) During the period in question, the restaurant shall be permitted to
increase by up to 50% the number of seats available for its use,
provided that the additional number of seats that shall be allowed
for a restaurant that uses an outdoor cafe shall be governed by the
number of seats sought to be used in the outdoor cafe portion of the
restaurant, so that for every two seats sought to be installed in the
outdoor cafe portion of the restaurant, one otherwise allowable
seat must be taken out of service from the interior portion of the
restaurant.
A. No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant for the
license ("applicant") shall demonstrate that a minimum four-foot-wide
area of unobstructed paved surface will be available for pedestrian
movement, including unimpeded passage of handicapped individuals.
§ 141-2 NEWSRACKS § 141-4
132:345
§ 141-5. Contents of application.
Application for the license required hereunder shall be made to the
Construction Code Official and shall be signed by the applicant. The
application shall contain the following information:
B. No food or drink, including alcoholic beverages, shall be prepared or
stored other than in the interior of the restaurant.
C. Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe
and the adjacent sidewalks and streets free and clear of any debris or
litter occasioned by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned as needed, not less
than twice daily, at the beginning of each business day, but not earlier
than 6:30 a.m., and at the time the business closes for the evening.
A. The name, residence address and telephone number of each individual,
owner, partner or, if a domestic corporation, the names, residence
addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and officers owning a
ten-percent or greater interest in the corporation and the chief
operating executive of the corporation and, if a nondomestic
corporation, the name, residence address and telephone number of the
managing officer for service of process within the State of New Jersey
and a copy of the qualification of said nondomestic corporation to
conduct business in the State of New Jersey.
B. A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon which
the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this chapter.
C. The address and description of each place where the applicant intends
to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
D. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other than
the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to the
application.
E. Three sets of a proposed layout plan containing scaled drawings clearly
illustrating the number, type of materials, color and location of all
tables, chairs, umbrellas and other furnishings or fixtures intended to
be located in the outdoor cafe. The perimeter of the outdoor cafe shall
be defined and set off by a portable-type enclosure, which may include
live plantings. The enclosure shall define the perimeter of the area to be
used as an outdoor cafe and shall separate it from the pedestrians
traversing the adjacent sidewalk. The enclosure shall not contain doors
or windows nor air conditioning or heating equipment and shall be open
at all times to the air from a height of not more than three feet. Awnings
or outdoor umbrellas extending over the enclosure are permitted. The
scaled drawings shall also illustrate the following:
(1) The location of any doors leading from the eating establishment to
the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be obstructed in any manner.
§ 141-4 CLOSTER CODE § 141-5
132:346
§ 141-6. Completeness of application.
The Construction Code Official will review the application for completeness
and compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the application is
complete, the Construction Code Official will act upon the same within 10
business days of the submittal of the application or within 10 business days
after the application becomes complete. If the application is not complete,
the Construction Code official will so notify the applicant within ten
business days of the submission and specifically detail the areas in which
the application lacks compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 141-7. Issuance of license.
If the application complies with this chapter, the Construction Code Official
shall issue a license strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
§ 141-8. Change in ownership.
The license is personal to the applicant, and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the license and shall require
a new application and a new license in conformance with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 141-9. Inspections.
Acceptance of the license by the applicant shall operate as a consent to the
health, fire, police and building officials of the Borough of Closter to inspect
the outdoor cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions
(2) The number of feet and location of unobstructed space permitting
free passage of pedestrian traffic around or through each outdoor
cafe.
(3) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to be
prepared.
(4) An illustration of the enclosure or protective barrier separating the
eating and serving area of each outdoor cafe from pedestrian
traffic.
(5) The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps, street furniture, trees and any other
fixtures permanently located on the sidewalk in front of the eating
establishment or within 10 feet thereof on either or any side.
(6) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting and
fixtures.
(7) An application fee as set forth in § A301-1C(1)(p) of the Borough of
Closter Code.
§ 141-5 NEWSRACKS § 141-9
132:347
of this chapter and any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or
regulation affecting the same.
§ 141-10. Indemnification.
No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have filed with the Borough
Clark a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the Borough
of Closter, its agents, servants, representatives or employees from any or
all claims, damages, judgment costs or expenses, including attorneys fees,
which they or any of them may incur or be required to pay because of
any personal injury, including death, or property damage suffered by any
person or persons as a result of or related in any way to the operation and
maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which the license is issued.
§ 141-11. Liability insurance requirement.
No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have first filed with the
Borough Clerk a commercial general liability policy issued to such person
by a public liability insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of New Jersey affording the coverages set forth below in the amounts
specified. Such insurance policy shall name the Borough of Closter, 295
Closter Dock Road, Closter, New Jersey 07624, its agents, officers, servants,
representatives and employees as additional insured with respect to the
operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe for bodily injury and
property damage in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit. The
insurance coverage required by this inspection shall at all times be
maintained for the full amount. The policy or certificate of insurance
required by this section to be filed with the Borough Clerk shall contain a
clause obligating the company issuing the same to give not fewer than 30
days' written notice to the Borough Clerk by certified mail, return receipt
requested, before cancellation or amendments of any of the terms thereof.
Notice of cancellation shall not relieve the company issuing such policy
of liability for any injury or claim arising before the cancellation becomes
effective. The cancellation of any such policy shall have the immediate
affect or suspending the license of such person to operate the outdoor cafe
covered thereby until a new policy complying the provisions of this section
is filed with the Construction Code Official and a letter in writing confirming
the new effective date of the license is issued by the Construction Code
Official.
§ 141-12. Conditions on insurance policy.
Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for
continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof notwithstanding
any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insured shall not be affected
by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the insured and that until the
policy is canceled the insurance company will not be relieved from liability
on account of nonpayment of premium or of any act or omission by the
§ 141-9 CLOSTER CODE § 141-12
132:348
named insured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for
the payment of any and all judgments up to the limits of such policy. All
policies or certificates of insurance shall be submitted to the borough's Risk
Management Consultant for review and approval prior to the granting of a
license and annually thereafter.
§ 141-13. Revocation or suspension of license.
Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license, which
shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Mayor and Council
for failure of any licensee to comply with this chapter or for violation of
any other applicable federal, state, county or municipal law, regulation
or ordinance. Any license issued hereunder is issued upon the express
understanding that the licensee obtains no property right thereunder, nor
any interest in the continuation or said license.
§ 141-14. Unlawful operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor cafe after the
suspension or termination of the applicable license.
§ 141-15. Maintenance of outdoor areas.
Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe and the
adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris or litter occasioned
by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned as needed and at the time that business
is closed and at the beginning of each business day, but not later than 9:00
a.m.
§ 141-16. Vending machines.
No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating an outdoor cafe.
§ 141-17. Signs. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1134]
No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except for signs
on the facade of the retail food service establishment and on the awnings,
complying with the applicable sign regulations of the Closter Code, other
than a "sandwich board" type of sign, which shall not be allowed to remain
outside after the end of each business day.
§ 141-18. Hazards to pedestrian traffic; underground utilities;
emergencies.
In addition to the powers of suspension or revocation as set forth above,
the borough reserves the right to modify, suspend or revoke any license on
10 days' written notice if the borough determines that pedestrian traffic is,
in fact, impeded or made unsafe because of the operation of the outdoor
cafe or because of any other safety issue which the borough determines
adversely affects the borough because of such operation. The license may
§ 141-12 NEWSRACKS § 141-18
132:349
also be suspended or revoked on 10 days written notice in the event that
the borough determines that it is necessary to utilize the area or any
part thereof for the maintenance or installation of underground utilities. In
the event of an emergency, which emergency is certified by the Borough
Manager, the license may be suspended or revoked without notice.
§ 141-19. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012:1134]
Alcoholic beverages may be served outdoors in accordance with the
alcoholic beverage control licensing requirements of the State of New
Jersey. If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control license
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the alcoholic beverage control license to be amended
to include the premises utilized for outdoor cafe purposes in order to serve
alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 141-20. Days of operation; term of license. [Amended 12-12-2012
by Ord. No. 2012:1134]
Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate as authorized in § 141-3. The
license, when issued, shall be valid for the calendar year in which it was
issued.
§ 141-21. Equipment not to be attached. [Amended 12-12-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012:1134]
No tables, chairs or other equipment shall be attached, chained or in any
manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, curb or sidewalk or to property of the
Borough in any way.
§ 141-22. Vacation of sidewalk space.
The licensee agrees at the end of the license period, or in the event that
the license is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that the
licensee will at his own cost and expense vacate the sidewalk space and
promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on five days'
written notice shall grant to the borough the right to remove any property
on the sidewalk, and the licensee agrees to reimburse the borough for the
cost of removing and storing the same.
§ 141-23. Noise-making devices. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012:1134]
The applicant shall not direct or permit to be directed to or from the
outdoor cafe any bell, whistle, siren, loudspeaker, public-address system,
radio, sound amplifier or similar sound device.
§ 141-24. Hours of operation. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012:1134]
§ 141-18 CLOSTER CODE § 141-24
132:350
§ 141-25. Table service. [Amended 12-12-2012 by Ord. No.
2012:1134]
Table service is required. Any table service provided at the outdoor cafe
shall be provided by persons engaged or employed for that purpose and
shall be furnished to seated patrons only.
Chapter 142
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Recreation Commissioners — See
Ch. 56.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 59.
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 67.
§ 142-1. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms, unless otherwise
expressly defined, shall mean and include each of the meanings herein
respectively set forth:
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter.
PARKS, PARKLAND, PARKWAYS, PARK AREAS or PLAYGROUND — All the
real property situated in the Borough of Closter under the jurisdiction
and care of the Borough of Closter, including the tennis courts owned
by the Borough, and including but not limited to the following
properties:[Amended 10-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:874; 2-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009:1028; 1-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2011:1111; 1-3-2012 by
Ord. No. 1112]
Property Block Lots
Alice Barkley Square Block 1302
Amendola Park Block 1901 Lot 41
Anderson Brook
Greenway
Block 2102 Lot 22
Bethany Circle Park Block 309 Lot 1
Blanch Woods Block 1801 Lot 1
A. No outdoor cafe shall be open for business prior to 7:00 a.m. nor remain
open for business after 11:00 p.m. All persons occupying the outdoor
cafe shall vacate the same no later than 11:30 p.m.
B. The applicant shall remove all chairs and other equipment from the
sidewalk within 30 minutes of the time in which the outdoor cafe is
vacated at the end of each business day; however, tables may remain
outside at night during the time of the calendar year allowed hereunder.
§ 141-24 NEWSRACKS § 142-1
132:351
Property Block Lots
Block 1802 Lot 1
Block 1803 Lot 1
Block 1804 Lots 1, 2
Buzzoni Farm Park Block 1806 Lot 1
Closter Nature
Center
Block 1402 Lots 25, 26
Block 1501 Lots 22, 26, 27, 28, 29
Block 1601 Lot 10
Block 1901 Lots 1, 33.03
Block 1902 Lots 1, 4, 5
Dwarskill Greenway Block 1805 Lot 2
Block 2006 Lot 7
Farrell Woods Block 907 Lots 14, 42
Lenapehoking
Preserve
Block 1701 Lot 3
Block 1702 Lots 1, 2.01, 6, 7
Lone Horseman Park Block 1715 Lot 1
Block 1707 Lot 4
MacBain Farm Block 2102 Lot 37.07
Memorial Park Block 804 Lot 6
Mollicone Park Block 607 Lot 1
Olaf & Ingeborg
Hagen Park
Block 1002 Lots 17, 7, 8
Block 1006 Lots 9, 10, 11, 12, 21, 24
Block 1006 Lot 24
Block 913 Lots 6, 7
Old Hook-High St.
Triangle
Block 502 Lot 7
Old Quarry Block 2102 Lot 22
Pfeiffer Park Block 1716 Lot 1
Pollack Square Block 1717 Lot 1
Block 1718 Lot 7
Block 1721 Lots 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
Remembrance Park Block 804 Lots 1, 2, 3, 4
Ruckman Park Block 1902 Lots 2, 3
Schauble Park Block 515 Lot 3
Block 516 Lot 3
§ 142-1 CLOSTER CODE § 142-1
132:352
Property Block Lots
Block 517 Lots 3, 4, 5, 6
Block 518 Lot 5
Block 601 Lot 1
Block 604 Lots 1, 2, 3
Block 605 Lot 1
Veterans Monument
Park
Block 1304 Lots 1, 2, 3, 4
Volunteer Square Block 1307 Lot 1
West Street Park Block 1205 Lot 3
PERMIT — Any written license issued by or under the authority of the
governing body permitting the performance of a specific act or acts.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, company, association, jointstock
association, firm or partnership.
§ 142-2. Hours closed; hours of use. [Amended 2-11-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009:1028]
§ 142-3. Unlawful behavior.
(Note: The use of motorized vehicles within the areas defined in § 142-1
of this chapter is prohibited pursuant to § 183-3B of this Code.) [Added
10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1133]
It shall be unlawful in any park or playground for any person to:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain, stay, loiter or be in or
upon the grounds of any park or playground between the hours of 10:30
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without the written permission of the governing
body.
B. Tennis court use is limited to one hour per person per day. It shall be
unlawful for any person to exceed the aforementioned limit.
A. Consume, use, sell, deliver, possess, carry or hold any alcoholic
beverage unless a permit from the governing body or its designate is
obtained prior thereto.
B. Use abusive, obscene, profane or indecent language or any disorderly
conduct disturbing or annoying to others.
C. Cut, deface, injure, remove or disturb any tree, shrub, building, fence,
bench or other structure, apparatus or property or pick, cut or remove
any shrub, bush or flower or mark or write upon any building, fence,
bench or other structure.
D. Hit or strike golf balls or play or practice golf. [Added 6-9-1999 by
Ord. No. 1999:796]
§ 142-1 NEWSRACKS § 142-3
132:353
§ 142-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter or doing any unlawful act
shall be deemed a disorderly person and shall, upon conviction therefor in
the Closter Municipal Court, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
Chapter 145
POOLROOMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 69.
Licenses — See Ch. 127.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 145-1. License required.
No person or persons, firm, association, club or corporation shall maintain,
operate, conduct or pursue the business or occupation of keeping any public
room or place wherein the games commonly known as "pool" or "billiards"
are played without having first obtained a license therefor from the Mayor
and Council of the Borough of Closter as hereinafter provided.
§ 145-2. Application for license.
An application for a license shall be filed with the Borough Clerk on forms
to be furnished by him or her, which forms shall require to be included the
following information:
E. Enter, utilize or be in or upon any portion of lawn or cultivated ground
in any public park or playground when forbidden by an official sign or
other official notification posted by the Borough's Police Department.
[Added 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1010]
F. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to use any park or
playground, including the Borough's tennis courts, for profit without
the express consent of the Mayor and Council. [Added 2-11-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009:1028]
G. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke within the boundary of the
parks, parklands, parkways, park areas or playgrounds defined in
§ 142-1 of this chapter. To the extent possible, "Smoke Free Zone" signs
shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at properties
where smoking is prohibited by this chapter. The sign(s) shall have the
words "Smoke Free Zone" in lettering that is not less than two inches in
height and shall contain the international no smoking sign or symbol.
[Added 10-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1133]
§ 142-3 CLOSTER CODE § 145-2
145:354
§ 145-3. Issuance of license.
A. The name and address of the applicant and the name and address of the
person or persons who will be in attendance at the premises and
actually in charge thereof.
B. In the case of a partnership, it shall state the names and addresses of all
partners.
C. In the case of a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses of
the officers, directors and all stockholders presently holding stock and
all who, for six (6) months prior to the making of said application, have
been officers, directors or stockholders.
D. In the case of clubs or associations, it shall state the names and
addresses of all officers.
E. Whether or not the person or persons named in the application have
ever been convicted of a crime, and if so, the date and place of such
conviction and the nature of the crime.
F. In the event that there should be any change from time to time as to the
person or persons in attendance and actually in charge of the premises,
written notice of such change shall be given to the borough by the
applicant within five (5) days. Such notice shall include the name and
address of any replacement or additional person or persons who will be
in attendance and actually in charge of the premises.
G. The location of the premises to be licensed.
H. The number of pool tables and billiard tables located or to be located
upon the premises to be licensed.
A. All licenses herein provided for shall be issued by the Borough Clerk
only after a resolution of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Closter shall have been adopted approving said application and only
after the payment of the license fee herein provided for. All such
licenses shall be valid from the first day of February of the year in which
the license is issued until the 31st day of January next after the same is
issued, unless sooner revoked. No license shall be issued to any
applicant if such applicant or an officer, director or stockholder of such
applicant or if the person in attendance at the premises and actually in
charge thereof shall have been convicted of a crime or of contributing
to the delinquency of a minor.
B. The person or persons in attendance at the premises and actually in
charge thereof shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and of good
moral character. Failure to meet this requirement or to comply
herewith shall be sufficient grounds for the denial of a license or the
suspension or revocation of a license. [Amended 5-27-1992 by Ord.
No. 1992:625]
§ 145-2 POOLROOMS § 145-4
145:355
§ 145-4. License.
Such license shall bear the date of issue, the name of the licensee, the
purpose for which issued and the location of the room or building wherein
the licensee is authorized to carry on and conduct any such business. Such
license may be transferred by the holder to any person or persons, firm,
association or corporation; provided, however, that the transferee shall
make application for such transfer to the Borough Clerk, such application
to be in accordance with § 145-2 hereof, and provided further that such
transfer is approved by resolution of the Mayor and Council of the Borough
of Closter in accordance with the requirements set forth for original issue
in § 145-3 hereof. Such license may be transferred by the holder to another
location; provided, however, that the licensee shall make written application
for such transfer, setting forth therein the proposed new location, and such
transfer is approved by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter.
§ 145-5. Annual license fees. [Amended 10-13-1971 by Ord. No.
1971:226; 4-1-1973 by Ord. No. 1972:241; 1-26-1977 by Ord. No.
1977:296110]
For each pool table or billiard table located on the premises, the annual
license fee shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
§ 145-6. Revocation or suspension of license.
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter may suspend or
revoke the license of any licensee on any one (1) or more of the
following grounds:
(1) Conviction of a violation of this chapter.
(2) If said license was procured by fraudulent conduct or false
statement of a material fact or if a fact concerning the applicant
was not disclosed at the time of filing the application, where such
fact would have constituted just cause for refusing to issue said
license.
(3) Permitting or suffering any activity upon the licensed premises
which is or may be detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare
or morals.
B. In all such cases, written notice of the charge or charges and the time
and place of hearing thereon shall be served on the licensee, either in
person or by certified or registered mail addressed to the licensed
premises. No revocation or suspension shall occur unless the licensee
shall have been afforded an opportunity to be heard in his or her
defense.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 145-4 CLOSTER CODE § 145-6
145:356
§ 145-7. Unsafe premises.
Any premises which shall be declared to be unsafe or unsuitable for use and
occupancy by the public, by the written report of the Building Inspector or
the Fire Inspector or the Sanitarian or the Health Officer, shall be deemed to
be ineligible for a license. The Mayor and Council may suspend any license
until such conditions are corrected, rectified or repaired.
§ 145-8. Hours of operation.
The hours of operation of such pool or billiard room shall be between 9:00
a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday. On Sunday, the hours of
operation shall be from 2:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m.
§ 145-9. Minors.
§ 145-10. Dice or cardplaying.
In no event shall any dice games or cardplaying be permitted on premises
licensed under this chapter, even if such dice games or cardplaying is for
social purposes.
§ 145-11. Premises.
Any premises in which the games of pool or billiards are played, located
on the street floor of any building, shall be so arranged and shall be so
lighted that a full view of the interior may be had at all hours from the public
thoroughfare or from adjacent rooms to which the public is admitted.
§ 145-12. Posting of license, ordinance and notices.
There shall be conspicuously posted and displayed in any premises licensed
under this chapter:
C. In the event that any license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall
not be entitled to the return of the license fee or any portion thereof.
A. No person under the age of sixteen (16) years shall be admitted to or
permitted to play pool or billiards in any licensed premises or to
frequent, lounge or congregate in such room or place unless
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
B. No person between the ages of sixteen (16) and eighteen (18) years
shall be admitted to or permitted to play pool or billiards in any licensed
premises or to frequent, lounge or congregate in such room or place
after the hour of 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian.
A. The license issued pursuant to this chapter.
B. A copy of this chapter, which shall be supplied by the Borough Clerk.
§ 145-6 POOLROOMS § 145-12
145:357
§ 145-13. Violations and penalties.111
Any person or persons, firm, association, club or corporation violating any
of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to
a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations
and Penalties, of this Code.
Chapter 147
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 81.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 85.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
Solid waste — See Ch. 169.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 147-1. General.
C. Not less than one (1) sign giving notice that no person under the age of
sixteen (16) years is permitted on the licensed premises unless
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian.
D. Not less than one (1) sign giving notice that no person between the ages
of sixteen (16) years and eighteen (18) years is permitted on the
licensed premises after 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by his or her
parent or guardian.
A. Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code
of the Borough of Closter" and may be referred to as "this chapter."
B. Findings. The Borough of Closter hereby finds that certain unsafe,
unsanitary, undesirable and unhealthy conditions exist at various
properties in the Borough and the public health, safety and welfare
make it desirous to terminate unsafe, unsanitary, undesirable and
unhealthy conditions and to prevent other similar conditions from
arising in the future on any properties in the Borough.
C. Purposes. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health,
safety and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance and condition of residential and
nonresidential structures and all existing premises; to establish
minimum standards governing facilities and other physical components
and conditions essential to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human
habitation and use; to abate certain responsibilities and duties upon
owners, operators and occupants; and to affix penalties for the violation
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 145-12 CLOSTER CODE § 147-1
145:358
§ 147-2. Applicability.
of this chapter. This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial and
essential for the public interest, and it is intended that this chapter be
liberally construed to effectuate the purposes stated herein.
D. Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions of this chapter.
E. Effective date. This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage
and publication according to law.
A. General. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in § 147-1.
Where, in a specific case, different sections of this chapter specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
B. Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this chapter or a previous regulation or chapter under which the
structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be
maintained in good working order. Except as otherwise specified
herein, the owner, operator or occupants shall be responsible for the
maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
C. Conflict with other provisions. In any case where the provisions of this
chapter impose a higher or stricter standard than set forth in any other
ordinance or regulation of the Borough of Closter or under the laws or
regulations of the State of New Jersey or any of its agencies, then the
standard as set forth herein shall prevail; but, if the provisions of this
chapter impose a lower or lesser standard than any other regulation or
ordinance of the Borough of Closter or the laws and regulations of the
State of New Jersey or any of its agencies, then the higher standard
contained in any such other ordinance, regulation or law shall prevail.
D. Compliance with other ordinances. Compliance with this chapter shall
not constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of
the Borough of Closter applicable to any structure or premises, nor
shall any one act constitute a defense against any subsequent chapter.
E. Responsibilities independent.
(1) Owner, operators and occupants shall have all duties, obligations
and responsibilities prescribed in this chapter, and no such person
or entity shall be relieved of any such duty, obligation or
responsibility hereunder or be entitled to assert as a defense
against any charge made against him, her or them for violation of
this chapter based upon the fact that another owner, operator or
occupant or any other third person or entity is also responsible and
in violation thereof.
§ 147-1 POOLROOMS § 147-2
145:359
§ 147-3. Code Enforcement Officer.
(2) Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this chapter, the
respective obligations and responsibilities herein of the owner and
operator on the one hand and the occupant on the other shall not
be altered or affected by any agreement or contract by and
between any of the aforesaid or between them and other parties.
F. Application of building code.112 Any alterations to buildings, structures
or appurtenances thereto or changes of use therein which may be
caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter shall be
done in accordance with all applicable sections of the Building Code of
the municipality.
G. Application of Zoning Ordinance.113 Nothing contained in this chapter
or any requirements of compliance herewith shall be deemed to alter,
impair or affect the application of the Zoning Ordinance or zoning laws
of the municipality.
H. Existing remedies to remain in effect. Nothing in this chapter shall be
deemed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the municipality or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any
buildings or structures which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe or
unsanitary.
A. Creation. There is hereby created the position of Code Enforcement
Officer.
B. Duties. The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of
this chapter and other relevant ordinances as prescribed therein and
shall also have the authority to enforce any conditions, stipulations or
requirements of development approvals of the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. Rule-making authority. The Code Enforcement Officer shall have
authority as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and
general welfare to adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to
interpret and implement the provisions of this chapter; to secure the
intent thereof; and to designate requirements applicable because of
local climate or other conditions. Such rules shall not have the effect of
waiving structural or fire performance requirements specifically
provided for in this chapter or of violations of accepted engineering
methods involving public safety.
D. Other enforcement. In addition to the Code Enforcement Officer, all
members of the Borough of Closter Police Department are hereby
designated as Assistant Code Enforcement Officers for purposes of the
enforcement of this chapter and as described in § 147-3B above.
112. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Uniform.
113. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 147-2 CLOSTER CODE § 147-3
145:360
§ 147-4. Approval; modifications.
Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the Code Official shall have the authority to
grant modifications for individual cases, provided the Code Official shall
first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of this chapter
impractical and the modification is in compliance with the intent and
purpose of this chapter and that such modification does not lessen health,
life and fire safety requirements.
§ 147-5. Unlawful acts; violations and penalties.
§ 147-6. Contents of notice. [Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No.
2009:1061]
The notice shall be in writing and served via hand delivery by the Code
Enforcement Officer or other Closter official designated by § 147-3D of this
chapter as Assistant Code Enforcement Officers. Alternatively, service shall
be by certified mail to the property owner or person(s) responsible. If, in the
judgment of the Property Maintenance Officer, the property is permanently
vacant, unoccupied or abandoned, said notice shall be posted on the front
door of the subject property and mailed via certified mail to the address
of the last known owner of record of the subject property on file with the
Borough. The notice shall contain the following:
E. Right of entry. The Code Official is authorized to enter the structure or
premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused
or not obtained, the Code Official is authorized to pursue recourse as
provided by law, including but not limited to seeking the execution of an
inspection search warrant by a Municipal Court Judge upon the
establishment of probable cause.
A. Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to
be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
B. Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of
violation or order served in accordance with § 147-6 shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be deemed a strict
liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the
person who shall violate this chapter, upon conviction, will be punished
as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties, of the Closter Code. Also, the Official can require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or of the order or direction made pursuant
thereto.
A. Such notice shall designate the building, structure or premises or
portion thereof in violation.
§ 147-3 POOLROOMS § 147-6
145:361
§ 147-7. Definitions and word usage.
B. Such notice shall contain a statement of the violations existing in the
building, structure or premises or portion thereof and the correction
thereof sought by the Enforcement Officer.
C. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days from
the date of service of the notice, in which the notice shall be complied
with and the violation abated, corrected or eliminated.
A. The following terms, wherever used herein or referred to in this
chapter, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A subordinate structure on
the same lot as the principal or main building or use.
BLIGHTING — A deteriorating influence or conditions affecting use and
value of real estate.
BUILDING — Any building, structure or part thereof, having a roof
supported by columns or walls, whether used for human habitation,
use or occupancy or unused, vacant, unoccupied or abandoned, and
includes any necessary buildings and appurtenances belonging thereto
or usually enjoyed therewith.
DETERIORATION — The condition or appearance of a building or a
part thereof characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
DONATION BIN — Any enclosed receptacle, container or other
depository made of metal, steel or a similar product and designed or
intended for the donation and the temporary storage of clothing or
other materials.[Added 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1113]
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises or any part of any
premises which may be lawfully viewed by the public or any member
thereof.
EXTERIOR OF PREMISES — Those portions of a building or a structure
which are exposed to public view or are visible from adjoining or
adjacent lots, including all outside surfaces and appurtenances thereto,
and the open land space of any premises outside of any building or
structure erected thereon.
IMMINENT DANGER — A condition that could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION — The presence on or within a premises of any insects,
rodents or other pests that present a safety hazard.
JUNKED VEHICLE — Any vehicle or trailer which is without a current
valid license plate and/or is unregistered as required by Title 39 of
the New Jersey statutes and/or is in a rusted, wrecked, discharged,
§ 147-6 CLOSTER CODE § 147-7
145:362
dismantled, partly dismantled, inoperative or abandoned conduit on.
The Code Enforcement Officer determines whether or not a vehicle
warrants this classification. Specifically exempt from the definition of a
"junked vehicle" are vehicles registered as historic vehicles.
LITTER or RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
NUISANCE —
OCCUPANT — Any individual living or sleeping in a building or having
possession of a space within a building.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a dwelling
or premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge
and consent of the owner.
OWNER — The owner or tenant of a single lot in the Borough of
Closter. For the purposes of this section, the term "owner" also means
the person or entity who files a summons and complaint in an action
to foreclose, and this person or entity shall be responsible for
maintenance and upkeep of vacant residential properties.[Amended
10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1106; 12-22-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1180]
Any public or private condition that would constitute a nuisance
according to the statutes, laws and regulations of the State of New
Jersey, its governmental agencies or the ordinances of the Borough
of Closter.
(1)
Any condition which may be detrimental to the health or safety
of all persons, whether on or inside a building, on the lands and
premises containing a building or in or upon an unoccupied lot.
This includes, but is not limited to, such conditions created by
abandoned, open or structurally unsound wells, shafts, towers,
basements, foundations or excavations; abandoned iceboxes,
refrigerators, motor vehicles or parts thereof; structurally unsound
buildings, structures or fences; lumber, trash, debris, rubbish,
refuse containers, construction material, tree stumps, dead or
dying trees, stones, appliances, furniture or household goods; or
sudden depressions or holes in the land.
(2)
Any physical condition potentially dangerous or hazardous to
human life or safety or tending to be detrimental to the health of
persons on or near or passing within the proximity of the premises
where said condition exists.
(3)
(4) Any condition which creates a fire hazard.
Any condition which is deemed unsightly by the Code Enforcement
Officer or other Closter official designated by § 147-3D of this
chapter as Assistant Code Enforcement Officers.
(5)
§ 147-7 POOLROOMS § 147-7
145:363
§ 147-8. Exterior property areas.
PODS — Portable on-site demand storage.[Added 10-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011:1106]
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the building or
structures thereof.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including
but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and parts thereof, solid market and
industrial wastes.
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — The request, directly or indirectly, for
money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of any kind
of value. Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or
employment of canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the
collection of money or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take
place whether or not the person making the solicitation receives any
contribution.[Added 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1113]
STORAGE CONTAINER — A receptacle or container that is less than
1,500 cubic feet, or any aggregate of that total (if multiple PODS), that
is suitable for the depositing of household furnishings, clothing and
similar materials for the purpose of storage of same by the owner on
a temporary basis when moving, construction or renovation is ongoing
by the owner on his/her lot in the Borough, PODS®, a registered
trademark, is included within this definition of a storage container,
which PODS or storage container must also be in good
condition.[Added 10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1106]
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction,
including but not limited to buildings, platforms, sheds, bins, shelters,
walls, fences and display racks and signs. Also defined as a combination
of materials to form a construction for use, occupancy or ornamentation
whether installed on, above or below the surface of land or water.
TRAILER — A structure standing on blocks, wheels, towed or hauled by
another vehicle and used for carrying materials, goods, objects or as a
temporary office.
B. Whenever, in describing or referring to any person, party, matter or
thing, any word importing the singular number or masculine gender is
used, the same shall be understood to include and apply to several
persons or parties as well as to one person, and to females as well as
males, and to bodies, corporations, associations or partnerships as well
as individuals, and to several matters and things as well as one matter
or thing. The word "shall" shall be applied retroactively as well as
prospectively.
A. Maintenance. The exterior of the premises shall be kept free of litter
(including, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, discarded,
windblown, deposited, dropped or strewn paper, wrappings, cardboard,
§ 147-7 CLOSTER CODE § 147-8
145:364
bottles, boxes and broken glass) and all nuisances and hazards to
tenants, occupants, pedestrians and other persons having access to the
premises and maintained in a sanitary condition. The word "hazards"
shall include, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Refuse.
(2) Dangerous loose and overhanging objects, including but not limited
to dead trees or tree limbs, accumulations of ice or any other
object, natural or man-made, which could threaten the health and
safety of persons if caused to fall or other similar dangerously loose
and overhanging objects which, by reason of their location above
ground level, constitute an actual hazard to persons or vehicles in
the vicinity thereof.
(3) Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, boilers, hot-water heaters,
television sets and other similar major appliances or any other
attractive nuisance.
B. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches. "Weeds" shall be
defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or
shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated
flowers and gardens.
C. Landscaping. Landscaping, hedges and bushes shall be kept from being
overgrown where exposed to public view and from becoming a blighting
factor for adjoining properties.
D. Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation.
E. Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained free
from any accumulation of rubbish, garbage or household goods and
shall be in a sanitary condition at all times.
F. Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water thereon, or within any structure located thereon, and to prevent
the runoff of drainage water upon bordering properties.
G. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including but not limited
to detached garages, fences, walls and stairways, shall be maintained
structurally sound, free from hazardous conditions and in good repair.
H. Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces, paved areas and similar areas shall be kept in a state of
good repair and maintained free from cracks and crevices, potholes and
other hazardous conditions.
I. Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, in good repair and free from hazardous conditions.
§ 147-8 POOLROOMS § 147-8
145:365
J. Waterways, brooks etc. All waterways, brooks, drainage ditches and
swales, to the extent that the same are located on or immediately
adjacent to the premises, shall be maintained in good condition, free of
debris, plantings or other obstructions.
K. Motor vehicles and trailers. No motor vehicle or trailer which is either
without a current inspection sticker; or without current license plates;
or without a currently valid New Jersey registration; or is classified as a
junked vehicle by the definition set forth in this chapter shall be parked,
kept or stored on any premises, and no motor vehicle shall at any time
be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being
stripped or dismantled unless such vehicle is kept within a garage or
automobile service station service bay. Exception: Specifically exempt
from the aforesaid are vehicle registered as historic vehicles, vehicles
at approved towing yards and vehicles being repaired at approved auto
body shops.
L. Residential parking. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor
vehicle on any portion of any premises except on driveways constructed
and installed in compliance with applicable Borough ordinances.
M. Trailers. No person shall park, stop or stand any trailer on any portion
of any premises at any time. Exception: Specifically exempt from the
aforesaid are trailers licensed or classified as "recreational."
N. Compost pile. Compost piles must be shielded from public view and
must be kept free from garbage, offensive odors and rodents.
O. Firewood. Firewood must be stored in the rear yard only.
P. Screening. All commercial areas, including nonconforming uses, for
which no site plan approval has been granted by the Borough Planning
Board shall be screened from adjacent noncommercial areas by means
of a fence, partition, screen, structure, wall, planting or similar device.
Any such fence, partition, screen, structure, wall, planting or similar
device shall be constructed or planted and maintained in compliance
with the ordinance or ordinances governing such structure or planting
in effect for the Borough of Closter.
Q. Outdoor lighting. [Added 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. 2006:977]
(1) The outdoor lighting provisions of the Property Maintenance Code
are intended to:
(a) Provide for and control lighting in outdoor public places where
public health, safety and welfare are potential concerns.
(b) Protect drivers and pedestrians from disabling glare or
nonvehicular light sources.
(c) Protect neighbors, wildlife, and the night sky from nuisance
glare and light trespass from improperly selected or poorly
aimed, placed, applied, maintained or shielded light sources.
§ 147-8 CLOSTER CODE § 147-8
145:366
§ 147-9. Exterior structure.
(d) Promote energy-efficient lighting design and operation.
(e) Protect and retain the intended character of the various
portions of the municipality.
(2) Control of nuisance and disabling glare (excessive brightness in the
field of view).
(a) All lighting shall be aimed, located, designed, fitted and
maintained so as not to present a hazard to drivers or
pedestrians by impairing their ability to safely traverse and so
as not to create a nuisance by projecting or reflecting
objectionable light onto a neighboring use or property.
(b) All lighting that is not fully cut off or fully shielded, where
specifically approved by the municipality, shall be so installed
and aimed so that it does not project its output into the
windows of neighboring residences, adjacent uses, past the
object being illuminated, skyward or onto a public roadway.
A. Exterior surfaces. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to
doors, door and window frames, roofs, cornices, porches, trim,
balconies and decks shall be maintained in good condition and free
from any hazards. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant
woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or
other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped
paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All surfaces shall be
maintained free from broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or
brick or other condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate
maintenance to the end that the property itself may be preserved,
safety hazard eliminated and adjoining properties and the
neighborhood protected from blighting influence. All reconstruction of
walls and siding shall be of standard quality and their appearance shall
commensurate with the character of the properties in the Zoning
district in which the premises is located, such that the materials used
will not be of a kind that, by their appearance under prevailing
appraisal practices and standards, will depreciate the value of
neighboring and adjoining premises.
B. Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and
loose or rotting materials and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
C. Roofs. All roofs shall be structurally sound, maintained free from safety
hazards and in good repair and shall not have defects, which may admit
rain, and roof drainage shall be adequate from causing dampness in the
walls or interior portion of the building.
§ 147-8 POOLROOMS § 147-9
145:367
§ 147-10. Interior structure.
D. Drainage. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in
good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
E. Decorative features. All cornices, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings
and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with
proper anchorage so not to constitute a nuisance or safety hazard.
F. Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions, including but not limited
to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings and exhaust ducts shall be
maintained in good repair and properly anchored so as to be kept in a
condition which shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In
the event that such overhang extensions are not properly maintained
with the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members,
be removed forthwith. If such overhang extensions are made of cloth,
plastic or of similar materials, said material shall be maintained in a
condition that shall not show evidence of excessive weathering,
discoloration, ripping, tearing or other holes. No overhang extension
shall be permitted to encroach on any streets, sidewalks or other parts
of the public domain.
G. Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck,
porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, free of safety hazards and in good
repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed
loads.
H. Chimneys. All chimneys, smoke stacks and similar appurtenances shall
be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
I. Storefronts. All storefronts shall be maintained in good repair and free
from safety hazards, and all surfaces thereof shall be painted, where
applicable, for purposes of preservation and appearance. In the event
repairs to the storefront are completed, such repairs shall be performed
with materials identical or compatible with the materials used in the
area not undergoing repair, to the end that the appearance of the
storefront shall be uniform and attractive and shall not constitute a
blighting factor depreciating adjoining properties.
J. Building street numbers. All residential and commercial building
numbers shall be visible from the road and maintained in good repair at
the cost and expense of the property owner or owners.
A. General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound, free from nuisances and
in a sanitary condition.
B. Windows. No storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be permitted
in window display areas unless said areas are first screened from the
public view by permanent rendering of the windows opaque to the
§ 147-9 CLOSTER CODE § 147-10
145:368
§ 147-11. Rubbish and garbage.
§ 147-12. Conditions of approval.
All conditions, stipulations and/or requirements of approval incorporated in
resolutions or other acts of the Borough of Closter or of any duly constituted
board or agency of the Borough shall be adhered to and shall be construed
to be continuing conditions of approval.
§ 147-13. Failure to comply; charges against property; lien.
[Amended 11-23-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1061]
In the event that any owner, tenant or person in possession fails to cut any
brush, hedges or other plant life or to cut or trim any tree or vegetation
after notice is given, as set forth in § 147-6, the same shall be cut or
trimmed under the direction and supervision of the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works, who shall certify the cost thereof to the
governing body. The governing body shall examine the certification of such
costs and, if found correct, shall cause the costs as shown thereon to be
charged against the affected property and to be assessed and levied as a
lien as allowed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.27. In the event that such costs
are deemed excessive, the governing body shall cause reasonable costs to
be charged against said property. The amount so charged shall forthwith
become a lien upon the affected property, the same to bear interest at the
same rate as other taxes and which shall be collected and enforced by the
same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 147-14. Penalties for violations.
Penalties and fines for violations of this chapter shall be as set forth in
Chapter 1, Article II of the Code of the Borough of Closter.
§ 147-15. Storage containers. [Added 10-12-2011 by Ord. No.
2011:1106]
public view. All such screening of interiors shall be maintained in a
clean and attractive manner and in a state of good repair.
A. Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises
shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
B. Disposal of rubbish or garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall
dispose of all rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing the aforementioned in approved containers.
A. General instructions.
(1) A single storage container of 1,500 cubic feet or any aggregate of
that total (if multiple containers) or less shall be permitted on any
lot in the Borough on a temporary basis as set forth hereafter.
§ 147-10 POOLROOMS § 147-15
145:369
Larger-size storage containers are prohibited in all residential
zones.
(2) It may be located in any yard area but no closer than five feet from
all interior property lines, and it shall not be located any closer
than 10 feet to any street line.
(3) The location of the temporary storage container on a corner
property shall not cause a sight obstruction at an intersection.
(4) A storage container(s) shall be permitted in accordance with this
section, but it shall only remain on the lot for a maximum of 30 days
from the date that the permit is issued.
(5) A storage container(s) with a valid permit issued pertaining to the
need for a storage container shall only remain on the lot for a
maximum of 90 days when there is a need for a storage container.
B. Permit requirements. Before any owner shall be permitted to place a
storage container(s) on the lot, an application to the Building
Department for a permit to do so shall be filed and approved. The
application shall identify the owner and/or the tenant, location, size and
the length of time that the storage container is requested.
(1) A storage container shall be permitted to remain for the following
length of time:
(a) Thirty days.
(b) Ninety days if a valid building permit was issued pertaining to
the need for a storage container.
(2) The owner may seek to keep the storage container for an additional
period of time by making a separate application for extension to the
Building Department with the understanding and acknowledgment
that any extension granted will not be further extended and
additional fees will be required unless extenuating circumstances
apply, such as a fire or natural disaster.
C. Fees. In addition to submitting the applications referred to above, each
application shall be accompanied with payment of a fee to the Borough
of $50 and in the case of an extension application, with payment of a fee
to the Borough of $100. The fees in question will cover the
administrative costs of the Borough, as well as any oversight to make
certain that the applicant performs in accordance with its application,
including but not limited to the removal of the container at the
expiration of the permit.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $200
or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day
that a violation exists shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.
§ 147-15 CLOSTER CODE § 147-16
145:370
§ 147-16. Charitable donation bins. [Added 2-8-2012 by Ord. No.
2012:1113]
A. Purpose. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 through 40:48-2.64, the
purpose of this section is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the placement and maintenance of clothing bins within
the Borough of Closter ("Borough"), as well as providing for a uniform
set of procedures for administering the issuance and revocation of all
permits issued by the Borough for the placement of clothing bins,
consistent with state law.
B. Permit required. Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the
contrary, no person shall place, use or employ a clothing bin for
solicitation purposes within the Borough without first obtaining a
permit, valid for a period of one year, from the Borough Construction
Official as hereinafter provided.
C. Application for permit; fee.
(1) Application for a permit to place and/or maintain a clothing bin
shall be made, in writing, to the Borough Construction Official prior
to placing and/or maintaining the clothing bin.
(2) The application shall contain the following information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association placing and/or maintaining such clothing bin;
(b) The name and address of the owner of the premises on which
the clothing bin is to be located, and the written consent of the
owner if the applicant is other than the owner;
(c) The location where the clothing bin would be situated, as
precisely as possible;
(d) A description, including dimensions of the proposed clothing
bin;
(e) The manner in which the person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association anticipates
any clothing or other donations collected via the clothing bin
would be used, sold or dispersed, and the method by which the
proceeds of collected donations would be allocated or spent;
and
(f) The schedule of pickups removing the articles from the
clothing bins, which can be no less often than once per week,
and the name and telephone number of the person to be
notified if the clothing bin is overflowing prior to the scheduled
date of pickup.
§ 147-16 POOLROOMS § 147-16
145:371
(3) The fee for such application for the permit to place and/or maintain
a clothing bin shall be $60.
(4) The permit shall expire one year (12 months) after the date of
issue.
(5) An expiring clothing bin permit may be renewed upon payment of
the renewal fee of $60 and by application to the Borough
Construction Official for renewal that shall include the following
information:
(a) The name, address and telephone number of the person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association placing and/or maintaining such clothing bin;
(b) The name and address of the owner of the premises on which
the clothing bin is to be located and the written consent of the
owner if the applicant is other than the owner, and, if the
applicant intends to move it, the new name and address of the
owner of the premises on which the clothing bin is to be
located and the written consent of the owner if the applicant is
other than the owner;
(c) The location where the clothing bin would be situated, as
precisely as possible, and, if the applicant intends to move it,
the new location where the clothing bin would be situated, as
precisely as possible;
(d) A description, including dimensions of the proposed clothing
bin;
(e) The manner in which the person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association has used,
sold or dispersed any clothing or other donations collected via
the clothing bin, the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations have been allocated or spent, and any changes the
person, firm, corporation, club or charitable organization,
institution or association anticipates it may make in these
processes during the period covered by the renewal; and
(f) The schedule of pickups removing the articles from the
clothing bins, which can be no less often than once per week,
and the name and telephone number of the person to be
notified if the clothing bin is overflowing prior to the scheduled
date of pickup.
D. Information to be displayed on bins; health or safety hazard; accessory
use; maintenance of bin area.
(1) The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously
displayed on the exterior of the clothing bin:
(a) The permit number and its date of expiration;
§ 147-16 CLOSTER CODE § 147-16
145:372
(b) The name and address of the registered person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association that owns the clothing bin and of any other entity
which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin;
(c) The telephone number of the person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association's bona fide
office and, if applicable, the telephone number of any other
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
(d) In cases when an entity other than the person who owns the
clothing bin may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and
easily understandable manner, indicating that clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be
shared, or given entirely to, an entity other than the person,
firm, corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association who owns the bin and identifying all such entities
which may share or profit from such donations; and
(e) A statement indicating the manner in which the person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association anticipates any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin would be used, sold or dispersed, and the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent.
(2) An application for a permit to place and/or maintain a clothing bin
shall not be granted and a permit may be revoked if the Borough
Construction Official determines that the placement of the bin
could constitute a health or safety hazard. Such hazards shall
include, but are not limited to, the placement of a clothing bin in
parking spaces, in any area that interferes with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, landscaping or required setbacks or within 100
yards of any place which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or
other flammable liquids or gases or is likely to or does attract
vermin or litter.
(3) Each clothing bin shall be accessory to an existing nonresidential
use.
(4) Each clothing bin and surrounding area shall be maintained in a
neat, clean and orderly condition. Failure to maintain the clothing
bin and surrounding area in a neat, clean and orderly condition
shall be cause for revocation of the permit granted hereunder.
E. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Building
Department and/or Borough Construction Official. All clothing bins
shall be subject to inspection by the Building Department or any duly
authorized representative of the Borough.
§ 147-16 POOLROOMS § 147-16
145:373
F. Receipt and investigation of complaints.
(1) The Building Department and/or Borough Construction Official
shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any complaints from
the public about a clothing bin.
(a) Whenever it appears that a person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association has engaged
in, or is engaging in, any act, omission or practice which
violates this section, the person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association who placed
and/or maintains the clothing bin shall be issued a warning,
stating that if the violation is not rectified or a hearing is not
requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at
the expense of the person, firm, corporation, club or charitable
organization, institution or association which placed the bin,
and any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be
sold at public auction or otherwise disposed of.
(b) In addition to any other means used to notify the person, firm,
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association which placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed
to the exterior of the bin itself.
(2) In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the Borough may seize the bin, remove it, or have it
removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell
at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the Borough.
G. Violations and penalties; remedies.
(1) Any person, firm, corporation, club or charitable organization,
institution or association violating any of the provisions of this
section and/or Section 2 of P.L. 2007, c. 209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61),
which results in the seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
(a) Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The
Borough Construction Official may bring this action in the
Municipal Court or Superior Court as a summary proceeding
under the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10
et seq., and any penalty monies collected shall be paid to the
Borough; and
(b) Deemed ineligible to place and maintain a clothing bin
pursuant to this section. A person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association disqualified
from placing and/or maintaining a clothing bin by violating the
provisions of this section may apply to the Borough
Construction Official to have eligibility of that person, firm,
§ 147-16 CLOSTER CODE § 147-16
145:374
§ 147-17. Bamboo. [Added 11-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1231]
corporation, club or charitable organization, institution or
association restored. The person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association may have its
eligibility restored if that person, firm, corporation, club or
charitable organization, institution or association has:
[1] Acted within the public interest; and
[2] Demonstrated a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of this section, and all other applicable laws and
regulations, or had no fraudulent intentions.
(2) In addition to any other penalties or remedies under this section,
any person, firm, corporation, club or charitable organization,
institution or association that violates any provision which results
in a threat to public health or safety shall be subject to all penalties
and remedies available under the Borough's police powers.
A. Purpose. This section is adopted to control the planting, cultivating or
growing of bamboo in the Borough of Closter, and to require barriers to
prevent the spread of existing bamboo into other areas of the Borough.
B. Regulation of planting, growing or cultivating of bamboo. Subject to
certain exemptions set forth in this section, no persons, or other
property owners or tenants, shall plant, cultivate, or cause to grow any
bamboo on any lot or parcel of ground in the Borough of Closter, subject
to the following exceptions:
(1) The root system of such bamboo plants is entirely contained within
an above-ground-level planter, barrel, or other vessel of such
design, material, and location as to entirely prevent the spread of
growth of the bamboo plants' root system beyond the container in
which it is planted; or
(2) The root system is contained within a properly constructed and
maintained barrier system.
(3) Whether planted or growing in a container, as described herein, all
bamboo plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no
part of the plant shall be closer than 10 feet from any property line
or right-of-way.
C. Exemptions. This section shall not apply to any land owner or possessor
who, prior to the effective date of this section, has planted or caused to
grow any bamboo on any property within the Borough limits unless the
Chief of Police or Construction Code Official or member of the Closter
Police Department determines, on his or her own or upon complaint
from any abutting or nearby property owner, that any portion of such
bamboo has been allowed to grow upon, extend roots across, or extend
branches, stalks or leaves over any public way or any private property
§ 147-16 POOLROOMS § 147-17
145:375
not owned by or in the possession of such land owner, tenant or any
possessor of said land.
D. Complaint notice; order for removal; compliance. Whenever a
complaint is received by the Borough regarding the encroachment of
any bamboo plant or root, or whenever the Borough on its own
observation and inspection determines that there is an encroachment of
bamboo plants or roots on to the property of another, the Borough,
through its delegated official, shall forward a notice of violation to the
alleged offending person, property owner, or other in possession of such
property (hereinafter the "violator"), which notice shall be substantially
as follows:
(1) The notice shall be mailed by certified mail, return receipt
requested, properly addressed and with sufficient postage, and also
by first-class mail. Notice by certified mail shall be deemed
complete on the date of personal delivery, or the date the certified
mail is marked refused or unclaimed or otherwise undeliverable by
the United States Post Office, when the first-class mail was not
returned.
(2) The notice shall specify the nature of the violation.
(3) The notice shall state that the violation must be corrected within 30
days from the date of the received or returned mailing.
(4) The notice shall state specifically what must be done by the violator
to correct the violation.
E. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person determined by any court of competent jurisdiction to
have violated this section shall be subject to pay a fine of not less
than $25 per day, nor more than $100 per day, for each day the
violation existed after the date for cure as set forth in the notice.
Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate
offense, for which an additional fine can be levied. The per-day fine
will be in addition to a penalty for failure to comply with this
section. This fine can be up to the maximum penalty set by the
State of New Jersey.
(2) If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the
aforesaid notice, the Borough is hereby authorized to remove or
have removed any encroaching bamboo and to take all reasonable
steps to eradicate the regrowth of the bamboo on the public rightsof-
way, including sidewalks, and to restore such land to its normal
condition, prior to such removal and eradication.
(3) The cost of the corrective action together with any civil penalties,
legal fees and other costs shall be recoverable from the violator or
other responsible party.
§ 147-17 CLOSTER CODE § 147-17
145:376
Chapter 151
RENTAL PROPERTY, SHORT-TERM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 147. Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 151-1. Short-term rental property prohibited uses.
§ 151-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISE or ADVERTISING — Any form of solicitation, promotion, and
communication for marketing, used to solicit, encourage, persuade or
manipulate viewers, readers or listeners into contracting for goods and/
or services in violation of this chapter, as same may be viewed through
various media including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, flyers,
handbills, pamphlets, commercials, radio, direct mail, internet websites,
or text or other electronic messages for the purpose of establishing
occupancies or uses of rental property, for consideration, which are
prohibited by this chapter.
CONSIDERATION — Soliciting, charging, demanding, receiving or
accepting any legally recognized form of consideration including a promise
or benefit, a quid-pro-quo, rent, fees, other form of payment, or thing of
value.
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure, or portion thereof, whether furnished or
unfurnished, which is occupied in whole or in part, or intended, arranged
or designed to be occupied, for sleeping, dwelling, cooking, gathering and/
or entertaining, as a residential occupancy, by one or more persons. This
definition includes an apartment, condominium, building, cooperative,
converted space, or portions thereof, that is offered to use, made available
for use, or is used for accommodations, lodging, cooking, sleeping,
A. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Borough
Code, it shall be unlawful for an owner, lessor, sublessor, any other
person(s) or entity(ies) with possessory or use right(s) in a dwelling
unit, their principals, partner or shareholders, or their agents,
employees, representatives and other person(s) or entity(ies), acting in
concert or a combination thereof, to receive or obtain actual or
anticipated consideration for soliciting, advertising, offering, and/or
permitting, allowing, or failing to discontinue the use or occupancy of
any dwelling unit, as defined herein, for a period of 30 days or less.
B. Nothing in this chapter will prevent formation of an otherwise lawful
occupancy of a dwelling unit for a rental period of more than 30 days.
§ 147-17 POOLROOMS § 151-2
145:377
gathering and/or entertaining of occupants and/or guest(s), for
consideration, for a period of 30 days or less.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Constitutes a family-type situation, involving
one or more persons living together that exhibit the kind of stability,
permanency and functional lifestyle equivalent to that of a traditional family
unit, as further described in the applicable reported and unreported
decisions of the New Jersey Superior Court.
OCCUPANT — Any individual using, inhabiting, living, gathering,
entertaining, being entertained as a guest, or sleeping in a dwelling unit,
or portion thereof, or having other permission or possessor right(s) within a
dwelling unit.
OWNER — Any person(s) or entity(ies), association, limited liability
company, corporation, or partnership, or any combination, who legally use,
possess, own, lease, sublease or license (including an operator, principal,
shareholder, director, agent, or employee, individual or collectively) that
has charge, care, control, or participates in the expenses and/or profit of a
dwelling unit pursuant to a written or unwritten agreement, rental, lease,
license, use, occupancy agreement or any other agreement.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
limited liability company, association, entity, and any person(s) and/or
entity(ies) acting in concert or any combination therewith.
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY — The use of a dwelling unit by an occupant(s).
§ 151-3. Permitted residential occupancy.
The residential occupancy of an otherwise lawful and lawfully occupied
dwelling unit for a period of 30 days or less by any person who is a member
of the housekeeping unit of the owner, without consideration, such as house
guests, is permitted.
§ 151-4. Advertising prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to advertise, solicit or promote by any means actions in
violation of this chapter.
§ 151-5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Upon the complaint of any resident, potential violations of the
provisions of this chapter shall be investigated by the Zoning Officer,
Construction Code Official, Fire Official, Code Enforcement Officer,
Health Department, other Sub-Code or Code Official, as their
jurisdiction may arise and shall be enforced as is deemed necessary by
those officials.
B. A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, a
nuisance per se, and is hereby further found and declared to be
offensive to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 151-2 CLOSTER CODE § 151-5
145:378
Chapter 160
SEWERS
C. Any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter, without
regard to intent or knowledge, shall be liable for the maximum civil
penalty, upon adjudicated violation or admission, of a fine not exceeding
$1,250. Each day of such violations shall be a new and separate
violation of this chapter.
D. The penalty imposed herein shall be in addition to any and all other
remedies that may accrue under any other law, including, but not
limited to, eviction proceedings and/or injunction, reasonable
attorney's fees or other fees and costs, in the Borough's Municipal
Court or the Superior Court of New Jersey in the vicinage of Bergen
County, or in such other court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, by
either summary disposition or by zoning or construction code municipal
proceeding.
§ 151-5 SEWERS § 151-5
160:379

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 11-14-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:365 (Ch. 82 of the 1967
Code)]
§ 160-1. Use of sanitary sewers.
The use of all sanitary sewers of the Borough of Closter shall be in
compliance with the rules and regulations enacted by the Bergen County
Utilities Authority.
§ 160-2. Adoption of user charge system and industrial cost
recovery system.
The Borough of Closter hereby adopts and enacts the user charge system
and industrial cost recovery system as contained in the rules and
regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority and authorizes their
immediate implementation by the appropriate municipal official, to be
designated by resolution of the governing body.
§ 160-3. Copies on file.
Not fewer than three (3) copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen
County Utilities Authority have been and are filed in the office of the Clerk
of the Borough of Closter and are available for public inspection during
normal business hours.
§ 160-4. Copies for sale.
Copies of the rules and regulations of the Bergen County Utilities Authority
can be obtained from the Bergen County Utilities Authority for the cost of
publication.
§ 160-5. Amendment to service agreement with county.
The Mayor and Clerk of the Borough of Closter shall be and they are
hereby authorized to act as signatories upon and to execute on behalf of
the Borough of Closter an amendment to the existing service agreement
with the Bergen County Utilities Authority which embodies the intent and
purpose of this article.
§ 160-1 SEWERS § 160-5
160:381

ARTICLE II
Discharge of Wastes
[Adopted 5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:667]
§ 160-6. Discharge of certain wastes prohibited.
No person shall, without the appropriate permit, discharge directly or
indirectly into the borough's public sanitary sewer system any wastes or
wastewater which contains any of the following:
A. Oil and grease. Oil and grease from nonresidential facilities in
concentrations or amounts violating applicable pretreatment standards
as defined by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
(hereafter "EPA") or the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection and Energy (hereafter "DEPE"); this includes:
(1) Petroleum-based hydrocarbons as determined by silica gel
absorption.
(2) Wastewater from retail, commercial and/or industrial facilities
containing floatable fats, wax, grease or oil.
(3) Total fats, wax, grease or oil containing concentration of more than
one hundred (100) mg/l, whether emulsified or not, or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between thirty-two degrees and one hundred fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (32º and 150º F.) [zero degrees and sixty-five degrees
Celsius (0º and 65º C.)] at the point of discharge into the sewer
system.
B. Explosive and/or flammable mixtures. Liquids, solids or gases which, by
reason of their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone
or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be
injurious in any other way to the sewer system or to the operation
thereof. Such materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline,
kerosene, naptha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones,
aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides,
hydrides and sulfides.
C. Noxious material. Noxious material and pollutants which, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are malodorous or capable of
creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or health or are present in
sufficient concentrations to prevent entry into the sewer system for its
maintenance and repair.
D. Improperly shredded garbage. Garbage that has not been ground or
comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be floating or
carried freely in suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing
in the sewer system, with no particle greater than one-half ( 1/2) inch in
any dimension. The discharge of any improperly shredded garbage is
prohibited; this prohibition does not apply to the use of garbage
§ 160-6 SEWERS § 160-6
160:383
§ 160-7. Interceptors required.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Health Officer, Building Subcode Official or Borough Engineer, they
disposal units in private dwellings whose only discharge is domestic
wastewater.
E. Radioactive wastes. Prohibited except in conformance with N.J.A.C.
7:28-11.2 (Disposal of radioactive materials-disposal by release into
sanitary sewerage systems).
F. Solid or viscous wastes. Solid or viscous wastes which will or may cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or otherwise interfere with the proper
operation of the sewer system. Prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to, grease, improperly shredded garbage, animal guts or
tissues, diseased human organs or tissue fluids, paunch manure, bones,
hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders,
sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings,
grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood,
plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of
fuel or lubricating oil and similar substances.
G. Excessive discharge. Wastewater at a flow rate that exceeds for any
time period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the
average daily flow rate of the nonresidential user during normal
operation or containing such concentrations or quantities of pollutants
that, in the judgment of the Superintendent of Public Works or Borough
Engineer, would cause a treatment upset, interference or loss of
treatment efficiency.
H. Toxic discharge. Waters and wastes containing objectionable or toxic
substances in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with the
other pollutants, to result in pass-through, to cause interference with
the sewer system or to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to
exceed standards promulgated by the EPA or the DEPE.
I. Stormwater. Discharge of stormwater, including surface and ground
water, from sump pumps and cellar drains into the sewer system from
any source.
J. Discolored materials. Wastes with a color higher than five hundred
(500) units as per platinum cobalt standard.
K. Corrosive wastes. Any waste which will cause corrosion or deterioration
to the sewer system; all wastes discharged to the sewer system must
not have pH value lower than five point five (5.5) or greater than nine
point five (9.5) standard units; prohibited materials include, but are not
limited to, concentrated acids, alkalis, sulfides, chloride and fluoride
compounds and substances which will react with water to form acidic
or alkaline products which have a pH value that does not fall within the
range stated herein.
§ 160-6 CLOSTER CODE § 160-7
160:384
are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease
in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved
by the Health Officer, Building Subcode Official or Borough Engineer and
shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection.
§ 160-8. Construction of interceptors.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials
capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They
shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily
removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and
watertight.
§ 160-9. Maintenance of interceptors.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained
by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times
and easily accessible for inspection.114
114. Editor's Note: Former § 160-10, Enforcement, § 160-11, More stringent provisions to apply,
and § 160-12, Violations and penalties, which immediately followed this section, were
renumbered 10-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:750 and are not included in Art. IV, Enforcement
and Penalties, as §§ 160-11, 160-12 and 160-13, respectively.
§ 160-7 SEWERS § 160-9
160:385

ARTICLE III
Connection to Borough Sanitary Sewer System
[Adopted 10-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:750]
§ 160-10. Written permit required.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any portion of the Borough of Closter's sanitary sewer
system without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works.
A. Application shall be made to the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works and the Borough Engineer upon a form provided by the
borough.
B. Upon issuance of the written permit, reasonable notice of the date and
time when the connection will be performed shall be given to the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works. The connection to
the Borough of Closter sanitary sewer system shall only be made upon
inspection by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works,
the Borough Engineer or their qualified representative.
C. The permit and inspection fee for connecting to the Borough of Closter
sanitary sewer system shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and
Deposits, which shall be paid to the Borough Clerk with a copy of the
application at the time the application is filed with the Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works.
D. All costs and expense incident to the connection shall be borne by the
owner of the property. The owner shall indemnify the Borough of
Closter from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by connection to the Borough of Closter sanitary sewer
system.
§ 160-10 SEWERS § 160-10
160:387

ARTICLE IV
Enforcement and Penalties
[Adopted 10-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:750]
§ 160-11. Enforcement.
The Borough Engineer, Health Officer, Construction Official and
Superintendent of Public Works shall be permitted to enter upon all
properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, sampling and testing
to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 160-12. More stringent provisions to apply.
Any effluent limitations and other requirements currently in effect or which
are adopted henceforth by the EPA, DEPE or any other governmental entity
having jurisdiction shall apply in any instance where they are more
stringent than those set forth in this article, and said law, regulation, code
or order shall supersede this article.
§ 160-13. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be served by
the Construction Code Official with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, no later than the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. If a violation is found to exist hereunder, the borough shall be entitled to
recoup any and all costs incurred by the borough for inspections and for
remedying damage to the sewer system directly attributable to the
violation.
C. Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in said notice described in Subsection A of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to one (1) or more of the following: a fine
not exceeding one thousand ($1,000.) dollars; imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ninety (90) days; or a period of community service not
exceeding ninety (90) days. Each day that such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
§ 160-11 SEWERS § 160-13
160:389
Chapter 162
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 162-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CART — A hand-drawn or propelled vehicle or wheeled container made of
metal, wood or otherwise, such as is generally provided by merchants for
the carting or carrying to automobiles or other places of merchandise or
foodstuffs.
PARKING YARD and PARKING PLACE — Any place which is open to the
public or to which the public is invited, whether maintained or operated
separately or in conjunction with any business or enterprise.
PERSON — Such term shall include a person of either sex or a corporation,
partnership, association or joint-stock company or societies and other
entities capable of being sued.
STREET or SIDEWALK — Such terms shall include any street, avenue, road,
alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert or crosswalk
and every class of road, square, place, municipal park, parking field or area,
parks or other places used by the general public and parking yard and
parking place.
§ 162-2. Leaving carts on streets or sidewalks prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or his or her agent or employee to leave
or to cause or permit or allow to be left any cart, either owned by him or her
or in his or her possession, custody or control, upon any street or sidewalk.
§ 162-3. Removal from property of owner.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a cart, as herein defined, from
the property of any food-dispensing establishment.
§ 162-4. Carts to be kept inside when business is closed.
At or before the close of business hours of any food establishment or
commercial establishment providing carts for the use of its customers
and patrons, the owner or operator of such food establishment or other
commercial establishment shall remove all carts from its parking yard or
parking place or the exterior of its premises and shall cause them to be
removed to the interior of the commercial establishment. Upon the failure
§ 160-13 CLOSTER CODE § 162-4
162:390
of any such owner or operator to so remove the carts to the interior of the
premises at the close of its daily business hours, said carts may be removed
by the borough in accordance with the provisions of § 162-5 and disposition
made thereof in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 162-5. Impoundment.
The borough shall remove or cause to be removed any cart found upon any
street or sidewalk and shall take the same or cause the same to be taken
to property or premises of the borough where the same shall be held until
redeemed or sold, as provided in this chapter.
§ 162-6. Notice of impoundment to owner.
Whenever the borough shall receive any cart containing identification of
ownership or right to possession, a notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to
such person, advising that such cart is held by the borough and advising the
amount necessary to redeem.
§ 162-7. Redemption.115
Any impounded cart may be redeemed by the owner thereof at any time
prior to the sale, dismantling, destruction or disposal thereof, and he or she
shall be entitled to receive such cart upon tendering the sum set forth in
Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits. In addition, the person seeking to redeem
shall pay the cost of advertising the sale thereof, if any. No cart shall be
delivered to a person seeking to redeem it unless proof establishing to the
satisfaction of the borough such person's ownership or right to possession
is submitted. Any delivery to a person apparently entitled thereto shall be
a good defense to the borough against any other person claiming to be
entitled thereto. The person to whom delivery ought to have been made may
recover the same with interest and costs from the person to whom the same
shall have been delivered.
§ 162-8. Sale of unredeemed carts.
Where any impounded cart remains in the custody of the borough for a
period of fifteen (15) days after impoundment and with respect to which no
person has presented to the borough proof establishing to its satisfaction
such person's ownership or right to possession, the Borough Clerk shall
give public notice in the official newspaper of the borough advising that at
a specified place and time, not less than five (5) days after such notice is
published, such cart shall be sold at public auction for the best price to be
obtained. A general description in such notice of the cart to be sold shall
be sufficient. Such sale shall be conducted by the Borough Clerk or by such
person as he or she may designate.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 162-4 SHOPPING CARTS § 162-9
162:391
§ 162-9. Disposition of unredeemed carts not sold.
In the event that any impounded cart shall remain unsold at public auction,
the borough may reoffer such cart for sale at a subsequent public auction
held pursuant to this chapter or it may dismantle, destroy or otherwise sell
or dispose of such cart. Any such sale or other disposition of such cart
pursuant to this chapter shall be without liability on the part of the borough
to the owner of such cart or other person lawfully entitled thereto or having
interest therein.
§ 162-10. Disposition of moneys.
Immediately after an impounded cart is redeemed, the borough shall pay
over to the Borough Treasurer the amount received for redemption costs
and expenses of the article redeemed, together with an itemized statement
thereof. Immediately after a sale or other disposition of such cart, the
Borough Clerk or person designated by him or her shall pay over to the
Borough Treasurer the proceeds of sale or other disposition of such cart,
with an itemized statement of the article sold, the price received and the
costs and expenses of sale, and the Borough Treasurer shall retain such
proceeds and credit them to the general fund.
§ 162-11. Violations and penalties.116
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code. This shall be in addition to any
fees for redemption of such property or costs of public sale chargeable to
an owner or person entitled to possession of such property as hereinbefore
provided.
Chapter 164
(RESERVED)
Chapter 167
SOIL MOVEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 162-9 CLOSTER CODE § 167-1
164:392
§ 167-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to prevent the unregulated and
uncontrolled relocation, filling, excavation and removal of soil by property
owners, developers and excavators which may result in conditions
detrimental to the public safety, health and general welfare substantially
hampering and deterring the efforts of the Borough to effectuate the
general purpose of municipal planning.
§ 167-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPER — Any person who, either directly or through an agent or
independent contractor, engages or intends to engage in land subdivision or
in the construction of one or more dwelling houses, business or industrial
buildings in any subdivision for the purpose of sale to or occupancy by
another person or persons.
EXCAVATOR — Any person who moves soil.
LOT — Any parcel of land or portion thereof, the boundary lines of which
can he ascertained by reference to the maps and records, or either, in the
office of the Tax Assessor of the Borough or in the office of the Bergen
County Clerk. For the purposes of this chapter, a lot shall also he deemed
to be any contiguous parcels of land under common ownership, which
ownership can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records, or
either, in the office of the Tax Assessor of the Borough or in the office of the
Bergen County Clerk.
MAJOR SOIL-MOVING PERMIT — Any soil-moving permit other than a
minor soil permit for the moving of soil within any period of 12 consecutive
months.
MINOR SOIL-MOVING WITH ENGINEERING REVIEW PERMIT — A permit
for the moving of more than 100 but less than 250 cubic yards of soil
within any 12 consecutive months, as required by § 167-4.1 of this chapter
and which is not submitted with or determined to affect an application
for subdivision or site plan approval, provided that the Construction Code
Official classifies the application as such pursuant to this chapter. If two
or more applications in any twelve-consecutive-month period require the
movement of soil in excess of 250 cubic yards in the aggregate, said
application shall be classified as a major soil moving application and shall
be required to comply with § 167-5 of this chapter, provided that the
Construction Code Official, in concert with the Borough Engineer, deems
such reclassification to be necessary.[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No.
2016:1213]
MINOR SOIL-MOVING PERMIT — A permit for the moving of more than
25 but less than 100 cubic yards of soil within any 12 consecutive months,
as required by § 167-4 of this chapter and which is not submitted with or
determined to affect an application for subdivision or site plan approval,
§ 167-1 (RESERVED) § 167-2
164:393
provided that the Construction Code Official classifies the minor soil-moving
application as such pursuant to § 167-4C. If two or more applications in
any twelve-consecutive-month period require the movement of soil in excess
of 100 cubic yards in the aggregate, said application shall be reclassified
as either a minor soil moving application with engineering review or a
major soil moving application. The reclassified application will be required
to comply with the requirements in the appropriate sections of this chapter,
provided that the Construction Code Official, in concert with the Borough
Engineer, deems such reclassification to be necessary.[Amended
9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1213]
MOVE — To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, place, fill, grade, regrade, level
or otherwise alter or change the location or contour or to transport or
to supply. This term shall not be construed to include plowing, spading,
cultivating, harrowing or discing of soil or any other operation usually and
ordinarily associated with the tilling of soil for agricultural or horticultural
purposes, landscaping and gardening by homeowners or agents of
homeowners, provided that it does not substantially alter existing drainage
patterns.
OWNER — Any person seized in fee simple of any lot or having such other
interest or estate therein as will permit exercise of effective possession
thereof or dominion thereover.
RETAINING WALL — A structure constructed and erected between lands of
different elevations to protect structures and/or prevent erosion.
SOIL — Any earth, sand, clay, loam, gravel, humus, rock or dirt, without
regard to the presence or absence therein of organic matter, including any
synthetic substance used as a substitute or in conjunction with soil.
SUITABLE FILL — The Planning Board Engineer shall determine whether
the fill is suitable or unsuitable to the particular location. Suitable materials
shall include but not be limited to materials such as earth, clay, gravel,
stone, dirt, etc.
TOPSOIL — Soil that, in its natural state, constitutes the top layer of earth
and is composed of 2% or more, by weight, of organic matter and has the
ability to support vegetation.
UNSUITABLE FILL — The Planning Board Engineer shall determine
whether the fill is suitable or unsuitable to the particular location.
Unsuitable materials are materials such as peat moss, organic material,
vegetation, leaves, tree stumps, wood chips, saw dust, chemical waste,
tires, wooden logs, etc.
§ 167-3. Soil-moving permit required.
No owner, developer or excavator shall move, cause, allow, permit or suffer
to be moved any soil in or upon any lot in the Borough until a soil-moving
permit therefor shall first have been issued in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. All applications for soil-moving permits shall be
made through the Municipal Construction Code Official's office.
§ 167-2 CLOSTER CODE § 167-4
164:394
§ 167-4. Application for minor soil-moving permit.
Application for a minor soil-moving permit does not require an appearance
before the Mayor and Council. The procedure for applying for and issuance
of a minor soil-moving permit shall be as follows:
A. Applications for minor soil permits shall be filed with the Construction
Code Official and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in § 167-6
of this chapter. Applications shall be made in triplicate on forms
prescribed by the Borough and supplied by the Construction Code
Official. In addition to any other requirements which the Borough,
acting through the Construction Code Official, may require on data
pertinent to the application, the application shall show the following:
(1) The identity and address of the applicant.
(2) The lot, block number and street address of the lot or lots involved.
(3) The identity and location of the owner of the property.
(4) The purpose or reason for the moving of soil.
(5) The estimated quantity, in cubic yards, of soil to be moved with
supporting calculations.
(6) A statement as to how the moving of the soil will affect all trees
with a diameter of six inches or more.
(7) The proposed date of completion of the work.
(8) The Construction Code Official may require the applicant to submit
an existing topographical map and proposed grading and drainage
plan and notification by certified mail to the abutting property
owners if the Building Inspector deems it necessary due to possible
drainage or erosion problems and to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the applicant, the property and the community.
B. The Construction Code Official, upon receipt of the application, shall
make a field investigation and shall issue the permit or deny it, giving
his reasons for denial.
C. The Construction Code Official will forward a copy of the permit to the
Planning Board and one copy to the applicant and shall retain one copy
on file. The Construction Code Official shall classify any minor soil
application as a major soil application if he finds the application should
be considered as part of a site plan or subdivision application, or that
the application will present unusual drainage or erosion problems or
that it will adversely affect the development of an abutting lot or lots.
D. Retaining walls shall not be greater than four feet in height. Retaining
walls that do not require major soil-moving permits and are under four
feet in height, or a series of stepped retaining walls totaling less than
four feet in height, shall be reviewed by the Construction Code Official
§ 167-4 (RESERVED) § 167-4
164:395
§ 167-4.1. Application for minor soil-moving with engineering
review permit. [Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1213]
§ 167-5. Application for major soil-moving permit.
The procedure for applying for the issuance of a major soil-moving permit
shall be as follows:
and the Building Subcode Official, without formal engineering design
calculations, and may be constructed with material such as railroad
ties or other material as approved by the Construction Code Official.
Retaining walls shall be set back from the property line a minimum
of one foot for every foot in wall height. If, in the opinion of the
Construction Code Official, any proposed retaining wall may cause
adverse conditions to the adjacent properties or has surcharge loadings
such as driveways, slopes, or other structures, the Construction Code
Official reserves the right to forward the application to the Planning
Board Engineer; in such a case, formal engineering design calculations
may be required for approval, and escrow fees shall apply as well as
the minor soil-moving fees as per Chapter A301. [Added 2-8-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012:1114]
A. Application for a minor soil-moving with engineering review permit
does not require an appearance before the Planning Board. The
requirements are the same as those listed in § 164-4, above, plus:
(1) A foundation location survey must be included with the application.
(2) The Borough Engineer shall review the as built and inspect the site.
(There is an engineering escrow of $250 required for the review
and inspection. See § A301-1E.)
A. On forms prescribed and supplied by the Planning Board, the applicant
shall set forth, in duplicate, to the Planning Board with copies to the
Planning Board Engineer and Municipal Construction Official's office
(note that, in total, the applicant must submit the original application
plus three copies to the Borough officials named herein):
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The names and addresses of the owners of the premises.
(3) If the soil moving application is submitted in conjunction with a
subdivision of six or more lots or for multifamily houses of 25 or
more units or for approval of a commercial development and the
applicant or owner is a corporation, the names and addresses of the
officers of the corporation, the Board of Directors and each and
every stockholder of record possessing greater than 10% interest
in the stock of the corporation.
(4) The relationship between the applicant and owners.
§ 167-4 CLOSTER CODE § 167-5
164:396
(5) The interest that the applicant has in the lands in question.
(6) The description of the lands in question, including lot and block
numbers of the lot or lots involved.
(7) The purpose or reason for moving the soil and whether it will be
done in connection with a proposed subdivision; and if so, the date
of filing the application for subdivision.
(8) A detailed statement of the method or process to be employed for
the excavation and proposed time period for removal.
(9) The kind and quantity in cubic yards of the soil to be removed.
(10) In case of removal or replacement of soil, the place to which the
soil is to be removed, and the place and quantity of soil to be
removed, in fill and excavation, and the transportation route to be
used within the Borough.
(11) The proposed date of completion of the work, including hours and
days of operation.
(12) The name and address of the excavator, contractor or the person
having express charge, supervision and control of the proposed
excavation work.
(13) The number, capacity, type and description of each piece of
equipment to be used in the operation and the number of
truckloads to be removed.
(14) The routes over which the material will be transported and the
method of traffic control.
(15) The method of abating noise and dust in the operation.
(16) The number of trees to be removed and a statement as to how the
moving of soil will affect all trees with a diameter of six inches or
more.
(17) The means of assuring lateral support and preventing erosion and
flooding.
(18) The submission of a soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(19) The means of protecting downstream properties from the effects of
the operation.
(20) A certificate that the applicant has placed or caused to be placed
stakes at each corner of the lot or lots from which soil is to be
removed and, further, that the applicant has placed or caused to be
placed grade stakes at the existing elevation points designated on
the topographical map pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
clearly marked to indicate the soil cuts or fills.
§ 167-5 (RESERVED) § 167-5
164:397
(21) In the event that the removal of said soil is in connection with the
development or subdivision, all of the information required under
the terms of the applicable Subdivision Ordinance of the Borough
of Closter.117
(22) Such other pertinent data as the Planning Board of the Borough of
Closter may hereinafter reasonably require.
(23) A foundation location survey must be included with the application.
[Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1213]
B. Signatures. Said application shall bear the signature of the applicant
and the endorsement of the owner or owners of said lands signifying
approval of the application, consent of the applicant to perform the
proposed work and consent to the Borough, in the event of failure of the
applicant to do so, to cause the proposed work to be completed or
otherwise terminated in keeping with the purposes and objectives of
this chapter.
C. Topographical map. Accompanying the application shall be eight prints
of a topographical map of the lot upon which the proposed soil-moving
operations are to be conducted and of all surrounding lands within 100
feet of the perimeter of said lot, prepared and certified by a licensed
professional engineer or land surveyor of the State of New Jersey, on a
scale of no less than one inch to 100 feet and referring to United States
Coast and Geodetic Survey data, showing both as to the lot and
surrounding lands:
(1) The dimensions of the lot, including distance and bearings and the
lot and block number of the lot, and of each lot in the surrounding
lands as shown on a Tax Assessment Map of the Borough.
(2) The existing elevations of all lands on a twenty-five-foot grid layout
or one-foot contour intervals as required by the Planning Board
Engineer.
(3) The existing elevations of all buildings, structures, streets and
bodies of water.
(4) Existing surface and subsurface drainage conditions and patterns.
(5) All wooded areas and all trees having a diameter of six inches or
more at the base.
(6) The limits of the area or areas within the lot or lots in question
within which the soil-moving operations are to be conducted, and
the existing elevations of said limits at intervals of not more than 25
feet or one-foot contour intervals as required by the Planning Board
Engineer.
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
§ 167-5 CLOSTER CODE § 167-5
164:398
(7) The proposed final elevations at each point where existing
elevations shown on said map are to be changed as a result of
completion of the proposed work.
(8) Proposed slopes and lateral supports at the limits of the area upon
completion of the soil-moving operations.
(9) Existing surface water drainage, channels of any streams, bodies of
water and watercourses, natural or artificial, including detailed
cross sections showing present and proposed channel widths; bank
slopes, grade and method of erosion control; proposed provisions
and facilities for surface water drainage which will result from the
proposed changes in elevations and contours due to the removal of
soil. This information may be provided on a separate map in the
form of a drainage study.
(10) Accurate cross sections showing the locations and quantities, in
cubic yards, of soil to be moved.
(11) All proposed elevations in enclosed rectangular boxes; and all
existing elevations to be indicated without any kind of enclosure.
(12) Such other pertinent data as the Planning Board may reasonably
require.
(13) All easements and restrictions of record which may affect the
subject lot or lots.
(14) If said moving application is in conjunction with the site plan or
subdivision plan, the developer shall submit a complete site plan or
preliminary subdivision plan according to the appropriate
Subdivision Ordinance.118
D. Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall not be greater than four feet in
height. Walls up to and including two feet in height can be approved by
the Construction Code Official without formal engineering design
calculations and may be constructed with material such as railroad ties
or other material as approved by the Construction Code Official. Walls
higher than two feet in height shall be designed by a professional
engineer and shall be of reinforced concrete or equivalent as approved
by the Planning Board Engineer. Retaining walls shall be set back from
the property line a minimum of one foot for every foot in wall height.
Wall plans, elevations and design computations shall be submitted to
the Planning Board Engineer for approval. Notice must be given to
neighboring property owners as outlined in Subsection F, below.
Subsequent to construction, the applicant’s engineer shall submit a
signed and sealed certification acceptable to the Construction Code
Official stating that the retaining wall(s) has/have been constructed in
accordance with the plans and applicable Code requirements and
standards. [Amended 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1114]
118. Editor's Note: See Ch. 172, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
§ 167-5 (RESERVED) § 167-5
164:399
E. Inspection of site.
(1) The Planning Board Engineer shall make an inspection of the site
from which soil is to be moved and shall make such engineering
studies as may be required to determine the effect of the movement
of soil as it relates to:
(a) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(b) Surface and subsurface water drainage.
(c) Soil fertility.
(d) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
(e) Public health and safety.
(f) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the
coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical development of
the Borough.
(2) The Planning Board Engineer shall also inspect the aforesaid site to
determine whether stakes have been placed on each corner thereof
and whether grade stakes have been placed at the existing points
designated on the topographical map pursuant to the provisions of
§ 167-5 hereof.
F. Hearing. The Planning Board shall fix a date for hearing within 45 days
after the receipt of the application and shall give to the applicant, either
personally or by certified mail, notice of the time and place of said
hearing. The applicant shall, at least five days prior to the date
appointed for said hearing, serve written notice in person or by
registered mail upon such persons as are shown on the municipal tax
records to be the owners of such lots within 200 feet of the property in
question. The applicant shall also, at least 10 days prior to the date
appointed for said hearing, place a legal advertisement in the official
newspaper of the Borough of Closter, setting forth its request for a soilmoving
permit, which notice shall include the name of the developer; a
description of the property by lot and block; the amount of soil to be
moved; the purpose for which the soil is to be moved; and the time, date
and place of said hearing. The applicant shall, at the hearing, present to
the Planning Board satisfactory proof, in affidavit form, of the service
and publication of said notices.
G. Factors to be considered in determining application. In considering the
application, the Planning Board shall be guided by the general purpose
of municipal planning and shall take into consideration the following
factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Surface and subsurface drainage conditions and patterns.
§ 167-5 CLOSTER CODE § 167-5
164:400
(3) Soil fertility and soil-bearing capacity.
(4) Lateral support of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Public health and safety.
(6) Land values and uses.
(7) The general welfare of the municipality and of the citizens of the
Borough of Closter.
(8) The unsightliness of the premises after soil movement.
(9) The effect of flooding upon the premises in question or surrounding
properties.
(10) Whether the proposed work will create a nuisance.
(11) Whether the proposed work is necessary in connection with the
development of residential property.
(12) The effect that the proposed movement of soil would have on
individual sanitary sewage disposal systems.
(13) The preservation of existing watercourses.
(14) The creation of sharp declivities, pits or depressions.
(15) Whether the proposed removal of soil constitutes a commercial
activity.
(16) Proposed complete site plan or preliminary subdivision plan.
(17) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted harmonious physical development of the Borough.
(18) Proposed soil and sedimentation control plan.
H. Decision. The Planning Board shall review and consider the completed
application, all of the requirements of the provisions of this chapter, the
material factors brought up in the report of the Planning Board
Engineer and the reports of other reviewing authorities of the Borough.
Thereafter, the Planning Board shall either grant or deny the issuance
of said soil permit. If the Planning Board denies the permit, the reason
for the denial shall be stated. The Planning Board may also issue a
permit with stipulations and conditions. The Planning Board shall act
within 45 days of the filing of a complete application. It shall be
considered an automatic approval of the issuance of said permit unless
the Planning Board extends the time limit for a period not to exceed an
additional 45 days.
I. Appeal. Any proper party may appeal to a court of appropriate
jurisdiction pursuant to applicable law. The Borough Council may, upon
its own initiative and not later than 30 days after the determination,
review any application for soil removal and decision by the Planning
§ 167-5 (RESERVED) § 167-5
164:401
§ 167-6. Soil moving and application fees.
§ 167-7. Performance bond.
Board or by the Construction Code Official. The Borough Council may,
by a majority vote of the members present, sustain or, by a 2/3 vote of
its entire membership, overrule the Planning Board Decision.
A. Soil application fee.
(1) Minor soil application fee: as set forth in Ch. A301, Fees and
Deposits.
(2) Major soil application fee: as set forth in Ch. A301, Fees and
Deposits.
(3) Soil application fee will not be refundable.
(4) An escrow deposit as set forth in Ch. A301, Fees and Deposits for a
major soil-moving application in order to conduct the required
Engineering Review. Additional escrow deposits may be required
as deemed necessary by the Planning Board or Planning Board
Engineer.
(5) An escrow deposit for a retaining wall may be required as deemed
necessary by the Planning Board Engineer.
B. Soil-moving fee. The soil-moving fee will be charged as set forth in Ch.
A301, Fees and Deposits.
C. Exemption from fees. All utility companies, federal, state and local
authorities, including the Board of Education and charitable
organizations, may be exempt from the requirements of soil application
fees and soil movement fees at the discretion of the Planning Board.
A. In the event that the Planning Board approves the soil-moving permit
application, the Secretary or Assistant Secretary of the Planning Board
shall forthwith give notice to the applicant of the action of the Planning
Board. If, in the discretion of the Planning Board, a performance bond is
required, the Secretary or Assistant Secretary shall also give notice of
the amount of the performance bond required as hereinafter set forth in
this section. In the event that the applicant fails to post the required
performance bond within 60 days of said notice, then the approval of
the Planning Board shall be automatically rescinded.
B. No major soil-moving permit shall be issued unless the applicant
therefor shall have posted with the Borough a performance bond in
form approved by the Attorney for the Planning Board and with surety
acceptable to the Borough in such amount as the Planning Board with
the assistance of the Planning Board Engineer shall determine,
conditioned upon full and faithful performance by the principal, within
the time specified in the application, of all the proposed work in
§ 167-5 CLOSTER CODE § 167-7
164:402
§ 167-8. Form, date and expiration of permit; hours of operation.
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of the soil-moving
permit issued pursuant hereto.
C. The amount of said bond shall be sufficient to cover the cost of property
restoration, to cover the cost of permanent soil erosion control if the
work is not satisfactorily completed by the applicant and to cover the
costs of Borough review and inspection. The bond amount shall be
estimated by the Planning Board Engineer and shall be confirmed at a
hearing of the Planning Board. The bond shall be as approved by the
Planning Board Attorney. The bond shall be presented to the Borough
Clerk before construction is started. The Planning Board may request
additional bonds for improvements shown on the soil-moving
application or plan, such as, but not limited to, the following: retaining
walls, planting, drainage, erosion, control damages to hauling route,
etc. In ascertaining the rate upon which to compute the amount of the
bond, the Planning Board shall take into consideration such factors as
may bear upon the facility with which the proposed work may be
performed, including, but not limited to, the type and character of soil;
the extent of the area over which the soil-moving operations are to be
conducted; the extent and depth of the various cuts and fills; the extent
to which the area of operations is wooded; the proximity of the
proposed operations to streets, buildings, structures, natural or
artificial streams or watercourses and general drainage conditions.
D. Before the holder of any soil-removal permit shall proceed before the
Planning Board Attorney with any application for any amendment or
alteration of the terms and conditions of any outstanding soil-removal
permit, there shall be submitted to the Planning Board the written
consent of the surety on said bond approving said application for
amendment or alteration and consenting to extension of the bond
coverage thereto.
E. Requests for the release of any bonds posted in accordance with the
terms of this section or the resolutions of the Planning Board shall be
accompanied by an affidavit, stating that the soil-moving operation has
been completed in accordance with the application and all plans, maps
and other data filed therewith and in accordance with all resolutions
and conditions therein adopted by the Planning Board. Said affidavit
shall be executed by a licensed professional or civil engineer or land
surveyor of the State of New Jersey.
A. The soil-moving permit shall be in such form as may be prescribed by
the Planning Board. A major soil permit shall be signed by the Secretary
of the Planning Board or the Chairman of the Planning Board, and it
shall contain any special conditions set forth in the recommendation. A
minor soil permit shall be signed by the Construction Code Officer.
B. The soil-moving permit shall be dated as of the date it is actually issued,
and the term of said permit shall not exceed one year.
§ 167-7 (RESERVED) § 167-8
164:403
§ 167-9. Prohibited acts.
No person to whom a soil-moving permit has been issued shall:
§ 167-10. Topsoil.
C. All permits shall automatically expire on the termination date, unless
application for renewal has been made and approved in writing,
extending such permit.
D. Hours of operation. There shall be no soil-moving operations which
include loading and unloading at any time between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., prevailing time, nor at any time on Sunday or legal holidays nor on
Saturday after the hour of 12:00 noon.
E. No soil permit shall be issued until it is determined that there are no
outstanding taxes or assessments for local improvements due or
delinquent on the property for which the application is made.
A. Conduct or maintain on the premises any sand, gravel or similar kind of
pit; any sand- or gravel-washing or -screening machinery or equipment;
any business or industry not permitted in the district in which said
premises are located and classified by the Closter Zoning Ordinance, as
amended and supplemented;119 or any endeavor or enterprise other
than the grading or regrading of said premises in accordance with the
provisions of said permit, and, where applicable, the necessary disposal
of soil incidental to said grading or regrading.
B. Conduct or maintain any soil-moving operations without having first
made adequate provisions by means of water, calcium chloride, or
otherwise, for the prevention of dust incidental to the use of vehicles,
machinery and equipment on the lands described in the soil permit.
C. Neglect to dispose of, on or before the completion date stated in the
application, any partially or wholly excavated boulders or other
noncombustible debris resulting from the soil-moving operations by
burial or removal and any partially or wholly excavated stumps felled or
uprooted trees or other combustible debris resulting from the soilmoving
operations.
D. Conduct any soil-moving operations beyond the expiration date as set
forth in the soil-removal permit or extended expiration date as may duly
be granted by the Planning Board.
A. Whenever any developer or excavator shall move topsoil in or upon any
lot, provision shall be made for the storage of said topsoil within the
boundary lines of said lot.
B. Except as hereinafter provided, all of the topsoil so stored shall be
uniformly replaced over the entire area or surface of the lot on or
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 167-8 CLOSTER CODE § 167-10
164:404
§ 167-11. Excavations more than six inches below final grade.
No developer or excavator shall, at any time in the course of the work, dig
or excavate more than six inches below the proposed final grades as shown
on the topographical map unless:
§ 167-12. Final grades.
No developer or excavator shall deposit soil upon, till in or raise the grade
of any lot without first making provision for:
before the completion date set forth in the soil permit, so that the final
grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance with the
proposed final grades shown on the topographical map.
C. No developer or excavator shall remove to any point beyond the
boundary lines of the lot any topsoil whatsoever unless and until topsoil
not inferior in quality to that to be removed shall first have been
replaced uniformly to a depth of not less than six inches, measured from
the proposed final grades as shown on the topographical map, over the
entire surface or area of the lot, excepting only such portions thereof as
shall be or shall have become, since the date of filing of said
topographical map, permanently covered by a building or structure,
street pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by
any body of water or waterway. In no event shall the developer or
excavator remove from the lot more topsoil than that comprising the
surplus or excess remaining after the replacement of the topsoil as
aforesaid.
A. The soil-moving permit specifies otherwise and the performance bond
hereinbefore referred to makes specific provisions for replacement, on
or before the completion date set forth in the soil-removal permit, of soil
of sufficient quantity and kind to restore the final grades to those shown
on the topographical map; or
B. After issuance of the soil-removal permit, the developer or excavator,
before digging or excavating below the approved level, shall apply to
the Planning Board and be granted an amendment of the application
and topographical map then in effect, which amendment may be
granted upon such terms as the Planning Board may deem necessary to
assure adherence to the purpose and objectives of this chapter.
A. The use in said work of soil or such other materials as will not result in
deviation from the proposed final grades or the uniformity thereof by
reason of abnormal shrinkage or settlement.
B. The collection and storage upon the lot of the original topsoil, to the end
that said topsoil shall not be buried beneath soil or other material of
inferior quality, and the uniform placement of the topsoil so stored over
the entire area or surface of the fill soil or other material, so that the
final grade or grades of said replaced topsoil shall be in accordance
§ 167-10 (RESERVED) § 167-12
164:405
§ 167-13. Exempt operations.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect or apply to any person
engaged in the moving of soil in and upon lands enrolled in the soil
conservation program of the Northeastern Jersey Soil Conservation District
of the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service
and for which lands and approved farm plan has been established by said
agency, provided that all soil-moving operations in and upon such lands are
performed in accordance with said approved farm plan.
§ 167-14. Authorized inspections.
For the purpose of administering and enforcing this chapter, any member
of the Planning Board, duly authorized agent of the office of the Planning
Board Engineer and Municipal Construction Official's office of the Borough
shall have the right to enter into and upon any lands in or upon which soilmoving
operations are being conducted to examine and inspect such lands.
§ 167-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code. Each and every
violation and nonconformance of the terms and provisions of this chapter or
each day that any provision of this chapter shall have been violated shall be
construed as a separate and distinct violation thereof.
with the proposed final grades shown on the topographical map. In the
event that such provision is not practicable, provision shall be made for
the uniform placement over the entire area or surface of the fill soil or
other material, excepting only such portions thereof as shall be or shall
have become permanently covered by a building or structure, street
pavement, curb, sidewalk, driveway or other paved area or by any body
of water or waterway, of a layer of topsoil not inferior in quality to that
of the original topsoil to a depth of not less than six inches, measured
from the proposed final grades as shown on the topographical map.
C. Seeding of the property or an approved alternative, which shall be
accomplished within one month after completion of the soil moving
operation, weather permitting, but in no event shall seeding of the
property or the approved alternative be accomplished more than six
months after completion. The applicant will maintain the seeded area
for a period of one year after completion.
§ 167-12 CLOSTER CODE § 167-15
164:406
Chapter 169
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 81.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 147.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 167-15 (RESERVED) § 167-15
164:407

ARTICLE I
Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse
§ 169-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue of coal or of any other fuel which has been consumed.
GARBAGE — All waste, animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter resulting
from the use and storage of food for human consumption, and including
spoiled food and food containers made of plastic, glass or other material.
GARDEN REFUSE — All grass clippings, weeds and leaves.
RUBBISH — All broken crockery, glassware, bric-a-brac, household utensils,
house sweepings, bottles and cans which are not food containers.
TRAILER — A vehicle that is towed by another vehicle or a large van that
is pulled by a truck or tractor, used especially for hauling freight.[Added
10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1105]
TRASH — All wooden boxes, crates, small branches, shrubbery, household
furnishings, household equipment and any other material which is not
constituted as garbage, rubbish and garden refuse, but excluding rocks, soil
and building and construction materials.
§ 169-2. Containers for storage required; separation of contents.
§ 169-3. Preparation of material for Borough collection.
A. The owner, lessee, agent, occupant or other person who manages or
controls any building, including a single-family dwelling, shall provide
and maintain not fewer than one container nor more than three
containers for the deposit of garbage, refuse and trash. The containers
shall be provided for the exclusive use of each building and shall be of
sufficient size and number to contain the waste accumulated in such
building. The containers shall be made of metal or plastic and
constructed so as to hold their contents without leakage. They shall be
provided with tight-fitting covers. No container shall be filled to a
height higher than three inches from the top nor weight more than 30
pounds when filled.
B. Said containers shall be of standard type, approximately 23 inches in
diameter and 30 inches in height, and are to be equipped with handles.
All containers shall be kept in a serviceable and sanitary condition at all
times.
A. Garbage. All garbage to be collected by the Borough shall be drained
free of water and stored in watertight, covered containers.
§ 169-1 (RESERVED) § 169-3
164:409
§ 169-4. Collection by borough.
§ 169-5. Placement of containers and bundles.
B. All brush and yard waste to be collected shall be collected and disposed
of in compliance with the provisions of Closter Code Chapter 170, §§
170-38 to 170-44. [Amended 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:950]
A. Collections of garbage from all residential premises and municipal
facilities in the Borough shall be made by the Department of Public
Works, in accordance with a schedule and regulations to be established
by the Department of Public Works and approved by the Mayor and
Council. The schedule established by the Department of Public Works
shall provide that garbage shall be collected two times each week.
B. Collection of ashes, garbage, rubbish, garden refuse and trash from all
properties not set forth in Subsections A, C and D, including but not
limited to retail, commercial, industrial and church premises, shall be
privately contracted for by the owner, lessee, agent, occupant or other
person who manages or controls said retail, commercial, industrial or
church premises at the cost and expense of said establishment. All
private scavengers must be licensed by the Board of Public Utilities and
must maintain all other licenses or permits required by any other state,
county or municipal governmental agency. Such collections shall not be
made by the Department of Public Works or any other municipal
department, board, agency or employee.
C. Collections of garbage from public schools shall be made by the
Department of Public Works on all regular collection days, except
holidays, in accordance with a schedule and regulations established by
the Department of Public Works and approved by the Mayor and
Council.
D. Collections of garden refuse, rubbish and trash from all residential
premises and municipal facilities shall be collected by the Department
of Public Works on the day designated by the Department of Public
Works and approved by the Mayor and Council. Such containers shall
not exceed one bushel in volume and shall not exceed 30 pounds each.
No more than 10 containers shall be collected on any one day.
Containers may not be bags, whether or not they are biodegradable.
E. In the case of heavy objects such as electrical appliances and large
items of household furnishings such as beds, chairs, mattresses and the
like, collections thereof shall be made at the curbside on those days
designated by the Mayor and Council.
A. Except as provided in § 169-4D and E, all containers and bundles shall
be placed for collection at the curbside of the property at the time of
collection. Note: Property owners with a permanent disability may
apply to the Department of Public Works for a waiver of the curbside
placement requirement. Collectors shall not be required to enter
§ 169-3 CLOSTER CODE § 169-5
164:410
§ 169-6. Building material debris.
The removal of debris and other building materials resulting from
construction of new buildings or alteration of existing buildings shall be
the responsibility of the contractor performing the work and the individual
homeowner. No such materials shall be collected by the Department of
Public Works, nor shall they be accepted from a resident at the transfer
station.
§ 169-7. Responsibility of landscapers and gardeners.
Any commercial landscaper, tree surgeon, arborist, gardener or
horticulturist performing services within the borough shall remove all
trimmings, branches, tree stumps, clippings and other waste materials
resulting from the services performed by them from the premises which
they service and will not be accepted by the borough at any time.
§ 169-8. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
dwellings, garages or other structures in order to make collections.
All such containers and bundles shall be placed at the curb before
7:00 a.m. on the day of the scheduled curbside collection and shall be
readily accessible by the collector without undue effort or hazard. The
collector shall return empty containers to their original location and
shall replace the covers. All residential garbage shall be containerized,
and no garbage shall be in bundles and left for collection.
B. All containers and bundles placed at curbside pursuant to § 169-4D and
E shall not be placed in the street and shall not be placed on the
sidewalk in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with pedestrian
passage. Such containers and bundles shall be placed at the curbside
after 6:00 p.m. on the day immediately before the scheduled curbside
collection. Such containers and bundles shall be placed at the curbside
prior to 7:00 a.m. on the day of the scheduled curbside collections to
guarantee pickup.
A. Bury or burn any garbage, trash, rubbish or garden refuse upon any
premises within the Borough of Closter.
B. Place any garbage, ashes, rubbish, trash or garden refuse upon any
other premises or upon any street or public place within the Borough of
Closter except as provided for in § 169-4D and E.
C. Permit or allow ashes, garbage, rubbish, trash, garden refuse or waste
materials to accumulate on his or her premises in quantities in excess of
200 pounds or in excess of one cubic yard.
§ 169-5 (RESERVED) § 169-9
164:411
§ 169-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 169-10. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article shall be by the Borough of Closter Police
Department, the Borough of Closter Department of Public Works and the
Borough of Closter Board of Health.
§ 169-9 CLOSTER CODE § 169-10
164:412
ARTICLE II
Transfer Station
§ 169-11. Definitions.
The definitions of § 169-1 of the Code of the Borough of Closter shall apply
to this article.
§ 169-12. Establishment and location.
There is hereby established a transfer station in the Borough of Closter
which shall be operated by the Department of Public Works in accordance
with a schedule and regulations approved by the Mayor and Council. The
location of the transfer station shall be determined by the Department of
Public Works and approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 169-13. Use and transfer station. [Amended 6-23-2010 by Ord. No.
2010:1069]
The Borough’s transfer station shall be closed as a dropoff point of trash,
rubbish and any items described in § 169-4 of the Code of the Borough of
Closter.
§ 169-14. Persons entitled to use transfer station.
A. The transfer station shall be available to any bona fide residents of the
Borough of Closter who have obtained from the Recycling Monitor a
sticker which must be displayed on the vehicle for which it is issued.
Residents failing to display said sticker shall be denied use of the
transfer station.
B. Retail, commercial, industrial or other institutional facility shall not
utilize the transfer station. No ashes, garbage, rubbish, garden refuse
or recycling material shall be deposited at the transfer station by any
retail, commercial, industrial or institutional facility. This paragraph
does not apply to houses of worship or schools. [Amended 10-12-2011
by Ord. No. 2011:1105]
C. No material transferred to or from the transfer station in any sort of
trailer is acceptable. [Amended 10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1105]
D. No commercial vehicles shall use the facilities of the transfer station
without express written consent of the Superintendent of Public Works.
E. Application.
(1) Residents of the Borough of Closter who wish to use the transfer
station must fill out an application and submit it to the Recycling
Monitor. The application shall set forth the following information:
(a) The name of the resident.
(b) The address.
§ 169-11 (RESERVED) § 169-14
164:413
§ 169-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 169-16. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this article shall be by the Borough of Closter Police
Department, the Borough of Closter Department of Public Works and the
Borough of Closter Board of Health.
(c) The phone number.
(d) (Reserved)120
(e) As to each vehicle:
[1] The license plate number.
[2] The make and model of the vehicle.
[3] The year of the vehicle.
[4] The color.
[5] Proof of residence and vehicle ownership must be supplied
with the application.
(2) The Recycling Monitor shall approve all applications which he or
she finds to be in order.
(3) Permit stickers shall be valid until December 31 of the year issued
and shall be available by December 1 of the year preceding the
permit year.
(4) Stickers will be distinguishable by different colors in each year;
color shall be designated by the Recycling Monitor. Each sticker
shall have a blank space wherein the Recycling Monitor shall write
the license plate number of the vehicle on which the sticker is to be
placed. Stickers are not transferable. Stickers shall be displayed on
the passenger side window as far to the rear of the vehicle as
possible.
120. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(1)(d), concerning names of all household licensed
drivers, was repealed 10-12-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1105.
§ 169-14 CLOSTER CODE § 169-16
164:414
ARTICLE III
Recycling
§ 169-17. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to comply with the mandatory, statewide
recycling program, L. 1987, c. 102, and the Clean Communities and
Recycling Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 et seq.121
§ 169-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms have the meaning indicated:
BULKY WHITE METAL GOODS — Large household appliances, including
but not limited to washing machines, stoves, refrigerators, clothes dryers or
dishwashers.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — The recyclable materials,
including newspaper, magazines, glass, aluminum cans, ferrous scrap,
leaves, white goods, steel and tin, grass, corrugated cardboard, highgrade
paper, mixed paper, plastic containers, and household-generated batteries.
DISPOSITION or DISPOSITION OF DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE
MATERIALS — The transportation, placement, reuse, sale, donation,
transfer or temporary storage for a period not exceeding six months of
designated recyclable material for all possible uses except for disposal as
solid waste.
DWELLING UNIT — Includes a one-family home and a two-family home.
MAGAZINE — Includes all magazines or periodicals printed on glossy stock
or paper of heavier quality than that commonly recognized as newsprint.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE STREAM — All residential, commercial and
institutional solid waste generated within the boundaries of the borough, as
measured in tons.
NEWSPAPERS — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly,
having printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements
and other matters of public interest.
PAPER — Includes all newspaper, high-grade office paper, fine paper, bond
paper, offset paper, xerographic paper, mimeo paper, duplicator paper and
related types of cellulosic material containing not more than 10% by weight
or volume of noncellulosic material such as laminates, binders, coatings or
saturants.
PAPER PRODUCT — Any paper items or commodities, including but not
limited to paper napkins, towels, corrugated and other cardboard,
construction material, toilet tissue, paper and related types of cellulosic
121. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 13:1E-92 to 13:1E-94 were repealed by L. 2002, c. 128, § 12,
effective 12-20-2002. See now N.J.S.A. § 13:1E-213 et seq.
§ 169-17 (RESERVED) § 169-18
164:415
products containing not more than 10% by weight or volume of
noncellulosic material such as laminates, binders, coatings or saturants.
PLASTIC CONTAINER — A container bearing markings No. 1 PETE or No.
2 HDPE.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become municipal solid waste, which may be collected, separated or
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products.
RECYCLABLE PAPER PRODUCT — Any paper product consisting of not less
than 50% secondary wastepaper material.
RECYCLABLE PAPERS — Any paper having a total weight consisting of not
less than 50% secondary wastepaper material.
RECYCLING — Any process by which materials which would otherwise
become solid waste or collected, separated or processed and returned to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or products.
RECYCLING CENTER — Any facility designed and operated solely for
receiving, storing, processing and transferring source-separated,
nonputrescible or source-separated commingled nonputrescible metal,
glass, paper, plastic containers, corrugated and other cardboard or other
recyclable materials approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER — A facility designed and operated
solely for receiving and storing of recyclable materials pending transporting
of a recycling center.
RECYCLING SERVICES — The services provided by persons engaged in
the business of recycling, including the collection, processing, storage,
purchase, sale or disposition, or any combination thereof, of recyclable
materials.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials,
including but not limited to paper, metal, glass, food waste, office paper and
plastic, which are kept separate and apart from residential, commercial and
institutional solid waste by the generator thereof for purposes of collection,
disposition and recycling.
§ 169-19. Closter Recycling Coordinator.
There is hereby created the position of Closter Recycling Coordinator.
§ 169-20. Designation of recyclable materials.
The following materials are designated as recyclable under the Closter
Mandatory Program:
A. Residential properties.
(1) Newspapers and magazines.
§ 169-18 CLOSTER CODE § 169-20
164:416
§ 169-21. Obligations of occupants.
(2) Glass beverage containers.
(3) Aluminum, steel and tin cans.
(4) Ferrous scrap.
(5) White goods.
(6) Leaves.
(7) Grass.
(8) Corrugated cardboard.
(9) Plastic containers as designated by the Recycling Coordinator.
(10) Household-generated batteries.
(11) Construction and demolition debris (concrete, brick, tree parts,
nonferrous/ferrous metal, asphalt, corrugated cardboard; where
practical). [Added 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1034]
(12) Mixed paper. [Added 3-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1034]
(13) Types 1 and 2 plastic containers. [Added 3-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009:1034]
B. Commercial properties.
(1) Corrugated cardboard.
(2) High-grade paper.
(3) Glass beverage containers.
(4) Ferrous scrap.
(5) White goods.
(6) Aluminum cans.
(7) Mixed paper.
(8) Construction and demolition debris.
(9) Types 1 and 2 plastic containers. [Added 3-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2009:1034]
A. Source separation.
(1) On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be mandatory
for all persons who are owners, lessees and occupants of property
in the Borough of Closter to separate their recyclable materials
designated in § 169-20 above from all other solid waste. In addition,
§ 169-20 (RESERVED) § 169-21
164:417
§ 169-22. Special arrangement for bulky white metal goods; tires.
glass shall be separated into three categories, brown, green and
clear.
(2) All source-separated recyclable generated by residential premises
shall be placed at the location designated in this section.
(3) The owners, lessees and occupants of commercial/institutional
premises shall be responsible for the pickup and disposal of all
source-separated recyclables through private channels and shall
comply with all reporting requirements of the State of New Jersey,
County of Bergen and Borough of Closter. In no event shall such
recyclable materials be left at the curb for pickup.
B. From September 1 to December 31 of each year, the owner, lessee or
occupant of every property within the borough shall source-separate
leaves from solid waste generated at that property. Leaves shall be
placed in the street at curbside in front of the property. Leaves may not
be placed in plastic bags.
C. Method of placement at curbside.
(1) All newspapers, magazines and corrugated cardboard will be
bundled securely to ensure that they will not be capable of being
windblown or distributed on the public street, and provided further
that the maximum weight of any bundle does not exceed 30 pounds.
(2) Glass, aluminum, metal cans and plastic containers shall be placed
at curbside in front of the property in a secure container.
D. The recyclable materials set forth in § 169-20A(1), (2), (3), (4), (6), (7),
(8) and (9) shall be placed by the owner, lessee or occupant at the curb
on the day established by the Mayor and Council for such pickups by
resolution for the district in which the premises are located; the
schedule for such pickups shall be in the form of a calendar setting
forth the dates for each specific pickup.
E. The recyclable material set forth in § 169-20A shall not be placed at the
curb earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the previous day established for pickup.
F. Recyclables, grass and leaves, may also be brought to the Closter
Recycling Collection Center between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00
p.m. Monday through Friday and 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on Saturday
in vehicles bearing a valid Closter recycling permit sticker.
A. The collection of bulky white metal goods and tires at curbside shall be
each Wednesday. These items shall only be picked up if a fee as set forth
in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, is paid in advance. A fee is charged
for the home pickup of bulky white goods, the home pickup of tire(s)
without a rim and for the drop off of tire(s) without a rim. Payment can
be mailed or dropped off to the Closter Department of Public Works,
§ 169-21 CLOSTER CODE § 169-22
164:418
§ 169-23. Collection.
Collection from curbside of recyclable materials shall be made by borough
employees or by contract for outside services, as directed by the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter, with primary administrative supervision
under the control of the Recycling Coordinator.
§ 169-24. Authority to sell.
The Recycling Coordinator may be authorized from time to time to sell and
deliver, by bid or by contract approved by the Mayor and Council, recyclable
materials so collected in order to obtain the best possible price.
§ 169-25. Private disposal of recyclable materials.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit any owner, lessee or
occupant from disposing of recyclable materials privately through a sale or
gift, provided that in no event shall such recyclable materials be left at the
curb for any private pickup, and further provided that in no event shall any
such recyclable materials be disposed of as part of the solid waste pickup
by the Borough of Closter in accordance with the normal pickup by the
Borough of Closter.
§ 169-26. Ownership after placement at curb.
From the time recyclable materials are placed at the curb by the owner,
lessee or occupant for collection by the Borough of Closter, such recyclable
materials shall become the property of the borough. It shall be a violation
of this article for any person unauthorized to collect or pick up or cause
to be collected or picked up any such recyclable materials for any purpose
whatsoever once the same has been placed at the curb. Any and each such
collection in violation hereof from one or more premises shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 169-27. Annual report.
The Recycling Coordinator shall annually submit a recycling tonnage report
to the New Jersey Office of Recycling.
§ 169-28. Notification of public.
130 Ruckman Road, Closter, New Jersey. Attention: Recycling Special
Arrangement. Bulky white metal goods and tires without rims can also
be dropped off at the Closter Recycling Center during operating hours
by a vehicle bearing a valid permit sticker. A fee as set forth in Chapter
A301, Fees and Deposits, must accompany the dropoff of tire(s) without
a rim. No fee is required for the dropoff of bulky white goods.
B. All payments shall be made by check and shall be made payable to the
Borough of Closter.
§ 169-22 (RESERVED) § 169-28
164:419
§ 169-29. Referral to Planning Board.
This article shall be referred to the Planning Board by the Borough of
Closter for a revision of the Master Plan in accordance with N.J.S.A.
13:1E-99.16, Subdivision c, specifically with regard to the collection,
disposition and recycling of designated recyclable materials within any
development proposal for the construction of 50 or more united of singlefamily
residential housing or 25 or more units of multifamily residential
housing and any commercial or industrial development proposal for the
utilization of 1,000 square feet of land. The Planning Board shall also
make recommendations to the Mayor and Council for amendments to the
Borough's Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance in
accordance with this section.
§ 169-30. Enforcement.
The Recycling Coordinator or his or her designee is hereby authorized and
directed to enforce this article. He or she is hereby authorized and directed
to establish and promulgate reasonable regulations as to the manner, days
and times for the collection of recyclable materials in accordance with
the terms hereof; said rules and regulations are subject to the change,
modification, repeal or amendment by majority vote of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 169-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provision of this article shall
be liable to a maximum penalty at the discretion of the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the Borough of Closter of not more than $300 for the
first offense, and not more than $500 or 10 days in jail for each and every
subsequent offense; except that a person violating § 169-25 of this article
A. The Recycling Coordinator, no later than December 6, 1987, shall notify
all persons owing, leasing or occupying property within the Borough of
Closter of the borough's recycling opportunities and the source
separate requirements of this article. This notice shall be done by
placing an advertisement in a newspaper circulating in the Borough of
Closter and by posting a notice in public places where public notices
are customarily posted by the borough and by a mailing to all
residential taxpayers.
B. Every six months after the initial notification, the Recycling Coordinator
shall notify all persons occupying residential, commercial and
institutional premises within the Borough of Closter of local recycling
opportunities and the course separation requirements of this article.
Said notification shall be done by placing an advertisement in a
newspaper circulating in the Borough of Closter and by posting a notice
in public places where public notices are customarily posted by the
borough.
§ 169-28 CLOSTER CODE § 169-31
164:420
shall be liable to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 169-31 (RESERVED) § 169-31
164:421
Chapter 170
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 71.
Sewers — See Ch. 160.
Solid waste — See Ch. 169.
§ 169-31 CLOSTER CODE § 169-31
164:422
ARTICLE I
Pet Waste
[Adopted 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:943]
§ 170-1. Title.
The title of this article is "Pet Waste."
§ 170-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of Closter, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 170-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 170-4. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 170-1 (RESERVED) § 170-5
164:423
§ 170-5. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 170-6. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department,
Health Officer and Animal Control Officer of the Borough of Closter.
§ 170-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200 per violation.
§ 170-8. Severability and when effective.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
§ 170-5 CLOSTER CODE § 170-8
164:424
ARTICLE II
Litter Control
[Adopted 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:944]
§ 170-9. Title.
The title of this article is "Litter Control."
§ 170-10. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Borough of Closter, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 170-11. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, saw milling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 170-12. Prohibited acts and regulated activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
B. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this article, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this article.
§ 170-9 (RESERVED) § 170-13
164:425
§ 170-13. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Health
Officer of the Borough of Closter.
§ 170-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a penalty of $200 for the first offense and thereafter
subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 170-15. Severability and when effective.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
§ 170-13 CLOSTER CODE § 170-15
164:426
ARTICLE III
Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:945]
§ 170-16. Title.
The title of the article is "Improper Disposal of Waste."
§ 170-17. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Borough of Closter, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 170-18. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Closter or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 170-19. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Borough of
Closter is prohibited. The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other
than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants
to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 170-20. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 170-16 (RESERVED) § 170-20
164:427
§ 170-21. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works and the Code Enforcement Official of the
Borough of Closter.
§ 170-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Equipment.
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use
for their intended purposes; and
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
(2) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 170-20 CLOSTER CODE § 170-23
164:428
§ 170-23. Severability and when effective.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
§ 170-23 (RESERVED) § 170-23
164:429

ARTICLE IV
Wildlife Feeding
[Adopted 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:946]
§ 170-24. Title.
The title of the article is "Wildlife Feeding."
§ 170-25. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the
Borough of Closter, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 170-26. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 170-27. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the Borough of Closter, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 170-28. Enforcement.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and the Health
Officer of the Borough of Closter.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease (written warning) the feeding immediately. The written warning
shall be kept on file with the Police Department, Department of Health
and Borough Clerk.
§ 170-24 (RESERVED) § 170-29
164:431
§ 170-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or 50 hours of community
service.
§ 170-30. Severability and when effective.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
§ 170-29 CLOSTER CODE § 170-30
164:432
ARTICLE V
Containerized Yard Waste
[Adopted 8-24-2005 by Ord. No 2005:947]
§ 170-31. Title.
The title of the article is "Containerized Yard Waste."
§ 170-32. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in the Borough of Closter, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 170-33. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 170-34. Prohibited conduct.
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless
the yard waste is containerized, in the street. If yard waste that is not
containerized is placed in the street, the party responsible for placement of
yard waste must remove the yard waste from the street or said party shall
be deemed in violation of this article. Landscapers and gardeners shall also
comply with the provisions of Closter Code, § 169-7.
§ 170-31 (RESERVED) § 170-35
164:433
§ 170-35. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department,
Health Officer and Superintendent of the Department of Public Works of the
Borough of Closter.
§ 170-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
§ 170-37. Severability and when effective.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
§ 170-35 CLOSTER CODE § 170-37
164:434
ARTICLE VI
Yard Waste Collection Program
[Adopted 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:948]
§ 170-38. Title.
The title of the article is "Yard Waste Collection Program."
§ 170-39. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Borough of Closter, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 170-40. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 170-41. Yard waste collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
article.
§ 170-38 (RESERVED) § 170-42
164:435
§ 170-42. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works for the Borough of
Closter.
§ 170-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
§ 170-44. Severability and when effective.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
§ 170-42 CLOSTER CODE § 170-44
164:436
ARTICLE VII
Illicit Connection
[Adopted 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:949]
§ 170-45. Title.
The title of the article is "Illicit Connection."
§ 170-46. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Closter, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
§ 170-47. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process wastewater
or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Closter unless that
discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than the Tier A
Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b) or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of Closter or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
§ 170-45 (RESERVED) § 170-47
164:437
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 170-48. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Borough of Closter any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 170-49. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works and the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Closter.
§ 170-50. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violations of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
§ 170-51. Severability and when effective.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
§ 170-47 CLOSTER CODE § 170-51
164:438
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
§ 170-51 (RESERVED) § 170-51
164:439

ARTICLE VIII
Outdoor Dumpsters and Refuse Containers
[Adopted 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1047]
§ 170-52. Covering required; prohibited acts; exceptions.
§ 170-53. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works and the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Closter.
§ 170-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
§ 170-55. Severability; repealer; when effective.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
A. It is hereby required that all outdoor dumpsters or other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater be covered at all
times.
B. It is prohibited for any person to have such uncovered dumpsters or
containers on their property, and it is further prohibited to allow the
spilling, dumping, leaking or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers.
C. Notwithstanding the above language, the following are excluded:
permitted temporary demolition containers, refuse containers at
industrial facilities authorized to discharge stormwater under a valid
NJPDES permit, litter receptacles, individual homeowner trash and
recycling containers and containers that hold large, bulky items (e.g.,
furniture, bound carpet and padding).
§ 170-52 (RESERVED) § 170-55
164:441

ARTICLE IX
Private Storm Drains
[Adopted 7-8-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1047]
§ 170-56. Retrofitting required for certain existing storm drain
inlets.
All existing storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving,
repairing (excluding repair of individual potholes), reconstruction,
resurfacing (including topcoating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a
thin base of hot bitumen) or alterations of facilities on property not owned
or operated by the municipality (except individual single-family homes) shall
be retrofitted to meet current NJDEP guidelines for the size of inlet casting
and curb piece openings as required by the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit (NJDES permit, rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A).
§ 170-57. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works and the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Closter.
§ 170-58. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
§ 170-59. Severability; repealer; when effective.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
§ 170-56 (RESERVED) § 170-59
164:443
Chapter 170A
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 35.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 108.
Soil movement — See Ch. 167.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 170.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 171.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 173.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
§ 170A-1. Scope; purpose; applicability; compatibility with other
requirements.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural best management practices
(BMPs). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
the nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential
pollutants. Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary
to achieve the established performance standards for water quality,
quantity, and groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 170A-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Closter.
§ 170-59 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-1
164:444
§ 170A-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
(1) Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans
pursuant to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of
development approvals under the subdivision and site plan review
process and do not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance. In their
interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul
any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision
of law, except that where any provision of this chapter imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the more restrictive
provisions or higher standards shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 170A-1 (RESERVED) § 170A-2
164:445
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels;
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure; any mining
excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to definfiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land or increased impervious surface of 1/
4 acre or more. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the placement of
impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or the
clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
§ 170A-2 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-2
164:446
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Borough of Closter, or political subdivision of this state subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities or
conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
§ 170A-2 (RESERVED) § 170A-2
164:447
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface water or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 170A-3. Design and performance standards for stormwater
management measures.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 170A-2 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-3
164:448
§ 170A-4. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major
Development.
§ 170A-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 170A-11.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlenbergii; (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of § 170A-4F and G:
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of § 170A-4F and G may be obtained for the enlargement
of an existing public roadway or railroad or the construction or
enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided that the following
conditions are met:
§ 170A-3 (RESERVED) § 170A-4
164:449
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternative analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of § 170A-4F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of § 170A-4F and G, existing structures currently in use, such as
homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
§ 170A-4F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in § 170A-4F and
G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at this § 170A-4E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading;
§ 170A-4 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-4
164:450
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy § 170A-4E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under § 170A-4E(2)(i)[2] above shall
comply with the following standard to control passage of solid and
floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this
subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris,
trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For
exemptions to this standard, see § 170A-4E(3)(c) below.
(a) Grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches
§ 170A-4 (RESERVED) § 170A-4
164:451
or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches or be no greater than
two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in § 170A-4G(1) are conveyed through any device
(e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment
device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed, at a
minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in § 170A-4G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 170A-4 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-4
164:452
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in § 170A-4F and G
shall meet one of the following requirements:
(a) Be dedicated to a government agency as approved by the
appropriate reviewing agency; or
(b) Subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the
appropriate County Clerk's office; or
(c) Subjected to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 170A-8 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 170A-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
§ 170A-4 (RESERVED) § 170A-4
164:453
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading.
"High pollutant loading areas" are areas in industrial
and commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan; and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 170A-5, complete one of
the following:
§ 170A-4 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-4
164:454
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 170A-2 shall be submitted to
the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval
in accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
§ 170A-4 (RESERVED) § 170A-4
164:455
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under an NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1
Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 170A-8 or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in § 170A-8. TSS reduction
§ 170A-4 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-4
164:456
shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in
Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of
both BMPs.
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP.
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP.
Table 2
TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 170A-6C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
§ 170A-4 (RESERVED) § 170A-4
164:457
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in § 170A-4F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 170A-8.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
§ 170A-4 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-4
164:458
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to § 170A-4G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
§ 170A-4 (RESERVED) § 170A-4
164:459
§ 170A-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at § 170A-5A(1)(a) and the Rational Method
and Modified Rational Method at § 170A-5A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
§ 170A-4 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-5
164:460
§ 170A-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
§ 170A-5 (RESERVED) § 170A-6
164:461
§ 170A-7. Nonstructural stormwater strategies.
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of
the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the
water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of
the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 170A-9D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 170A-9.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 170A-4 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 170A-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Strategies.
(1) Buffers. Buffer areas are required along all lot and street lines
separating residential uses from arterial and collector streets,
separating a nonresidential use from either a residential use or
residential zoning district line, and along all street lines where
loading and storage areas can be seen from the street. The buffer
area shall use native vegetation, which requires less fertilization
and watering than nonnative species. Buffer areas may be used for
stormwater management by disconnecting impervious surfaces
and treating runoff from these impervious surfaces. Preservation of
natural wood tracts and limiting land disturbance for new
construction shall be incorporated where practical.
§ 170A-6 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-7
164:462
(2) Curbs and gutters. Curb cuts or flush curbs with curb stops are
encouraged where practical to allow vegetated swales to be used
for stormwater conveyance and to allow for the disconnection of
impervious areas where practical.
(3) Drainage systems. An existing ordinance may require that all
streets be provided with inlets and pipes where the same are
necessary for proper drainage. The use of natural vegetated swales
in lieu of inlets and pipes is encouraged where practical.
(4) Driveways and accessways. The use of pervious paving materials to
minimize stormwater runoff and promote groundwater recharge
should be considered for driveways and accessways where
practical. Consideration should be given for subsurface soil
conditions. The use of crowned driveways is also encouraged to
promote disconnectivity between impervious surfaces and allow
grass areas to promote groundwater recharge.
(5) Natural features. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, swamps,
hilltops, and views, are to be preserved whenever possible, and
that care be taken to preserve selected trees to enhance soil
stability and landscape treatment of the area. In addition, forested
areas shall be maintained to ensure that leaf litter and other
beneficial aspects of the forest are maintained in addition to the
trees.
(6) Nonconforming uses, structures or lots. The existing ordinance
may allow an applicant/owner of an existing use to propose
additions or alterations that exceed the permitted building and/or
lot coverage percentages. The applicant should mitigate the impact
of the additional impervious surfaces unless the stormwater
management plan for the development provided for these increases
in impervious surfaces. This mitigation effort must address water
quality, flooding and groundwater recharge.
(7) Off-site and off-tract improvements. Any off-site and off-tract
stormwater management and drainage improvements shall
conform to the "Design and Performance Standards" described
herein and in the Borough Code.
(8) Off-street parking and loading. Where practical, parking lots with
more than 10 spaces and all loading areas should allow for flush
curb with curb stop or curbing with curb cuts to encourage
developers to allow for the discharge of impervious areas into
landscaped areas for stormwater management. The use of natural
vegetated swales for the water quality design storm, with overflow
for larger storm events into storm sewers, should be utilized where
practical. A developer may demonstrate that fewer spaces would be
required, provided that area is set aside for additional spaces if
necessary. Pervious paving could be provided for overflow parking
areas.
§ 170A-7 (RESERVED) § 170A-7
164:463
§ 170A-8. Sources for technical guidance.
(9) Performance standards. Pollution source control must be evaluated
in order to prohibit materials or wastes from being deposited upon
a lot in such form or manner that they can be transferred off the lot,
directly or indirectly, by natural forces such as precipitation,
evaporation or wind. Materials and wastes that might create a
pollutant or a hazard shall be enclosed with appropriate measures/
devices.
(10) Shade trees. The existing ordinance requires shade trees to be
planted along the street on which the building fronts. In addition to
this section, the Borough may have a Tree Preservation Ordinance
that restricts and otherwise controls the removal of mature trees
throughout the Borough.122 This chapter should recognize that the
preservation of mature trees and forested areas must be
considered in the management of environmental resources,
particularly watershed management, air quality, and ambient
heating and cooling. A critical disturbance area that extends
beyond the driveway and building footprint where clearing of trees
cannot occur shall be depicted on the plan minimizing land
disturbance. Identification of forested areas and the percentage of
wooded areas be protected from disturbance shall also be
provided.
(11) Sidewalks. Sidewalks should be designed to discharge stormwater
to neighboring lawns where feasible to disconnect these
impervious surfaces or use permeable paving materials where
appropriate.
(12) Soil erosion and sediment control. The applicant shall comply with
the New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Standards and/
or the Borough's Soil Movement Ordinance123 as applicable and
should incorporate procedures to retain and protect natural
vegetation; minimize and retain water runoff to facilitate
groundwater recharge; and install diversions, sediment basins, and
similar required structures prior to any on-site grading or
disturbance.
B. Further guidance on the implementation of these strategies can be
found in the NJDEP Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
April 2004, as amended.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 181, Tree Preservation and Removal.
123. Editor's Note: See Ch. 167, Soil Movement.
§ 170A-7 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-8
164:464
§ 170A-9. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin. The
provisions of this section do not preempt more stringent municipal or
county safety requirements for new or existing stormwater
management basins. Municipal and county stormwater management
plans and ordinances may, pursuant to their authority, require existing
stormwater management basins to be retrofitted to meet one or more of
the safety standards in § 170A-9B(1), (2) and (3) for trash racks,
overflow grates, and escape provisions at outlet structures.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
§ 170A-8 (RESERVED) § 170A-9
164:465
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per foot
squared.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per foot
squared.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
§ 170A-9C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four feet to six feet
in width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet
below the permanent water surface, and the second step shall
be located one foot to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
§ 170A-9 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-9
164:466
§ 170A-10. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
surface. See § 170A-9D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
§ 170A-9 (RESERVED) § 170A-10
164:467
plan at § 170-10C below as part of the submission of the applicant's
application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
(3) The applicant shall submit four copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
§ 170-10C of this chapter.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning Board and/or Zoning
Board (as appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements
have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards
set forth in this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the Topographic Base Map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals two
hundred feet or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The
map, as appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface
water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils,
perennial or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the
Category One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their
appropriate buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious
or vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads,
bearing and distances of property lines, and significant natural and
man-made features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the scale of
the Topographical Base Map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
§ 170A-10 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-10
164:468
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 170A-3
through 170A-7 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
Topographic Base Map, shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions, with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 170A-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 170A-11.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in § 170A-10C(1) through (6) of this chapter
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
§ 170A-10 (RESERVED) § 170A-10
164:469
§ 170A-11. Maintenance and repair; performance guarantee.
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 170A-1C of this chapter
shall comply with the requirements of § 170A-11B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall include the following:
(a) Contain specific preventative maintenance tasks and schedules
and the name, address, and telephone number of the person or
persons responsible for preventative and corrective
maintenance (including replacement).
(b) Maintenance guidelines for stormwater management
measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best
Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a
public agency or homeowners' association) as having the
responsibility for maintenance, the plan shall include
documentation of such person's agreement to assume this
responsibility or of the developer's obligation to dedicate a
stormwater management facility to such person under an
applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 170A-11B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on § 170A-11B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
§ 170A-10 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-11
164:470
§ 170A-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to the following penalties: a fine not to exceed $500 per day for the
first offense and a fine not to exceed $1,000 per day with the possibility of
imprisonment for the second and subsequent offenses.
Chapter 171
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 170A-11B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 170A-11B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year. Any adjustments to the
management plan or deed shall require notification and approval
from the applicable board prior to the filing of a revised deed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
§ 170A-11B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by § 170A-11B(6) and (7) above.
(9) The requirements of § 170A-11B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 170A-11 (RESERVED) § 170A-12
164:471
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 59.
Driveways — See Ch. 92.
Newsracks — See Ch. 132.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 141.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 173.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 183.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 170A-12 CLOSTER CODE § 170A-12
164:472
ARTICLE I
Obstructions
[Adopted 11-22-1967 by Ord. No. 1967:179 as Art. III of Ch. 91 of
the 1967 Code]
§ 171-1. Prohibited acts. [Amended 9-11-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:722]
§ 171-2. Keeping sidewalks safe and passable required. [Amended
7-28-1976 by Ord. No. 1976:287]
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, sump
pump discharge, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process waters to any public sanitary sewer. [Amended
4-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1090; 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2015:1189]
B. No person shall throw, put or place or cause or permit to be thrown, put
or placed into, upon or within any public street, road or place in the
borough any substance, matter or thing whatsoever whereby the safe,
free or unobstructed use of the same by the public may be in any wise
impeded or interfered with or whereby the same may be rendered
unsightly in appearance, and no person shall put on, deposit or leave
any rubbish, refuse or other materials in or upon any of the sidewalks or
gutters of public streets, roads or places within the borough.
C. No person shall connect or allow to be connected into any sanitary
sewer located within the Borough of Closter any drain or leader
designated to collect ground or surface waters. [Added 6-24-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015:1189]
D. No sump pump shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system of the
Borough. [Added 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1189]
A. All owners or occupants of stores or other places of business or of
dwelling houses in the borough shall keep the sidewalks in front of their
premises occupied by them at all times in a safe, passable and orderly
condition.
B. No person or persons, whether as owner or occupant of a store, retail
establishment or any other place of business in the Borough of Closter,
shall sell or be allowed to sell or display for sale any wares,
merchandise or any articles whatsoever for sale on the sidewalks,
whether or not in front of an existing place of business.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section of this Article, the Mayor
and Council may by resolution permit the use of sidewalks for sale days
upon request by a merchant.
§ 171-1 (RESERVED) § 171-3
164:473
§ 171-3. Animals in streets prohibited.
No person shall permit any cattle, horses, sheep, goats or any other animal
or animals belonging to him or her to run at large in any street, road or
public place in the borough or tie or tether any such animal in any street,
road or public place or upon any unenclosed lot adjacent thereto in such a
manner as to allow such animal to obstruct or impede free passage through
such public road, street or place.
§ 171-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663; 8-24-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:950; 6-24-2015 by Ord. No.
2015:1189]
A. Any homeowner or property owner who is found to be in violation of the
provisions of this article shall have the opportunity to correct the
violation without penalty provided the violation is corrected within two
months of the date of notice of violation.
B. For any violations that remain unabated after two months, there shall
be a minimum fine of $500 for each violation of the provisions of this
article. Each violation and each day a violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate violation and shall be
punishable as such.
§ 171-3 CLOSTER CODE § 171-4
164:474
ARTICLE II
Advertisements and Utility Poles
[Adopted 11-22-1967 by Ord. No. 1967:179 as Art. IV of Ch. 91 of
the 1967 Code]
§ 171-5. Erection and maintenance of utility poles; permit required.
No person or corporation shall erect, place or maintain poles for the use
of telephone, telegraph or any other purpose whatsoever upon the streets
of said borough, except with the permission and under the direction of the
Mayor and Council.
§ 171-6. Issuance of permits.
Any person, persons or corporation desiring a permit for any of the
purposes specified in §§ 171-5 and 171-6 shall apply to the Mayor and
Council of said borough, and upon the order of the Mayor, the Clerk of the
Borough shall issue a permit to excavate according to the terms and rules
hereinafter specified.
§ 171-7. Report on permits at Council meetings.
The Mayor shall, at every regular meeting of the Council, make a report on
permits applied for, issued or rejected.
§ 171-8. Restoration guaranty deposit. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 1993:663]
To insure the prompt restoration of the streets or sidewalks to their original
condition where permits have been granted to dig up the same, the persons
or corporations, before receiving such permits, shall deposit with the
Borough Clerk a sum as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits,
for an excavation 50 feet or less in length and for a longer or larger
excavation such sum as, in the judgment of said Mayor and Council, may
be deemed necessary, said deposit to be held by the Borough Clerk as
a guaranty that said streets or sidewalks shall be restored to a proper
and satisfactory condition and also for compliance with all the terms and
conditions specified in said permit.
§ 171-9. Excavation methods.
All excavations made must be properly protected so as to allow safe passage
along all streets in which the same are made and must be properly lighted
during nighttime, and all surplus material must be properly removed.
§ 171-10. Restoration of streets; failure to comply; borough
prerogative. [Amended 10-13-1971 by Ord. No. 1971:226; 1-3-1994
by Ord. No. 1993:663]
If any person, persons or corporations to whom permits have been granted
shall fail to protect or restore the streets so opened to the satisfaction of the
§ 171-5 (RESERVED) § 171-10
164:475
Mayor and Council, then said Council shall, after 10 days' notice, proceed
to protect or put said street or sidewalks in proper condition and shall
reimburse themselves out of the money deposited on obtaining the permits,
and any amount left over after paying for the protection or restoration
of said street or sidewalk shall be paid back to the person, persons or
corporations who deposited the same. The Borough Clerk shall receive a
sum as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, for each permit issued,
to be paid by the person or corporation to whom the permit is granted, for
his or her services in connection with the same.
§ 171-11. Prohibited placement of advertisements.
No person, persons or corporation shall be permitted to place signs,
placards or advertisements of any description along the public highways or
streets in the Borough of Closter or on the trees or telephone, telegraph or
electric light poles on said streets.
§ 171-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
The penalty for the violation of this article or any part thereof shall be as set
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties,
of this Code. All costs shall be paid.
§ 171-10 CLOSTER CODE § 171-12
164:476
ARTICLE III
Sidewalk and Curb Area Maintenance
[Adopted 11-22-1967 by Ord. No. 1967:179 as Art. II of Ch. 91 of the
1967 Code]
§ 171-13. Prompt removal of snow and ice; temporary measures.
[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663; 9-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1172]
§ 171-14. Maintenance of sidewalk and curb areas.
The owner or owners, tenant or tenants of lands abutting or bordering upon
the sidewalks of public streets, avenues and highways within the limits of
A. The Borough requires prompt removal of snow and ice from public
sidewalks. Every person, partnership, corporation, or other entity in
charge or control of any building or property within the Borough,
whether an owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise (hereinafter
"person"), shall remove and clear away or cause to be removed and
cleared away snow and ice from the sidewalk(s) in front of or abutting
said building or property along with all walkways, handicapped ramps,
staircase (including steps), driveways and parking areas. Snow and ice
shall also be removed to provide access to all fire hydrants located on
the property.
B. All sidewalks, walkways, handicapped ramps or staircases shall be
cleared to a width of 30 inches or the maximum width of the sidewalk,
walkway, handicapped ramp or staircase, whichever is less. These areas
must be cleared in a manner to provide access to all crosswalks.
C. Snow and ice shall be removed and cleared from the aforementioned
places within 12 hours of daylight after the end of the weather event
and at all times thereafter shall be kept free and clear of snow, slush
and ice.
D. In the event that it shall be impossible, due to weather conditions, to
remove any ice formation, the same shall be rendered safe by the
person responsible for its removal within the time referenced in
Subsection C, above, by the placement of sand or other approved
substance on the area to render the same safe for pedestrians.
E. The provisions of this section are the obligation of the property owners,
irrespective of whether the owners occupy the structure or not. Owners
continue to have such obligations even while temporarily away from
their property (such as on vacation) and are advised to make
arrangements to have their property cleared, consistent with the
provisions of this section, during such times.
F. No person shall throw, place or deposit snow or ice into or on any public
street, sidewalk or private property belonging to another. [Added
7-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1227]
§ 171-13 (RESERVED) § 171-14
164:477
the Borough of Closter shall keep trimmed all grass and weeds bordering
such sidewalks and shall remove all bushes, brush, undergrowth and other
impediments bordering such sidewalks and existing between the curbline
of such street, avenue or highway and the property line of the abutting
property.
§ 171-15. Failure to comply; Borough prerogative. [Amended
11-23-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:643; 9-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1172]
In the event that the person responsible for the removal and clearance of
snow and ice, as set forth and required by § 171-13, or for the removal of
all grass, weeds, bushes, undergrowth or other impediments bordering said
sidewalks, as set forth and required by § 171-14, within three days after
notice to remove same, the Superintendent of Public Works may cause such
work to be done under his or her direction and he or she shall certify the
cost thereof to the Mayor and Council.
§ 171-16. Cost becomes lien; addition to taxes. [Amended
11-23-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:643]
§ 171-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-23-1992 by Ord.
No. 1992:643; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Any owner or owners, tenant or tenants violating any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
A. The cost of such removal of ice, snow, grass, weeds, bushes, brush,
undergrowth or other impediments, as certified by the Superintendent
of Public Works, if found correct by the Mayor and Council, shall
forthwith become a lien upon the lands abutting or bordering upon said
sidewalks and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes
next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, and the same shall bear
interest at the same rate as taxes.
B. The Mayor and Council shall, upon receiving the certificate of cost
aforesaid from the Superintendent of Public Works, examine the same
and, if found correct, shall adopt a resolution directing that the cost as
aforesaid shall be charged against the land abutting or bordering any
such sidewalk from which snow, ice, grass, weeds, bushes, brush,
undergrowth or other impoundments have been removed under the
direction of the Superintendent of Public Works, as hereinbefore
directed, and shall cause a certified copy of such resolution to be
delivered to the Borough Tax Collector, who shall collect such charges
at the time of the collection of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lands.
§ 171-14 CLOSTER CODE § 171-17.1
164:478
§ 171-17.1. Enforcement. [Added 9-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1172]
The provisions of this article are enforced by the Borough's Code
Enforcement Official or his/her designee.
§ 171-17.1 (RESERVED) § 171-17.1
164:479

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 9-27-1989 as Ord. No. 1989:584]
§ 171-18. Construction at owner's expense. [Amended 3-28-1990 by
Ord. No. 1990:592]
§ 171-19. Materials. [Added 9-27-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:584]
In the making of such improvements, the materials to be used shall be as
recommended by the Borough Engineer and adopted by resolution by the
Mayor and Council.
§ 171-20. Supervision.
The construction of all such improvements shall be under the control,
supervision and inspection of the Borough Engineer or his or her
representative.
§ 171-21. Conformity.
Where the grade of any street, road or highway or of a section thereof along
which any improvement herein contemplated is proposed to be made shall
have been established by law or municipal act previous to the adoption
of this Article or the issuance of notices hereinafter referred to, said
improvements shall be made to conform as nearly as practicable to the
grade so established.
§ 171-22. Grade stakes.
In every instance where any of the improvements herein provided for are
required to be performed, no work of construction shall be commenced
or proceeded with until grade stakes shall have first been located by the
Borough Engineer. Applications for the location of grade stakes shall be
A. In all the streets, roads and highways of the Borough of Closter, the
sidewalks shall be constructed, reconstructed, paved, repaved, curbed,
recurbed, improved, repaired and maintained in full at the cost and
expense of the owner or owners of the land in front of which the
improvement is made.
B. For purposes of this article, maintenance shall include but not be
limited to the prompt clearance of all snow, ice, weeds, vegetation and
debris from said sidewalks and curbs. It shall also include the
maintenance and repair of all cracks and crevices, the maintaining of a
level surface and the taking of all necessary steps to ensure as far as
practicable the safety of the users of said sidewalk. For all repairs and/
or replacements of more than 25% of curbing and/or sidewalk, a
building permit in the amount of $60 shall be obtained by the owner for
review and inspections of all new sidewalk and curbing. [Amended
8-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1048]
§ 171-18 (RESERVED) § 171-22
164:481
made to the Borough Clerk by or for the owner of any premises in front of
which any of the herein described improvements are intended to be made.
§ 171-23. Costs of grades and stakes.
All costs and expenses incident to the giving of proper grades and the
setting of stakes therefor preparatory to the making of any of the
improvements contemplated by this Article and inspection by the Borough
Engineer shall be borne by the owner of the premises in front of which such
grades shall be established and shall be a lien against said premises until
paid.
§ 171-24. Issuance of notice.
None of the improvements herein contemplated shall be required to be
performed except upon resolution of the Mayor and Council directing the
Borough Clerk to issue notices to the owner or owners of the properties
in front of which it is proposed to make a contemplated improvement.
Such notice shall contain the description of the property affected sufficient
to identify it, a description of the improvement and a statement of the
percentage of the cost to be borne by the owner or owners of such real
estate and a statement that unless the owner or owners complete the
same within 30 days after service thereof, the borough will make the
improvement at the expense of the owners.
§ 171-25. Service of notice.
Notice set forth in § 171-24 shall be done in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:65-3.
§ 171-26. Assessment.
When any of the improvements herein provided for are made by the
Borough of Closter, the cost and expense thereof and incident thereto shall
be apportioned among the several properties improved in proportion to the
frontage of their respective lands, and a true statement of such cost, under
oath or affirmation, shall be forthwith filed by the Borough Engineer with
the Borough Clerk. The Mayor and Council shall examine such statement
and, if the same is properly made, shall confirm the same and file the same
with the Collector of Taxes. Such Collector of Taxes shall forthwith record
such assessments in the borough assessment record. Before confirming the
report, the Mayor and Council shall give notice to the owner or owners
named therein of the time and place fixed for examination of the report. The
notice shall be served in the same manner as required for service of notices
pursuant to law.
§ 171-27. Interest; installments.
Sidewalk assessments shall bear interest from the time of confirmation at
the same rate and with the same penalties for nonpayment as assessments
for local improvements and from confirmation thereof will be a first and
§ 171-22 CLOSTER CODE § 171-27
164:482
paramount lien upon the real estate assessed to the same extent and
be collected and enforced in the same manner as assessments for local
improvements. Payment of assessments may be made in installments in the
same manner and at the same rate of interest as assessments for local
improvements.
§ 171-28. Notice of improvements unnecessary.
The Mayor and Council may make a sidewalk improvement or award a
contract therefor without giving the notice provided for in § 171-24 if notice
of the pendency of the ordinance providing for the improvement has been
given to the owners of the real estate affected thereby and a hearing be
given to all persons interested in the proposed improvement at the time and
place stated in the notice before adoption of the ordinance. The notice shall
be served or published 10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing.
§ 171-27 (RESERVED) § 171-28
164:483

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk Repair
[Adopted 8-12-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:622]
§ 171-29. Responsibility of owners.
A. Duties.
(1) It shall be the duty of all owners of property abutting upon streets,
avenues or highways of the borough where sidewalks have been
constructed to maintain the sidewalks in front of their premises in a
safe, passable and serviceable condition and free from obstruction
of grass, weeds, sediments or other material. It shall be the duty of
said property owners to repair, construct, alter or relay said
sidewalks so as to keep them free of cracks and crevices and on an
even grade.
(2) All owners of property abutting upon streets, avenues or highways
of the borough who apply for a building permit for new
construction of an improvement upon vacant land, which does not
require site plan approval, shall be required to construct sidewalks
and curbs in accordance with the standards of § 173-48E. The term
"vacant land" shall include a parcel of land where the existing
structure will be removed and replaced with construction of a new
improvement. No certificate of occupancy shall be granted until
this provision is met. The Building Department/Zoning Officer shall
notify the owner of the requirement to install a sidewalk and curbs.
The owner may request a waiver of this requirement from the
Mayor and Council. The request shall be made within 20 days of
notification and shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for the
waiver. The Mayor and Council shall schedule a hearing to consider
the waiver request. Upon construction and acceptance, the owner
shall have the duty to maintain the sidewalk and curb in
accordance with Subsection A(1)above. [Amended 5-13-1998 by
Ord. No. 1998:760]
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, where any property
owner shall, having received a notice of required compliance from the
Property Maintenance Officer, fail or neglect to maintain, construct,
repair, alter or relay the sidewalks in front of or abutting his or her
property in a safe, passable and serviceable condition, the governing
body may pass a resolution causing a notice to be served, in writing,
upon the owner or occupant of said land requiring the specified
maintenance or repairs to be done within a period of 30 days from the
date of service of said notice. The notice shall be served in person upon
the owner or occupant by leaving the same at his or her usual place of
residence with a member of the family over the age of 14 years.
Whenever any lands are unoccupied and the owner cannot be found
within the municipality, notice may be mailed, postage prepaid, to his or
her post office address, if the same can be ascertained. In case such
§ 171-29 (RESERVED) § 171-29
164:485
owner is a nonresident and his or her address cannot be ascertained,
then notice may be inserted for four weeks, once a week, in a
newspaper circulating in the municipality and shall also be posted upon
the affected premises. In the event that an owner of property shall be
granted a waiver from any of the provisions of this section, including
but not limited to the obligation to construct sidewalks and curbs, the
borough shall condition such waiver upon the owner's contribution to a
fund dedicated to the repair, replacement and construction of sidewalks
within the borough. Such monetary contribution shall be in the sum
established by the Borough Engineer and shall be based on the amount
of linear feet of sidewalk and/or curb the owner would otherwise be
required to construct. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:747;
6-9-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:792; 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1221]
C. Failure to comply. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:747]
(1) If the owner refuses or neglects to comply with the notice within 30
days after service or publication, the Property Maintenance Officer
is authorized and empowered to effect such repairs and
improvements with borough personnel or with independent
contractors, in his or her discretion, as will eliminate the
objectionable condition. When any such work shall be done, a true
and accurate account of the costs shall be kept and distributed
among the properties abutting upon the sidewalk in due proportion
to the amount of material and labor expended upon each parcel of
property involved, and a true statement and report of the cost
under oath or affirmation shall be filed forthwith by the Property
Maintenance Officer with the Borough Clerk and Tax Assessor. The
Property Maintenance Officer shall also file with the Borough Clerk
proof of service or publication of the notice of demand.
(2) Upon the filing of a statement or report by the Property
Maintenance Officer, the Borough Council shall cause notice to be
given to the owner of all properties affected designating the time
and place when the report and statement will be considered and
confirmed by the Borough Council. At the time and place
designated, the Borough Council shall afford an opportunity for all
parties in interest to be heard. After the hearing, the Council may
make such changes or amendments as appeared to be just and
proper. The Council may thereafter confirm the report with or
without amendments, and it shall then be transmitted to the
Collector of Taxes.
D. Upon receipt of the report from the Borough Council, the Tax Collector
shall enter upon his or her books and records the proper charges
against the respective properties affected, levying assessments thereon
in the proper amounts in the same manner provided by law for the
levying of assessments for street improvements. The Collector of Taxes
shall have the power to enforce collection of the assessments in the
same manner provided by law for the enforcement of payments of taxes
and assessments. The assessment shall bear interest at the same rate
§ 171-29 CLOSTER CODE § 171-29
164:486
§ 171-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
In addition to the remedy provided by § 171-29, any person who violates the
provisions of this Article V shall, upon conviction, be punished as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
per annum as taxes accruing within one month from the date of
confirmation by the Borough Council.
E. In the event that any sidewalk, curb, driveway apron or gutter
construction or maintenance will involve the removal of any tree or part
thereof, including roots, situated between the edge of the sidewalk and
the curb and it is the tree or part thereof, including a root, which has
caused the deteriorated, broken or hazardous sidewalk, the property
owner shall secure written approval for the necessary work from the
Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Closter. It shall be the
obligation of the abutting property owner to obtain the necessary
permit from the Shade Tree Commission and to perform the work
permitted, said work to be accomplished in a manner and with the
workmanship approved by the Shade Tree Commission during the
permit process. If the Shade Tree Commission refuses to issue a permit
pursuant to this subsection, it shall send written notice of denial to the
Property Maintenance Officer and the Borough Clerk as well as the
property owner. In the event that the Shade Tree Commission has
denied the permit or fails to take any action within 30 days from
application for a permit, the property owner shall be relieved of his or
her obligation to comply with the notice to repair the sidewalk only to
the extent that a tree or a portion of the tree or its roots interferes with
said repair work. [Amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:747]
§ 171-29 (RESERVED) § 171-30
164:487

ARTICLE VI
Street Excavations
[Adopted 11-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:640]
§ 171-31. Purpose. [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
The purpose of this article is to establish regulations and fees for the
opening and excavation of municipal streets within the Borough of Closter.
§ 171-32. Definitions.
The following terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the
meanings herein indicated:
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen circumstance or occurrence, the existence
of which presents an actual or potential clear and immediate danger to
person or property, including, without limitation, a gas leak, a water main
break, a sanitary sewer line break, or any similar situation which might
result in harm to the public’s health, safety, or welfare or damage to public
or private property. [Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
EXTENSIVE OPENING — An opening, tearing up or excavating, for any
purpose, of a borough road of 100 feet or more of roadway length or where
connecting lateral openings are made at average intervals of less than 100
feet along the roadway length or an opening which disturbs 20% or more of
the curb-to-curb width of the pavement area.
OWNER — Any person, corporation, public utility or other entity on whose
behalf a street opening is performed by a permittee.
PERMITTEE — Any person, firm or corporation granted a permit hereunder.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Public Service Electric and Gas Company, Rockland
Electric, Hackensack Water Company, or any other gas, electric, water,
cable, telephone, fiber optic, wireless or other provider or successor entity
having either the power of eminent domain or that is subject to the
regulations of the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey
or similar governmental body.[Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017:1234]
SMALL OPENING — Any opening, tearing up or excavating, for any
purpose, of a borough road which is not an extensive opening, and generally
not larger than 48 inches by 48 inches or 16 square feet in size.
STREET — Any street, road or other public way dedicated to and accepted
by the Borough of Closter, and shall include all of the area thereof lying
within the bounds of the curbing or, in the absence of curbing, the dedicated
right-of-way.
§ 171-33. General requirements.
A. Permit required.
§ 171-31 (RESERVED) § 171-33
164:489
§ 171-34. Application requirements.
(1) No person, persons or corporations, municipal or private, nor any
utility company, public or private, shall for any purpose open, tear
up, excavate, bore, tunnel or drive under or in any way impair the
surface or subsurface within the paved or unpaved limits of any
street in the Borough of Closter without first obtaining a road
opening permit from the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works through the Building Department. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(2) Only such persons, firms or corporations to whom or to which
permits have been granted shall be permitted to perform such work
and then only in the manner herein required and only as
specifically allowed in the permit. Assignment of rights under any
permit issued hereunder is prohibited; the permittee is always
responsible for performance under this article.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any work done by or for the
Borough of Closter (whether directly or under a contract with the
Borough) for the construction of waterlines, sewer lines or street
improvements or involving openings or excavations in Borough roads,
streets, sidewalks, curbs, parks, utilities, facilities, or any portion
thereof owned, maintained or controlled as part of the Borough’s
infrastructure. [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
C. No permit applicant shall begin work until he or she receives the
authorization number from the Underground Location Service and the
appropriate utility. The applicant must comply with the requirements of
N.J.S.A. 2C:17-4 and 2C:17-5, which provide, among other things, that
said applicant shall give to any person or corporation engaged in the
distribution or transmission of manufactured, mixed or natural gas or
synthetic natural gas, liquefied natural gas or propane gas in the area of
the proposed excavation written notice of the proposed excavations and
ascertain from such person or corporation the location of all such
gaslines or pipelines within 200 feet of the proposed excavation.
D. Nonopening of road. No street, road or paved area constructed,
reconstructed or repaved within three years of the time that the road is
sealed can be excavated, built or patched except in the case of
emergency, or except in the case of newly installed utility lines that
have been approved pursuant to the procedures outlined in Chapter
173 of the Code.124 [Amended 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:994;
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
A. Form.
124. Editor's Note: See § 173-47G, Utilities.
§ 171-33 CLOSTER CODE § 171-34
164:490
(1) Application for a permit shall be made in writing on forms to be
prescribed by the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works and issued by the Building Department and shall be filed at
least seven business days prior to the commencement of any work.
The application shall specify the name and address of the applicant;
the specific location of the proposed excavation and the width,
length and depth thereof; the type of road or other surface; and the
individual(s), firm or corporation for whose benefit the excavation
is to be made, and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for
the issuance of the permit as hereinafter provided, together with
the charges as hereinafter set forth. The applicant shall
acknowledge its responsibility to restore and repair the street,
curb, sidewalk, and other areas and rights-of-way as set forth in
Chapter 171, including §§ 171-36 and 171-38 herein. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(2) Applications for extensive openings shall require, in addition to the
above, information regarding:
(a) All improvements.
(b) Typical details and sections of construction procedure.
(c) Plans, profiles and other details necessary to accurately depict
the work.
(3) Standard details used by public utilities and accepted and
approved by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
or the Borough Engineer may be used to satisfy the requirements of
A(2)(b) and (c) preceding.
(4) No work may commence by the permittee until the date set forth in
the issued permit.
B. Emergency road opening.
(1) In the event that an emergency condition exists requiring
immediate action by any person, firm or corporation required to
obtain a permit pursuant to this section, the person may
immediately cause the roadway to be entered and emergency
measures taken without first obtaining a permit, provided that:
(a) The person(s) doing the work notifies the Closter Police
Department and the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works prior to the start of work; the Police Department
shall log the emergency. [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017:1234]
(b) A permit is applied for within 24 hours of the road opening or
on the next business day, whichever is later. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
§ 171-34 (RESERVED) § 171-34
164:491
(c) All work is to be performed in accordance with the provisions
of §§ 171-35, 171-36, 171-37 and 171-38.
(d) The Borough Engineer shall be notified by the person(s) doing
the work within 24 hours of a road opening. If a road opening
commences on a Saturday or Sunday as a result of emergency
road work, the Borough Engineer shall be notified on the
morning of the first business day thereafter. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(2) The borough reserves the right to issue a written stop-work order
where the same is deemed appropriate by the Superintendent of
the Department of Public Works or the Borough Engineer.
C. Review of the application of small openings. Prior to the issuance of a
permit, copies of the application therefor shall be referred to the
Borough Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer who shall, within five working days, note any
objections to the issuance of a permit or any conditions which shall be
satisfied prior to or be imposed as conditions upon the issuance of the
permit, as appropriate.
D. Applicant. The applicant must be a licensed contractor or agent of a
public utility, whether corporate, individual or partnership, who will be
actually engaged in the performance of the work to ensure the safety of
the public and that the work is done in accordance with borough
specifications The application shall be made for and on the behalf of the
owner for whom such work is being done and shall be countersigned by
such owner. Permits will not be issued directly to private owners or
developers without specific written approval of the Mayor and Council.
E. Agreement. The owner shall agree, as a condition of the issuance of a
permit, that any facilities, pipes or poles or other object(s) to be
installed within the borough right-of-way pursuant to the permit shall
be promptly relocated at the owner's expense, except where otherwise
provided by law, as required by the Borough of Closter, to accommodate
the installation of borough facilities. Such agreement shall be in writing
and contained on the face of the application form and permit.
F. Review of application for small and extensive openings. All small and
extensive openings shall first be reviewed and approved by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, and extensive
openings shall subsequently be reviewed and approved by the Borough
Engineer prior to the issuance of a permit.
G. Issuance. Street opening permits shall be issued through the Building
Department by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
once reviewed and approved as provided for herein; provided, however,
that no permit shall be issued until an application fee and an
engineering fee, as described in § 171-40 of this article, have been paid
§ 171-34 CLOSTER CODE § 171-34
164:492
§ 171-35. Work requirements.
to the Borough through the Building Department. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
H. No road opening permit will be issued between November 15 and
March 15 unless an emergency exists. In the event an emergency exists
and a permit is issued during this period, the applicant assumes all
responsibility for the safe maintenance of said opening and further
assumes all liability for damages resulting from or any way connected
to the project. [Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
I. The use of steel plates on Borough roadways between November 15 and
March 15 is prohibited. [Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
J. No opening is to be made on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, except in
the case of an emergency. [Added 12-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017:1234]
A. Generally. The current New Jersey State Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, with all
amendments and supplements, shall govern all of the work performed
under the Borough of Closter road opening permits, except as
supplemented below. [Amended 7-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-1014]
(1) No Borough road shall be closed to traffic without prior written
consent of the Police Department. In the event that a road is closed,
uniformed police may be required to act as traffic directors, and the
proper traffic control devices shall be erected and maintained in
accordance with standards described in the current edition of the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. All costs of providing
uniformed police shall be the responsibility of the permittee or the
owners. The Borough will bill the permittee for such services at the
prevailing rate specified annually by the Borough. In the event that
a detour is deemed necessary by the permittee, application shall be
made to the Chief of Police, who shall determine the necessity for
such detour and the route to be followed. In emergency situations,
notification by phone to the Police Department shall be done prior
to the start of work.
(2) Any work under an issued permit must be commenced within 30
calendar days from the date of issue and completed 45 days from
commencement or said permit shall be deemed void and
reapplication shall be required. The Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or the Borough Engineer may grant a
single forty-five-day completion extension past the original permit
expiration date. [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(3) Work commenced under a permit shall be continued expediently
during normal working hours until completed.
§ 171-34 (RESERVED) § 171-35
164:493
(4) The applicant shall notify the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works or the Borough Engineer by fax at least 48 hours in
advance of the actual commencement of digging. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
B. Guard. The applicant shall keep the work site properly guarded both
day and night and shall have lights, barriers and adequate safety
devices as described in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
placed thereat and maintained throughout the performance of the work
and shall interfere as little as possible with the traffic along the street
or road within the borough, and only that part of any such street or road
as is set forth in the permit shall be opened.
C. Cover and protection. All utilities shall be constructed with adequate
depth of cover protection for the utilities in the event that future
borough road construction, repair or modification necessitates
excavation, undercutting or installation of facilities in the area where
the utility is located. This location will in no way relieve the utility
owner of the responsibility of relocating said utility at said utility
owner's expense in case of conflict with future construction,
reconstruction or modification of related facilities, except as otherwise
specified herein.
D. Protection of existing structures. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to give other notice of the proposed street opening to any
person, firm or corporation whose pipe, conduits or other structures are
laid in the portion of the street to be opened. Said notice shall be given
to all utilities by calling the Garden State Underground Plant Location
service or its successor entity at telephone number 1-800-272-1000 or
such other number established by said entity 48 hours before
commencement of said opening or as provided by law, and the
permittee shall restore the same, at his or her own expense, to the
condition it was in prior to commencement of the work. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
E. All excavations shall be completely backfilled at the end of each
working day unless it would constitute a hardship to the permittee or
where the size of the excavation makes it impossible to backfill at the
end of each working day, in which event a waiver may be granted by the
Superintendent of Public Works or the Borough Engineer. In the event
that a waiver is granted, the contractor or owner shall cover the
excavation with heavy one-inch-thick steel plates secured to existing
pavement to prevent rattles and movement and erect appropriate
barriers and lights around the entire excavation and arrange to provide
appropriate security protection, if such security is necessary, at his or
her own cost, and such other safeguards as may be needed to protect
the public from an open excavation. If steel plates are placed for over a
weekend or for an extended period, all edges are to be macadam-sealed
and sloped. In no event shall an excavation be left open for more than
72 hours unless an emergency exists and permission has been secured
from the Chief of Police, the Superintendent of the Department of
§ 171-35 CLOSTER CODE § 171-35
164:494
§ 171-36. Repair and cleaning of streets and property. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
§ 171-37. Inspections.
The Superintendent of Public Works or the Borough Engineer shall
periodically inspect all road openings and the repair and resurfacing thereof
for the purpose of determining compliance with the conditions imposed on
the issuance of the permit and the specifications. The borough may, upon
the recommendation of either of them:
Public Works and the Borough Engineer or their designated
representatives.
A. The permittee agrees to immediately restore and replace, at its own
cost and expense, the street, curb, gutter, bike path, sidewalk, catch
basins, manholes, pavement markings, signs, conduits, installations,
fixtures and all other disturbed areas so as to restore said areas to the
same or better state and conditions as existed before work commenced,
and compliant with the Borough’s standards; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall modify the permittee’s obligation to adhere to all
other standards for street opening and excavation as are set forth in the
specifications contained in § 171-38 herein. Without limiting the
foregoing, the permittee shall be liable for any damage to the roadway
leading to or adjacent to the work site.
B. The permittee shall, on a continuing basis, maintain all streets and
other property affected by the construction in a clean condition free
from all rubbish, earth, rock and other debris. Upon completion of all
work under the permit, the permittee shall again clean the affected
property and remove all debris and unused material. In the event that
the permittee fails to act as provided herein, the Borough, upon 24
hours' notice to the permittee, may clean and remove all rubbish,
excess earth, rock, debris and unused material and charge the
permittee the cost thereof. If the permittee fails to reimburse the
Borough for the costs incurred, said costs shall be deducted from the
permittee's deposit held by the Building Department.
A. Order a temporary stop to any road opening.
B. Order that the applicant perform or correct work in accordance with
the directions of the borough.
C. Order a stop to any work and revoke the permit, in which event the
Borough of Closter shall complete the work or cause it to be completed,
and either declare the applicant's deposit forfeited or notify the
applicant's surety of an intent to file claim on the bond, or both, to the
extent necessary to complete the work.
D. Authorize the correction of any work after notification to the permittee
and after the neglect or the refusal of the permittee to make such
§ 171-35 (RESERVED) § 171-37
164:495
§ 171-38. Specifications.
corrections within 24 hours and, after the completion of the same,
either declare the permittee's deposit forfeited or notify the permittee's
surety of an intent to file a claim on the bond, or both, to the extent
necessary to make the necessary corrections.
E. Take any other action deemed reasonable under the circumstance to
protect the borough's interests.
A. Small road openings may be permanently paved after a sixy-to-ninetyday
normal settlement period or as directed sooner or later than that
period by the Borough Engineer or the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works. [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No.
2017:1234]
B. No extensive road opening shall be permanently paved until a final
inspection has been made by the Borough Engineer or the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and final approval
given.
C. For all openings:
(1) The existing pavement must be saw-cut or blade-cut vertically in a
straight line to the full depth of the pavement before excavation
begins.
(2) The material excavated from the trench opening shall not be
utilized as backfill and shall be removed from the site. The
applicant shall backfill the trench with bank-run sand and/or dense
graded aggregate compacted in lifts in accordance with Subsection
C(6) herein. Excavated materials must be removed from the work
site within two calendar days after the day of excavation or within
24 hours at the direction of the Superintendent of the Department
of Public Works or the Borough Engineer. [Amended 12-13-2017
by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(3) All trench backfill of dense graded aggregate or bank-run sand
shall be furnished from outside sources and approved by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the Borough
Engineer. [Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(4) The uncompleted length of road opening (not having a surface
course of stabilized base at the end of the workday) allowed under
a permit at any one time shall not exceed 25 linear feet unless a
special need can be established by the permittee and approval to
exceed this limitation is secured from the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or the Borough Engineer. Such special
need shall be noted, in writing, on the permit application to the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the Borough
Engineer before such permission is granted, except in unusual
cases and/or emergencies. In that event, such special needs shall
§ 171-37 CLOSTER CODE § 171-38
164:496
be documented, in writing, after approval is granted. The
unstabilized length of trench shall be plated with one-inch-thick
steel plates in accordance with § 173-35E. [Amended 12-13-2017
by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(5) Where existing manholes are located in the road shoulder areas, a
minimum of two inches of compacted hot mix asphalt surface
course (to be approved by the Borough Engineer) and six inches of
compacted hot mix asphalt base course shall be placed four feet on
both sides of the manhole casting over eight inches of compacted
quarry processed stone compacted in two four-inch lifts. The width
of the hot mix asphalt shall vary to the dimensions of the existing
road. [Amended 7-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1014;
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(6) All backfill shall be placed in four-inch to six-inch layers, with each
layer thoroughly compacted by mechanical means to the
satisfaction of the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works or the Borough Engineer. The Superintendent or the
Borough Engineer shall have the right to require a compaction test
to be performed by an independent laboratory at the expense of the
permittee. [Amended 7-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1014;
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(7) After proper compaction, the entire area of the opening shall be
paved with the temporary pavement, maintaining a smooth
transition with the adjoining paved areas.
D. Asphalt pavement openings.
(1) For openings in asphalt-surfaced pavements or penetration
macadam pavements, backfill material shall be deposited and
compacted as described in Subsection C(6) preceding to a level
similar to the bottom of the adjoining subbase course, but not less
than 12 inches below the surface level of the adjacent paved
surfaces. [Amended 7-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1014;
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(a) For street openings the subbase course shall be quarryprocessed
stone of not less than six inches compacted
thickness constructed in two compacted lifts.
(b) The base course shall be hot mix asphalt base course (as
approved by the Borough Engineer) not less than six inches
compacted thickness constructed in two compacted lifts.
(c) The pavement surface shall be placed and compacted flush
with the finished surface of the existing pavement and shall be
maintained at this level by the permittee by the addition of hot
mix asphalt surface course (to be approved by the Borough
Engineer) until final settlement has occurred.
§ 171-38 (RESERVED) § 171-38
164:497
(d) After a sixty- to ninety-day normal settlement period or as
directed sooner or later than that period by the Borough
Engineer or the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works, a final pavement surface course will be applied
wherever necessary to maintain a flush and level surface.
(e) The final pavement surface course shall be hot mix asphalt
surface course (as approved by the Borough Engineer), with all
joints between the existing pavement and the bituminous
concrete surface course coated with a tack coat.
(f) The contractor/developer shall infrared the perimeter of the
trench so as to reseal the pavement and blend the new trench
pavement with the existing road pavement. Specifications for
the infrared process are available from the Borough's
Department of Public Works.
(g) During the winter months, if hot mix asphalt base course
material or surface course material is not available, cold mix
asphalt may be substituted with the approval of the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer and the provision that this material is
removed and replaced with hot mix asphalt base material and
hot mix asphalt surface material when these materials become
available or as directed by the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or the Borough Engineer.
E. Concrete pavement surface openings. For all openings in concrete
surfaces, the trench backfill shall be compacted in six-inch layers to a
level eight inches below the top of the adjacent paved surface. An eightinch
compacted depth constructed in two compacted lifts of hot mix
asphalt base course shall then be placed and compacted level with the
existing pavement and shall be maintained by the permittee to a
pavement level by adding additional asphalt material until final
settlement has occurred. After final settlement has occurred, the
temporary asphalt pavement shall be removed and the opening
excavated to a depth of 10 inches, and a pavement of Class b concrete
10 inches in depth shall be constructed level with the existing pavement
surface. A layer of heavy six-by-six No. 6 gauge wire mesh reinforcing
shall be placed in the opening at a point for eight inches below the
finished elevation. [Amended 7-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1014;
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
F. Nonpaved area. All grass or graveled areas or sidewalk areas disturbed
within the borough right-of-way shall be reconstructed, topsoiled,
seeded and mulched within 14 days of completion of excavation. All
concrete areas will be thoroughly compacted. These limits may be
waived by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer only when abnormal temperatures or inclement
weather necessitates the same.
§ 171-38 CLOSTER CODE § 171-38
164:498
§ 171-39. Insurance; deposits.
G. All work shall be guaranteed for a period of at least 36 months from its
completion and acceptance by the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works or the Borough Engineer. [Amended 7-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008:1014; 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
A. Insurance. The applicant shall present evidence satisfactory to the
Borough Attorney of insurance sufficient to indemnify and save
harmless the borough, it agents and servants against and from all suits
and costs of every kind and from all personal injury or property damage
resulting from negligence or from any phase of operations performed
under the permit. Said insurance shall provide limits of not less than
$1,000,000 of single limit or, in the case of a public utility, may be in the
form of a certificate of self-insurance. Where there is an extensive
opening, the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer may request additional insurance if it is deemed
necessary under the circumstances.
B. Security.
(1) The Building Department shall not issue a permit unless the
applicant has deposited as security for faithful performance a
certified check made payable to the Borough of Closter or led a
bond with the surety satisfactory to the Borough Attorney, the
amount thereof to be based upon the security deposit fee schedule
as contained in § 171-40 of this article. [Amended 12-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(2) In lieu of the security deposit required above, a public utility
applicant may file with the Building Department a corporate
performance bond in the amount of at least $20,000. This corporate
performance bond must be an annual one and must be renewed
annually. In the event that a public utility applicant applies for a
permit for road opening and/or road openings and the required
security deposit fee set forth in § 171-40 exceeds said $20,000, the
public utility applicant shall file a corporate performance bond in
an amount equal to the difference between the $20,000 and the
required security deposit. For all non-public-utility applicants, the
surety bond shall be a minimum of $1,000. A certified check for a
lesser amount may be deposited; however, that must be in the
amount provided by § 171-40 for the work to be performed.
[Amended 7-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1014; 12-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(3) Upon satisfactory completion of all work permitted or required
under the permit for extensive openings, if the security deposit is
$2,000 or less, the Borough of Closter will retain 100% of the
security deposit as security for maintenance of said work for a
period not to exceed one year from the date of completion,
provided that if the security deposit is in the form of a certified
§ 171-38 (RESERVED) § 171-39
164:499
§ 171-40. Fees. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Fees shall be as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
check, the permittee may deposit a surety bond of $2,000
satisfactory to the Borough Attorney in lieu of said certified check.
If the security deposit is greater than $2,000, then the Borough
will release or refund 60% or more of the same with the approval
of the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the
Borough Engineer, except that it shall retain a minimum of $2,000,
and the surety bond will be deposited for the maintenance as set
forth above. All bonds and certificates of insurance shall contain a
provision that the same shall remain in full force and effect for a
period of two years after the last work under any permit has been
completed and accepted by the Borough. [Amended 7-23-2008
by Ord. No. 2008:1014]
(4) In the case of a small opening, the Borough shall retain the security
deposit for 12 months after satisfactory completion of all work
permitted or required under the permit, provided that if the
security deposit is in the form of a certified check, the permittee
may deposit a security bond in lieu of said check. [Amended
7-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1014]
C. Application fee and escrow deposit.
(1) The applicant shall also pay, by separate money order, certified
check or, if the applicant is a public utility as herein defined, by a
corporate check a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in §
171-40 of this article. Applicants other than a public utility shall
pay, by separate money order or certified check, a refundable
escrow deposit fee for inspection and professional services as set
forth in § 171-40 of this article. Should the escrow deposit fee
account at any time become insufficient to cover the actual or
anticipated inspection and professional expenses, said fund shall
be subject to increase on demand of the Building Department.
[Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(2) The borough shall pay from the escrow deposit fee any costs
incurred by its designated representatives or professional
consultants for inspection or other engineering services or legal
fees required in connection with the proposed opening or
excavation at the rate established.
A. An escrow deposit fee for engineering and legal costs will be required
of all non-public-utility applicants.
B. For all work proposed on each application that exceeds the quantities
delineated in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, a work schedule shall
be submitted to and approved by the Superintendent of the Department
of Public Works or the Borough Engineer, who shall estimate the total
§ 171-39 CLOSTER CODE § 171-40
164:500
§ 171-41. Return of deposit upon completion of work. [Amended
12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
Upon the completion of any such work, the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works or the Borough Engineer shall file a report,
which report shall contain the date of completion, the amount of deposit,
the cost to the Borough for resurfacing the area so excavated or opened,
if the same shall have been necessary, and the balance, if any, due to
the applicant. Upon receipt of the report by the Building Department, the
balance due, if any, to the applicant on account of any deposit shall be
forthwith returned.
§ 171-42. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663; 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
Any person, company, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction of such violation, be
subject for each offense to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code. In case of failure
to restore payments or roads or streets as hereinabove provided, after
written notice by the Building Department to do so, each day that such
pavement, roads or streets remain unrestored shall constitute a separate
offense.
escrow fee required based thereon. If, at any time during the course of
the work, it appears evident to the Superintendent of the Department
of Public Works or the Borough Engineer that the escrow deposit
fee is or will be insufficient to cover all costs of inspection and/or
other professional services, additional escrow deposit fees shall be
estimated by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or
the Borough Engineer and paid to the Borough’s Building Department,
based on a revised work schedule to be submitted by the applicant.
This procedure shall be repeated as often as necessary to guarantee
sufficient escrow deposit fees being available. [Amended 12-13-2017
by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
C. Actual payment from the escrow deposit fee fund shall be based upon
the professional fees as fixed from time to time by the Council by
resolution, but which shall be not less than the following rates:
[Amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(1) Professional engineering services: minimum fee of $165 per hour,
but in any case not less than $300;
(2) Attorney: minimum fee of $200 per hour.
§ 171-40 (RESERVED) § 171-42
164:501
Chapter 173
SUBDIVISION OF LAND AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 200. Fees — See Ch. A301.
§ 171-42 CLOSTER CODE § 171-42
164:502
ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 173-1. Long title.
This chapter is an ordinance establishing rules, regulations and standards
governing the subdivision of land and site plan review within the Borough
of Closter pursuant to the authority set forth in Chapter 291 of the Laws
of 1975,125 and amendments and supplements thereto, setting forth the
procedure to be followed by the approving authority in applying and
administering these rules, regulations and standards and providing
penalties for the violations thereof.
§ 173-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review
Ordinance" of the Borough of Closter.
§ 173-3. Purposes.
These regulations are deemed necessary to protect the character, stability
and orderly development of all areas of the community; to secure safety
from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters and
hazards; to encourage the proper location and design of streets; to promote
a desirable visual and aesthetic environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements; to promote the
conservation of open space and valuable resources; to prevent degradation
of the environment through improper land use; to provide adequate light,
air and open space; to encourage planned developments which incorporate
the best features of design and relate the type, design and layout of
development to the particular site; and to provide rules, regulations and
procedures which will guide the appropriate development of lands within
the community in order to promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
125. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 173-1 (RESERVED) § 173-3
164:503

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 173-4. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall
be used in the interpretation and construction of this chapter. Words
used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall
include the plural and the plural the singular. The word "structure"
shall include the word "building"; the word "person" includes a
corporation as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word
"plot"; the word "occupied" includes the words "designed or intended to
be occupied"; and the word "used" shall include the words "arranged,
designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased or intended to
be used." The word "may" is permissive.
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:126
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Secretary to the Planning Board
for any application before the Planning Board and the Secretary to
the Board of Adjustment for any application before the Board of
Adjustment.127
ANCILLARY SERVICES — Services offered which would not be
considered within the normal scope of the stated business of the
enterprise.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000:839; amended
1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2003:912]
APPLICANT or DEVELOPER — A developer submitting an application
for development; the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or
of any land proposed to be included in the proposed development,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase or other
person having an enforceable proprietary interest in the land.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use,
zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant to law.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the Borough of
Closter or the Borough of Closter Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, as provided in Article III.
BOARD128 — The Planning Board of the Borough of Closter.
126. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2005:952, adopted 10-11-2005, adopted new regulations for
signs (see Art. XVII), including § 173-79, Definitions and word usage. The following
definitions, previously included in this section, now appear in § 173-79: area of sign;
awning; building code; canopy; district; ground sign; maintenance of signs; mansard;
marquee; parapet; person; roofline; sign; structure; unlawful signs; wall sign; and window
sign.
127. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “altering,” added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No.
2000:839, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-5-2004 by Ord. No.
2003:912.
§ 173-4 (RESERVED) § 173-4
164:505
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having
a roof.
CIC — Closter Improvement Commission.[Added 1-5-2004 by Ord.
No. 2003:912]
CLOSTER IMPROVEMENT COMMISSION — See Chapter 29.[Added
1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2003:912]
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — See Chapter 147.[Added
1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2003:912]
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to
a site designated as a development and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
"Common open space" may contain such complementary structures
and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form completed as
specified by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the municipal
agency and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for
approval of the application for development, including, where
applicable, but not limited to a site plan or subdivision plat, provided
that the municipal agency may require such additional information
not specified in the ordinance or any revisions in the accompanying
documents as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision
as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the
application for development have been met. The application shall not be
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the municipal
agency. An application shall be certified as complete immediately upon
the meeting of all requirements specified in the ordinance and in the
rules and regulations of the municipal agency and shall be deemed
complete as of the day it is so certified by the administrative officer for
the purposes of the commencement of the time period for action by the
municipal agency.[Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply with
the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use
as contained in the Zoning Ordinance129 and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.130
128. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “awning and/or canopy,” added 12-27-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000:839, which immediately preceded this definition, was repealed 1-5-2004 by Ord.
No. 2003:912, and replaced with separate definitions of “awning,” “canopy” and
“marquee.”
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
130. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “Construction Official and Property Maintenance
Officer,” added 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2000:839, which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2003:912, and replaced with separate
definitions of “Construction Official” and “Code Enforcement Officer.”
§ 173-4 CLOSTER CODE § 173-4
164:506
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — See definition of "Construction official"
as provided in the Department of Community Affairs regulations,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.4.[Added 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2003:912]
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than planned
development.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The County Planning Board, as defined
in Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1), of the county in
which the land or development is located.[Added 4-21-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980:372]
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with a single means of ingress and egress
and having a turnaround, the design of which may vary, to the extent
such design comports with the standards set forth in the Code of the
Borough of Closter.[Added 11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:880]
DAYS — The number of calendar days for the purpose of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any mining, excavation or
landfill; and any use or change in the use of any building or other
structure or land or extension of use of land for which permission may
be required.
DISTRICT — One of any zones or use districts as designated in Chapter
200 of the Code of the Borough of Closter.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000:839]
DIVISION — The Division of State and Regional Planning in the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means, including the control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development and the means necessary for water supply preservation or
prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against floods.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body
created pursuant to P.L. 1968, c. 245 (N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.).
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and
shall also include the painting of wall signs.[Added 12-27-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000:839]
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice or gravity.
FARM — An area of land which is actively devoted to agriculture or
horticultural use which occupies no less than five acres, exclusive of
§ 173-4 (RESERVED) § 173-4
164:507
the land upon which the farmhouse is located and such additional land,
in conformance with the minimum lot size of the residential zone in
which the farm is located, as may actually be used in connection with
the farmhouse as provided in N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.3, 54:4-23.4, 54:4-23.5
and 54:4-23.11.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the approving authority
taken on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after
all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been
installed or guaranties properly posted for their completion or approval
conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties, which, in the case of
a subdivision, shall be filed with the proper county recording officer.
GOVERNING BODY — The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough
of Closter.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening or
surrounding property significantly affecting or affected by the quality
and character of the historic site or sites.[Added 1-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 1993:663]
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural
object or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing which
has been formally designated in the Master Plan as being of historical,
archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural
significance.[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
INTERESTED PARTY —
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures on, above or below the
ground surface.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by the Borough of Closter for the maintenance of any
improvements required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State
of New Jersey.
(1)
In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative
proceeding before a municipal agency, any person, whether
residing within or without Closter Borough, whose right to use,
acquire or enjoy property is affected by any action taken under this
chapter or whose rights to use, acquire or enjoy property under this
chapter or under any other law of this state or the United States
have been denied, violated or infringed by an action or failure to
act under this chapter.
(2)
§ 173-4 CLOSTER CODE § 173-4
164:508
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the Borough of Closter which shall
have been duly adopted by the Borough of Closter Planning Board.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots which
proposes a change of use to a use permitted in the zoning district,
provided that the proposed permitted use will not have a greater
adverse affect than the existing use on circulation, water supply,
sewage disposal, drainage, landscaping, signs, lighting, off-street
parking or loading or the lack of any or all of these factors,
environmental factors and other considerations specified in this
Chapter 173, and provided that the development plan proposes a
change of use for a building or structure or portion thereof which
exceeds 2,000 square feet.[Amended 11-25-1991 by Ord. No.
1991:617; 3-11-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:618]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision of land for the creation of
fewer than three lots, provided that such subdivision does not involve
a planned development, any new street or the extension of any offtract
improvements, the cost of which is not to be wholly borne by the
developer.[Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372; 11-25-1991
by Ord. No. 1991:617]
NONCONFORMING SIGN — [Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No.
2000:839]
OFFICE BUILDING — Under the provisions of Chapter 220 of the Laws
of 1975131 pertaining to physically handicapped persons, an "office
building" means a building or structure of more than 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area wherein a commercial or business activity or service
is performed or a profession is practiced or wherein any combination
thereof is performed or practiced in all or the majority of such building
or structure.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map and accompanying ordinance adopted by the
governing body of the Borough of Closter pursuant to law. Such map
shall be deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width
of streets and public drainageways and the location and extent of flood
control basins and public areas, whether or not such streets, ways,
basins or areas are improved or unimproved or are in actual physical
existence.
OFF-SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of
A sign legally erected but not presently complying with a
subsequently enacted sign ordinance.
(1)
A sign not conforming to the current Sign Ordinance but for which
a special permit or variance was previously granted.
(2)
131. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:32-4 et seq.
§ 173-4 (RESERVED) § 173-4
164:509
a development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of
a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or rightof-
way.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designed or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided
that such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures,
streets and off-street parking and other improvements that are
designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land.132
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Any applicant for development,
the owners of the subject property and all owners of property and
government agencies entitled to notice.
PERFECTED APPLICATION — One that is submitted in a proper and
complete form, including all required application forms, maps and
reviews prior to scheduling of a public hearing, where required, or
formal action being taken by the approving authority; all required
fees are submitted and filed within the appropriate time schedules;
proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or
delinquent on the property for which approval is sought; and all other
governmental approvals are received by the approving authority within
the required time periods.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
Closter Borough, including cash, provided that the borough shall not
require more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — A physical impairment which confines a
person to a wheelchair; causes a person to walk with difficulty or
insecurity; affects the sight or hearing to the extent that a person
functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed to danger; causes
faulty coordination; or reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and
perceptiveness to the extent that facilities are needed for the safety of
that person.
PLAN — The provisions for development of a planned development,
including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location
and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density
of development, public or private streets, ways and parking facilities,
open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the plan,"
132. Editor’s Note: The former definition of “owner,” added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000:839,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2003:912.
§ 173-4 CLOSTER CODE § 173-4
164:510
when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and graphic materials
referred to in this definition.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified in the Zoning Ordinance133 to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures
with appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office
uses, or both.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Includes planned unit development,
planned residential development, residential cluster, planned
commercial development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous size as specified in the Zoning Ordinance134 to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures
with appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified
minimum contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters, which
may include appropriate commercial or public or quasi-public uses, all
primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specific minimum
contiguous acreage to be developed as a single entity according to a
plan, containing one or more residential clusters or planned residential
development and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial or
industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to
residential uses as shall be specified in the Zoning Ordinance.135
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision or site plan pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant
to this chapter prior to final approval after specific elements of a
development plan have been agreed upon by the approving authority
and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design
of a project illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and
relationship to its site and immediate environs.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public areas include:
Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational
areas.
(1)
(2) Other public open spaces.
133. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 173-4 (RESERVED) § 173-4
164:511
PUBLIC BUILDING — Under the provisions of Chapter 220 of the Laws
of 1975136 pertaining to physically handicapped persons, any building,
structure, facility or complex used by the general public, including but
not limited to theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums, schools,
libraries, recreational facilities, public transportation terminals and
stations, factories, office buildings, business establishments, passenger
vehicle service stations, shopping centers, hotels or motels and public
eating places constructed by any state, county or municipal government
agency or instrumentality or any private individual, partnership,
association or corporation, with the following exceptions: one- to fourfamily
private residences, warehouse storage areas and all buildings
classified as hazardous occupancies. As used herein, "hazardous
occupancy" means the occupancy or use of a building or structure or
any portion thereof that involves highly combustible, highly flammable
or explosive material or which has inherent characteristics that
constitute a special fire hazard.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the biological as well as
drainage function of the channel and providing for the flow of water to
safeguard the public against flood damage, sedimentation and erosion
and to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and
bridges, to induce water recharge into the ground, where practical,
and to lessen nonpoint pollution.[Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, Board of Education, state
or county agency or other public body for recreational or conservational
uses.
RELETTERING — To change the lettering or descriptive symbols on a
sign without changing any of the structural parts or components of the
sign.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000:839]
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — An area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of
any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law or the alteration of any streets or the
establishment of any new streets within any subdivision previously
made and approved or recorded according to law, but does not include
conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
(3) Scenic and historic sites.
(4) Sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
136. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:32-4 et seq.
§ 173-4 CLOSTER CODE § 173-4
164:512
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported
from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means
as a product of erosion.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangle-shaped easement established at the
intersection of two streets or a driveway and a street in which nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner
as to obstruct vision between a height of two feet and six inches above
the center-line grade of the street or driveway. The borough shall have
the right of entry to remove any obstruction to vision within the sight
area not conforming to the standards of this definition, following due
notice to the property owner. Said triangle shall be determined along
such street lot lines or edge of driveway 25 feet distant from their joint
intersection.
SIGN — Any device, painting, structure, fixture or placard, made of
combustible or incombustible materials, using electronic, stationary,
lighted, painted or printed symbols and/or written copy of the purpose
of informing or directing members of the public or advertising,
promoting or identifying any institution, establishment, product, goods,
services or person.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000:839]
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown:
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch plat of a subdivision to be used for the
purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the requirements
of § 173-11 herein.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law; or
which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county recording officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board
and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats; and includes
the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved,
and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks or
paving areas within the street. For the purpose of this chapter, "streets"
shall be classified as follows:
The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but
not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage,
floodplains, marshes and waterways.
(1)
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices.
(2)
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to
make an informed determination pursuant to this chapter.
(3)
§ 173-4 (RESERVED) § 173-4
164:513
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale
or development. The following shall not be considered "subdivisions"
within the meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created:
divisions of land found by the Planning Board or Subdivision Committee
thereof, appointed by the Chairman, to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size; divisions of
property by testamentary or intestate provisions; divisions of property
upon court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure;
consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument;
and the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land owned by the same person or persons and all of which are
found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown
and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Tax Map or
atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include the
term "resubdivision."[Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
SUBDIVISION APPLICATION — The application for approval of a
subdivision pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law [P.L. 1975, c. 291
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)] or an application for approval of a planned
unit development pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.[Added
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
TEMPORARY/PROMOTIONAL SIGN — Any one sign not to be used
for more than 40 consecutive days for any one time period and no
more than 120 days total per calendar year, except as provided at
§ 173-50N(7).137 This shall include, but is not limited to, any sign,
pennant, flag, valance or advertising display constructed of paper, vinyl,
cloth, canvas, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials, with or
without frames.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000:839;
amended 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2003:912]
TEMPORARY WINDOW SIGN — A sign meeting the criteria of a
temporary/promotional sign placed within 10 inches of the interior
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor
streets to the major system of arterial streets, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets
for circulation within such a development.
(2)
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Streets which are parallel to and
adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
137. Editor’s Note: Former § 173-50N(7) was superseded 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:952. For
current signs regulations, see Art. XVII, Signs.
§ 173-4 CLOSTER CODE § 173-4
164:514
surface of a window or glazed door and intended to be viewed from
the outside, which is not to be used for more than 40 consecutive days
for any one time period and no more than 120 days total per calendar
year.Added 1-5-2004 by Ord. No. 2003:912]
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings
or reproduction thereof.[Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
WINDOW SIGNS — A sign installed only by painted lettering, without a
contrasting background, inside a window or glazed door and intended
to be viewed from the outside. This shall include illuminated signs. Said
lettering may not occupy more than 15% of the total glazed area of any
such window or door panel. Window signs shall include all glazed area
including doors.[Added 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000:839]
ZONING OFFICER — See Chapter 200.Added 1-5-2004 by Ord. No.
2003:912]
§ 173-4 (RESERVED) § 173-4
164:515

ARTICLE III
Administration and Enforcement
§ 173-5. Administration; approving authority.
A. Planning Board as approving authority. In accordance with Chapter 291
of the Laws of 1975,138 the Planning Board shall act as the approving
authority for subdivision plats as a condition for filing such plats with
the county recording officer, either individually or as a part of a
simultaneous application, and for site plan approval as follows:
(1) For minor subdivisions.
(2) For preliminary and final major subdivisions and site plans.
(3) For subdivisions and site plans which also require conditional use
approval.
(4) For minor and major subdivisions which require site plan approval.
(5) For subdivisions and site plans which also require planned
development approval.
(6) For subdivision and site plans in which a variance request is made
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980:372]
B. Board of Adjustment as approving authority. In accordance with
Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975,139 the Board of Adjustment shall act
as the approving authority for subdivision plats as a condition for filing
such plats with the county recording officer and for site plan approval
as follows: where a use variance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, is
requested in which a subdivision and/or a site plan is a part of the
application.
C. Exception in application of regulations. Except for public hearings, the
approving authority, when acting upon applications for minor,
preliminary and final subdivision approval and preliminary and final site
plan approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements of this chapter as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the provisions of this chapter if the literal
enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable
or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to the land in question.
D. Simultaneous review and approval. The approving authority shall have
the power to review and approve one or more land use ordinance
requirements simultaneously with review for subdivision and site plan
approval without the applicant being required to make further
138. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
139. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 173-5 (RESERVED) § 173-5
164:517
§ 173-6. Fees.
Filing fees, inspection fees, fees for specific services and escrow fees,
as required for the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review Ordinance,
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Closter Procedures
application to the approving authority or the approving authority being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the approving authority, whether it is for subdivision conditional use,
site plan approval or a variance, shall apply. Whenever approval of a
conditional use or a use variance is requested by the applicant, notice
of the hearing on the plat shall include references to the request for
such conditional use or use variance.140
E. Minor site plan review. [Added 3-11-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:618]
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.1, the Planning Board Chairman
shall appoint a Site Plan Subcommittee. The Site Plan
Subcommittee shall review applications where a development plan
proposes a change of use to a use permitted in the zoning district
(where § 173-27C is not applicable) for a building or structure or
portion thereof which exceeds 2,000 square feet. The Site Plan
Subcommittee may:
(a) Determine that the development plan does require full site
plan approval because of the applicability of § 173-27C and
refer the application to the Planning Board for site plan review.
(b) Determine that the development plan conforms to the
definition of minor site plan and refer the application to the
Planning Board for minor site plan review.
(c) Determine that the development plan, while it conforms to the
definition of a minor site plan, does not require Planning Board
approval because the literal enforcement of the minor site plan
requirements are impracticable or will exact undue hardship
upon the applicant and the proposed change of use does not
adversely affect any municipal considerations concerning the
health, safety or general welfare. If the Planning Board
Subcommittee makes this determination, it shall, in writing,
refer the applicant to the administrative officer for issuance of
a change of use certificate of occupancy which shall then be
issued by the administrative officer. If this determination is
made, the applicant shall have returned all but $25 of his or
her application fee as provided in § 35-30C of this Code.
(2) The Planning Board Subcommittee shall have 10 days from the
receipt of an application to make a determination as provided by
this Subsection E.
140. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-5 CLOSTER CODE § 173-6
164:518
Ordinance pertaining to the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment.141
All required fees shall be paid in cash or certified or bank checks, payable
to the Borough of Closter.
§ 173-7. Public hearings.
A. When required. A public hearing shall be required for all applications
except minor subdivision approval and final subdivision approval and
final site plan review.
B. Availability of maps and documents prior to hearing. Any maps and
documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file and
available for public inspection at least 10 days before the date of the
hearing during normal business hours in the office of the administrative
officer. The applicant may produce other documents, records or
testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the
previously filed maps and documents.
C. Notice of public hearing.
(1) The applicant shall give notice of a public hearing to the owners of
all real property as shown on the current tax records located within
200 feet in all directions of the property in question.
(2) Said notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the
property proposed for subdivision or development by street
address and block and lot numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Borough Tax Collector's office, a duplicate copy of
which shall be forwarded to the administrative officer. The notice
will also indicate that the maps and documents will be available at a
specific time and location for public inspection pursuant to
§ 173-7B.
(3) Notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the public
hearing.
(4) The applicant shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the borough at least 10
days prior to the public hearing.
(5) Proof of service upon property owners and proof of publication in
affidavit form shall be submitted to the administrative officer no
less than 48 hours prior to the commencement of the public
hearing.
D. Certification of list of persons entitled to notice. Upon the written
request of an applicant, the Tax Assessor of the Borough of Closter
shall, within seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax
duplicates of names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is
141. Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Land Use Procedures.
§ 173-6 (RESERVED) § 173-7
164:519
required to give notice. The applicant shall be entitled to rely upon
the information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any
owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
E. Other notification. The applicant shall provide that notice for a hearing
on an application for the development of property be given by personal
service or certified mail to:
(1) The Clerk of a municipality when involving property within 200 feet
of said municipality.
(2) The County Planning Board where the property is adjacent to an
existing county road or proposed road shown on the Official County
Map or on the County Master Plan, affects a county drainage
facility or adjoins other county land or is situated within 200 feet of
a municipal boundary.
(3) The Commissioner of Transportation where the property is
adjacent to a state highway.
(4) The Director of State and Regional Planning in the Department of
Community Affairs for an application exceeding 150 acres or 500
dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or
documents required to be filed with the administrative officer of
the Borough of Closter.
F. Effect of mailing notice. Any notice made by certified mail shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
G. Verbatim recording required. The approving authority shall provide for
the verbatim recording of the proceedings by either stenographer,
mechanical or electronic means for public hearings. The authority shall
furnish its transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request
to any interested party at his or her expense.
H. Written findings and conclusions. Each decision of the approving
authority shall be in writing and shall include findings of facts and
conclusions based thereon.
I. Copies and notification of decision.
(1) A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the approving authority
within 10 days of the date of the decision to the applicant or, if
represented, to his or her attorney without separate charge and to
all who request a copy of the decision for a fee as specified herein.
A copy of the decision shall also be filed by the approving authority
in the office of the administrative officer. The administrative officer
shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested
party for a fee as specified herein and available for public
inspection at his or her office during reasonable hours.
(2) A brief notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the
community. Such publication shall be arranged by the approving
§ 173-7 CLOSTER CODE § 173-7
164:520
§ 173-8. Minimum standards; waiver provisions.
§ 173-9. Development agreements. [Added 11-28-1979 by Ord. No.
1979:367]
authority. The period of time in which an appeal of the decision may
be made shall run from the publication of the decision.
A. The rules, regulations and standards contained herein shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the borough. Any action
taken under the terms of this chapter shall give primary consideration
to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the entire
community. However, if the applicant can clearly demonstrate that,
because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his or her land, the literal
enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable or will
exact undue hardship, the approving authority may permit such waivers
as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter.
B. The waiver provisions of this section shall be applicable to the entire
chapter herein except where specifically prohibited by law.
C. Any waiver provided hereunder by the approving authority shall be
specified in the written resolution of approval, whether conditional or
otherwise, with the reasons granting such waiver also specified.
A. Approval. [Amended 5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:672]
(1) Where a development agreement is required to be executed
governing off-tract improvements, on-tract improvements,
performance guaranties, maintenance guaranties or other
conditions as may be required by this chapter or by the approving
authority, said development agreement shall be drafted by and
satisfactory to the following:
(a) The Planning Board Attorney in those cases where the
Planning Board is the approving authority.
(b) The Zoning Board Attorney in those cases where the Board of
Adjustment is the approving authority. [Amended 3-12-2014
by Ord. No. 2014:1154]
(2) In either case, the development agreement shall be reviewed by the
Borough Attorney and, thereafter, approved by the governing body.
Said development agreement may include, but need not be limited
to, the amount of cash contributions, if any, required, the method of
payment and the obligations to be undertaken by the Borough of
Closter, if any. [Amended 3-12-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1154]
B. All performance guaranties and maintenance guaranties required by
this chapter shall be in writing and shall be reviewed by the Borough
§ 173-7 (RESERVED) § 173-9
164:521
§ 173-10. Informal review. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends
to prepare and submit an application for development. The developer shall
not be required to submit any fees for such an informal review. The
developer shall not be bound by any concept plan for which review is
requested, and the Planning Board shall not be bound by any such review.
Attorney as to form, sufficiency and execution and approved by the
governing body.
§ 173-9 CLOSTER CODE § 173-10
164:522
ARTICLE IV
Subdivision Classifications; Minor Subdivisions
§ 173-11. Subdivision classifications.
§ 173-12. Submission of application for minor subdivision.
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in duplicate, on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for minor subdivision approval shall be filed no less than 21 days
prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required fees,
as provided in Article III, shall be submitted with the application form.
§ 173-13. Minor subdivision requirements.
A. Any applicant for land subdivision shall submit 20 copies of a sketch
plat of the proposed subdivision for the purpose of classification and
preliminary discussion. The sketch plat shall be submitted to the
administrative officer at least three weeks prior to the regular meeting
of the approving authority.
B. If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect
shall be made on the plat, which shall be returned to the applicant for
compliance with the procedures in Articles V and VI.
C. The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or other
similarly accurate base, at a scale not less than 50 feet to the inch. The
entire tract shall be shown on one sheet. It shall show or include the
following information:
(1) The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to
the entire tract.
(2) All existing structures and wooded areas within the portion to be
subdivided.
(3) The names of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
(4) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(5) All streets, roads, railroads and streams within 500 feet of a
subdivision.
A. Map requirements. The application shall be accompanied by 20 copies
of the proposed subdivision accurately drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch equals 50 feet, certified by a licensed land surveyor, and drawn
on Mylar or similar material. The minor subdivision plat shall be in
conformance with the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c.141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.), and shall indicate: 142
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-11 (RESERVED) § 173-13
164:523
§ 173-14. Approving authority action.
§ 173-15. Minor subdivision approval.
(1) The location of the lots to be created in relation to the entire tract.
(2) All existing structures and wooded areas within the subdivision and
within 200 feet thereof.
(3) The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
(4) The Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
(5) All streets and streams within 200 feet of the subdivision.
(6) The area in square feet of all lots to be created.
(7) A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relation to
surrounding areas.
(8) Easements, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drainpipes, rights-of-way, drainage easements and prior
variances.
(9) Acreage of the entire parcel to be subdivided.
(10) History of any previous actions or restrictions on the property.
B. The municipal agency shall prepare a checklist setting forth the items
contained in Subsection A above which shall be provided to the
applicant along with the application form. The checklist shall be used
for purposes of determining the completion of the application pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. [Added 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1991:617]
A. The approving authority shall grant or deny approval within 45 days of
submission of a complete and perfected application or within such time
as may be consented to, in writing, by the applicant.
B. Failure of the approving authority to act within the time period shall
constitute minor subdivision approval. A certificate by the Borough
Clerk as to the failure of the approving authority shall be issued upon
the request of the applicant whose signature shall be sufficient in lieu of
the Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority and shall be so
accepted by the county recording officer for the purpose of filing
subdivision plats.
C. Whenever review or approval is required by the County Planning Board
or a state agency, the approving authority shall not accept an
application as perfected unless receipt of approval is received from said
county or state agency. Under appropriate circumstances, the
approving authority may condition its approval upon a timely receipt of
a favorable report from said county or state agency.
§ 173-13 CLOSTER CODE § 173-15
164:524
§ 173-16. Effect of minor subdivision approval.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, shall not be changed or abridged for a period
of two years after the date of minor subdivision approval, provided that
the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as provided
herein.
§ 173-17. Required guaranties.
Before recording a minor subdivision plat or a deed in lieu thereof, the
approving authority may require the installation and maintenance of onand
off-tract improvements. Said improvements may require the furnishing
of performance and maintenance guaranties in accordance with Articles XI
and XII herein.
A. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision, subject to § 173-16.
B. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
approval by the approving authority unless within such a period a plat
in conformance with the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the county recording officer,
the Borough Engineer and the Borough Tax Assessor. In addition,
copies shall be submitted to the Borough Clerk, the Building Inspector/
Chief Construction Official and the administrative officer. Any such plat
or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the Chairman
and Secretary of the approving authority.143
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-15 (RESERVED) § 173-17
164:525

ARTICLE V
Major Subdivision Preliminary Approval
§ 173-18. Submission of application.
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in triplicate, on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for preliminary major subdivision approval shall be filed no less
than 21 days prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority.
Required fees, as provided in Article III, shall be submitted with the
application form.
§ 173-19. Preliminary plat requirements and details.
A. The application shall be accompanied by 15 copies of the proposed
subdivision accurately drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
50 feet, certified by a licensed land surveyor as to existing features and
boundaries, and drawn on Mylar or similar material. The subdivision
plat shall be in conformance with the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). All design features shall be prepared by a
licensed professional engineer.144
B. Preliminary plat details. The preliminary plat shall contain the
following:
(1) The date. All revisions shall be noted and dated.
(2) A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to the
surrounding properties, existing streets and streams within 500
feet of the subdivision.
(3) The title of the development, North arrow, scale, block and lot
number, name and address of the record owner and name and
address, license number and seal of the person preparing the
subdivision. If the owner of the premises is a corporation, the name
and address of the president and secretary shall be submitted on
the application.
(4) All distances shall be in feet and decimals of a foot, and all bearings
shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
(5) The names, as shown on current tax records, of all owners of
property within 200 feet of the subdivision, together with the block
and lot numbers of said property.
(6) The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with the
zone boundaries within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the
property in question.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-18 (RESERVED) § 173-19
164:527
(7) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, building or
setback lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way, to be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor.
(8) Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed restrictions,
exceptions or variances covering all or any part of the parcel. A
copy of such covenants, deed restrictions, exceptions or variances
shall be submitted with the application.
(9) The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersections with
other public streets.
(10) The location of existing buildings and all other structures,
including walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with spot elevations
of such buildings and structures. Structures to be removed shall be
indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain shall be indicated
by solid lines.
(11) The location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures
and utility lines, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe
sizes, grades and direction of flow, locations and inlets, manholes
or other appurtenances and appropriate invert and other
elevations. If any existing utility lines are underground, the
estimated location of said utility lines shall be shown.
(12) Existing and proposed contours, referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic datum, with a contour interval of one foot for slopes
of less than 3%; an interval of two feet for slopes of more than 3%
but less than 15%; and an interval of five feet for slopes of 15% or
more. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines, and
proposed contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
(13) The location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, ponds and marsh areas, as determined by a survey.
(14) All proposed streets, with profiles, indicating grading; and cross
sections showing the width of roadways, the location and width of
sidewalks and the location and size of utility lines conforming to the
borough standards and specifications.
(15) The location of all existing and proposed waterlines, valves and
hydrants and all sewer lines or alternative means of sewerage and
sewage disposal and treatment.
(16) Existing and proposed stormwater drainage system. All plans shall
be accompanied by a separate sketch showing all existing drainage
within 500 feet of any boundary and all areas, such as paved areas,
§ 173-19 CLOSTER CODE § 173-19
164:528
§ 173-20. Procedural requirements for preliminary approval.
grassed areas, wooded areas and any other surface area
contributing to the calculations, and showing methods used in the
drainage calculations.
(17) Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of the tract to be
subdivided and the area, in square feet, of all lots.
(18) Any lands subject to the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964 shall be
duly noted as to the valuation, assessment and taxation in
accordance with § 173-67 herein.
(19) Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority, the County Planning Board or other
governmental agencies for determination that the details of the
subdivision are in accordance with the standards of this chapter,
the Zoning Ordinance145 and all other applicable laws, ordinances
or resolutions.
C. The municipal agency shall prepare a checklist setting forth the items
contained in Subsections A and B above and § 173-20C, which shall be
provided to the applicant along with the application form. The checklist
shall be used for purposes of determining the completion of the
application pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. [Added 11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991:617]
A. Preliminary subdivision plat review.
(1) The applicant shall submit the preliminary subdivision application
and plat maps and payment of all required fees to the
administrative officer, who shall submit copies of the preliminary
plat to the following:
(a) Approving authority attorney.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Planning consultant.
(d) Building Inspector/Chief Construction Official.146
(e) Board of Health.
(f) Fire Department.
(g) Police Department.
(h) Department of Public Works.
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-19 (RESERVED) § 173-20
164:529
(i) Other municipal, county or state officials and agencies as
directed by the approving authority.
(2) Said persons and boards shall make recommendations to the
approving authority, in writing, within 35 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take said
recommendation into account, but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations if the approving
authority finds such recommendations not to be essential to its
determination.
(3) If a preliminary subdivision application is found to be incomplete,
the developer shall be notified, in writing, of the deficiencies
therein by the Board or the Board's designee for the determination
of completeness within 45 days of submission of such application or
it shall be deemed to be properly submitted. [Amended
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
(4) Where adjustments or changes are required in the plat submission,
the applicant shall be required to modify the plat in order to qualify
as a perfected application for public hearing purposes.
B. County Planning Board and other governmental agency approvals.
(1) Any subdivision application requiring County Planning Board or
other governmental agency approval shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Bergen County Planning Board or other
governmental agency for review and approval. The approving
authority may condition any approval that it may grant upon the
timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or other governmental agency by its failure
to report thereon within the required time period.
(2) A preliminary subdivision requiring County Planning Board or
other governmental agency approval which may or may not have
been received at the time of the public hearing in the borough shall
require the public hearing to be continued until such time as the
required reports are received or by the failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
C. Other requirements.
(1) The applicant shall be required to submit proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which preliminary approval is sought.
(2) All applicable fees shall be paid prior to any action by the approving
authority.
D. Public hearings. Upon submission of a perfected application, the
administrative officer shall schedule a public hearing for the applicant.
§ 173-20 CLOSTER CODE § 173-20
164:530
§ 173-21. Effect of preliminary subdivision approval.
The applicant shall meet all of the requirements established in § 173-7C
for public hearings.
E. Time period in which to act.
(1) The approving authority shall grant, condition or deny preliminary
subdivision approval within 45 days of a perfected application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant
for subdivisions of 10 or fewer lots or 95 days for subdivisions
containing more than 10 lots.
(2) Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
periods or to obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing,
shall constitute preliminary approval by the approving authority.
A. If the approving authority acts favorably on a preliminary plat, the
applicant shall submit six copies of a correct map to the administrative
officer. The Chairman and Secretary shall affix their signatures to the
plat with a notation that it has received preliminary approval, and one
such plat shall be returned to the applicant for compliance with final
approval requirements.
B. Except as provided herein, preliminary approval of a major subdivision
shall confer the following rights for a three-year period from the date of
approval to the applicant:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and offstreet
improvements; except that nothing herein shall be construed
to prevent the borough from modifying by ordinance such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat, as the case may be.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern beyond the
three-year period.
(4) In the case of a subdivision of 50 acres or more, the approving
authority may grant the rights referred to in Subsection B(1), (2)
and (3) above for such a period of time, longer than three years, as
shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable,
§ 173-20 (RESERVED) § 173-21
164:531
taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter and the
approving authority may thereafter grant an extension to
preliminary approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under preliminary approval, the potential
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
section or sections awaiting final approval, economic conditions
and the comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if
the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
shall govern beyond the three-year period.
C. Failure to obtain final approval within the prescribed time limits as
herein defined shall void the preliminary plat approval.
§ 173-21 CLOSTER CODE § 173-21
164:532
ARTICLE VI
Major Subdivision Final Approval
§ 173-22. Submission of application.
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in triplicate, on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for final subdivision approval shall be filed no less than 21 days
prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required fees,
as provided in Article III, shall be submitted with the application form.
§ 173-23. Plat requirements and details.
A. The application shall be accompanied by an original and 20 copies of
the proposed final subdivision, drawn on Mylar or similar material. The
plat shall not differ substantially from the approved preliminary plat.147
B. Final plat details. The final plat shall be drawn in ink, on tracing cloth,
at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet and in compliance
with all the provisions of the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.). The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
(1) The date, name and location of the subdivision, name of the owner,
graphic scale and reference meridian.
(2) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or
dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with
accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs
and central angles of all curves; and the area of each lot.
(3) The names, exact locations and widths of all existing and recorded
streets intersecting or paralleling the plot boundaries within a
distance of 200 feet.
(4) The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites, other
than residential, shall be noted.
(5) Lot, block and street numbers as approved by the Borough
Engineer of the Borough of Closter, including lot and block
numbers of abutting property.
(6) Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
(7) The location and description of all monuments.
(8) The names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-22 (RESERVED) § 173-23
164:533
§ 173-24. Procedural requirements for final subdivision approval.
(9) Certification by the applicant's surveyor and engineer as to the
accuracy of details of the plat.
(10) Certification that the applicant is the agent or owner of the land or
that the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
(11) When approval of a plat is required by any other officer or body of a
municipality, county or state, such approval shall be certified on the
plat or evidence shall be submitted that an application has been
made for such approval.
(12) The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement of the Borough
Engineer that he or she is in receipt of maps showing the position
of all stormwater drains, sanitary sewer mains and all utilities in
their exact locations and elevations, together with any other data
required and indicating the estimated cost of the installation of all
public improvements required to be installed by the applicant.
(13) Proposed final grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one
inch equals five feet vertical and one inch equals 50 feet horizontal,
on sheets twenty-two by thirty-six (22 x 36) inches, and drawings
shall include both plans and profiles and shall show elevations of all
monuments referred to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey
level bench marks, and such elevations shall be shown in feet and
hundredths of a foot.
(14) Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
(15)Written proof that the lands set aside or shown for easement,
public use or streets are free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances.
C. The municipal agency shall prepare a checklist setting forth the items
contained in Subsections A and B above which shall be provided to the
applicant along with the application form. The checklist shall be used
for purposes of determining the completion of the application pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. [Added 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1991:617]
A. Final subdivision plat review.
(1) The applicant shall submit the completed application and maps and
the payment of all required fees to the administrative officer, who
shall submit copies of the same to the following:
(a) Borough Engineer.
(b) Board of Health.
(c) Planning consultant.
(d) Board of Public Works.
§ 173-23 CLOSTER CODE § 173-24
164:534
(e) Approving authority attorney.
(2) Said persons and Boards shall make recommendations, in writing,
to the approving authority within 35 days of the application
submission.
B. Determination as to compliance. The Borough Engineer and Planner
and the approving authority attorney, where appropriate, shall advise
the approving authority of the following:
(1) The nature of the improvements to be required as a condition of
final approval.
(2) The estimated value of the improvements installed or to be
installed.
(3) The nature and amount of performance guaranties, if any, to be
required as a condition to final approval.
(4) The provisions of open space reservation or dedication and the
standards for open space organizations.
(5) The effects, if any, of valuation, assessment and taxation of the
Farmland Assessment Act.
(6) The findings and compliance of all provisions under planned
development status.
(7) The amounts to be deposited to reimburse the approving authority
and the borough for costs incurred or to be incurred for legal,
engineering, planning and other professional reviews and work, for
recording fees and for any other costs anticipated by the approving
agency, where applicable.
(8) Any other conditions upon which final approval will be granted or
conditioned.
C. Applicant's responsibilities. The applicant shall be required to submit
the following for the approving authority's approval:
(1) A developer's agreement, prepared by the approving authority
attorney, setting forth the obligations of the applicant in connection
with the final approval.
(2) A performance guaranty, in a form satisfactory to the approving
authority and borough, complying with Article VII of this chapter,
and guaranteeing performance of the developer's agreement.
(3) Maintenance guaranties, if any, for work completed prior to final
approval.
(4) Deeds for any easements, rights-of-way or public lands in a form
satisfactory to the approving authority and Borough Attorneys.
§ 173-24 (RESERVED) § 173-24
164:535
(5) Evidence of compliance with other conditions imposed by the
approving authority.
(6) Proof of payment of taxes and assessments as provided in
§ 173-20C.
(7) Funds to be deposited to reimburse the approving authority and
borough for costs incurred or to be incurred for legal, engineering,
planning and other consultant reports, for recording fees and for
any other costs anticipated by the approving authority.
D. County Planning Board and other governmental agency approvals. Any
final approval required for county subdivision approval or by other
governmental agencies shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Bergen County Planning Board or other governmental agencies for
review and approval. The approving authority may condition any
approval that it may grant upon the timely receipt of a favorable report
on the application by the County Planning Board or other governmental
agency by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
E. Approving authority action.
(1) Grant of final approval.
(a) Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete and perfected application to the
administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the approving
authority to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
final approval, and a certificate of the Borough Clerk as to the
failure of the approving authority to act shall be issued upon
the request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient, in lieu of
the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, and
shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for
purposes of filing subdivision plats.
(b) Unless the preliminary plat has been approved without
changes, the final plat shall incorporate all changes or
modifications required by the approving authority.
(c) The final plat shall be accompanied by a certificate of the
Borough Engineer that he or she is in receipt of a map which
shows all utilities in their exact locations and elevations and
which identifies the utilities already installed and those to be
installed. The certificate shall also state:
[1] That the applicant has installed all required
improvements; or
[2] That the applicant has posted a performance guaranty
with the Borough Clerk in sufficient amount and proper
§ 173-24 CLOSTER CODE § 173-24
164:536
form to assure the completion of all required
improvements.
(2) 148Upon final approval by the approving authority and when the
signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the approving
authority have been placed on the original, the administrative
officer shall request the applicant to have 11 copies of such final
plat, drawn on Mylar or similar material, filing a copy thereof with
each of the following:
(a) Approving authority administrative officer.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Building Inspector/Chief Construction Official.149
(d) Tax Assessor.
(e) Borough Clerk.
(f) Fire Department.
(g) County Planning Board.
(h) Other governmental units or municipal officials where
required.
F. Final subdivision approval; plats; filing.
(1) Final subdivision approval shall expire 95 days from the date of the
signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have
been duly filed by the applicant with the county recording officer.
(2) The approving authority may for good and sufficient cause shown
extend the period of recording for an additional period not to
exceed 190 days from the date of the signing of the plat.
(3) No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county
recording officer until it has been approved by the approving
authority as indicated on the instrument by the signature of the
Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority or a certificate
has been issued pursuant to Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975.150
The signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the approving
authority shall not be affixed until the developer has posted the
guaranties required pursuant to Articles XI and XII of this chapter,
where appropriate. If the county recording officer records any plat
without such approval, such recording shall be deemed null and
148. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
150. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 173-24 (RESERVED) § 173-24
164:537
§ 173-25. Effect of final subdivision approval.
void, and upon the request of Closter Borough, the plat shall be
expunged from the official records.
(4) It shall be the duty of the county recording officer to notify the
approving authority, in writing, within seven days of the filing of
any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of filing and
official number.
A. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary subdivision
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the applicant
pursuant to § 173-21 of this chapter, whether conditionally or
otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date
of final approval, provided that the rights conferred by this section shall
expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the required time
period. If the applicant has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and has duly recorded the plat as required, the approving
authority may extend such period of protection for extensions of one
year, but not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, the granting of final approval terminates the
time period of preliminary approval pursuant to § 173-21 of this chapter
for the section granted final approval.
B. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development or
planned residential development or residential cluster of 50 acres or
more or conventional subdivision for 150 acres or more, the approving
authority may grant for such period of time longer than two years as
shall be determined by the approving agency to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
thereafter and the approving authority may thereafter grant an
extension of final approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under final approval, the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, economic
conditions and the comprehensiveness of the development.
§ 173-24 CLOSTER CODE § 173-25
164:538
ARTICLE VII
Site Plan Approval Procedure
§ 173-26. Application of requirements.
§ 173-27. When required. [Amended 5-13-1981 by Ord. No.
1981:404]
A. Except as provided herein, no building permit shall be issued for a
building, structure or use or any enlargement, expansion or change of
use unless a site plan is first submitted and approved by the approving
authority.
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be given unless all construction and
conditions conform to the site plan as approved, unless conditionally
approved by the approving authority as provided herein.
A. Site plan review shall not be required for single-family detached
dwellings or for such accessory uses as a private garage, toolhouse,
garden and private greenhouses, swimming pools and other similar
uses incidental to a single detached dwelling or for similar
improvements as accessory uses to a principal use.
B. Site plan approval shall not be required where: [Amended 3-13-1985
by Ord. No. 1985:491]
(1) Ordinary or minor repairs to the exterior or interior of a building do
not involve structural changes or enlargements of the building, as
defined in the Uniform Construction Code of the State of New
Jersey.
(2) Renovations or alterations to the exterior or interior of any building
or structure do not involve any enlargement of the building or
major structural change, as defined in the Uniform Construction
Code of the State of New Jersey.
C. However, the Construction Code Official shall refer any application for a
building permit to the approving authority for site plan approval, §
173-27B(1) and (2) notwithstanding, where the construction,
reconstruction, alteration or change of use will affect circulation, water
supply, sewage disposal, drainage, landscaping, signs, lighting, offstreet
parking or loading or the lack of any or all of these factors,
environmental factors and other considerations as specified in this
chapter.
D. Except as provided in § 173-27B(1) and (2) herein, all construction or
enlargement of a building or structure shall require site plan approval.
However, any change in use to a permitted use within the zoning
district in any building or structure thereon shall not necessarily
require Board approval, provided that the proposed use is approved by
the Zoning Officer in conjunction with the Construction Code Official
when required. The proposed user must submit an affidavit and other
§ 173-26 (RESERVED) § 173-27
164:539
§ 173-28. Minor site plan requirements. [Added 11-25-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991:617]
documents satisfactory to these administrative officers. A list of the
required documents may be obtained from the Construction Office.
Upon receipt of satisfactory information, the Zoning Officer, in
conjunction with the Construction Code Official where issues are
related to the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, may approve
the use administratively. Alternatively, if, in the opinion of the Zoning
Officer and/or the Construction Code Official, there has been a material
change in the use of the property contrary to the statements contained
in the user’s documentation, then the user may be required to apply to
the appropriate board for approval of the use, as otherwise set forth
in Chapter 173 of the Closter Code. In addition, where the change of
use will have a more adverse effect than the existing use on circulation,
water supply, sewage disposal, drainage, landscaping, signs, lighting,
off-street parking or loading or the lack of any of these factors,
environmental factors and other considerations as specified in this
chapter, site plan approval will be required. [Amended 3-13-1985 by
Ord. No. 1985:491; 11-25-1991 by Ord. No. 1991:617; 3-11-1992
by Ord. No. 1992:618; 9-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1130]
A. Application for a minor site plan shall be submitted to the
administrative officer, in writing, in triplicate, on forms supplied by the
municipal agency. Receipt of an application for minor site plan approval
shall be filed no less than 10 days prior to the regular meeting date of
the municipal agency. The application fee required shall be that as set
forth in Chapter 35, Land Use Procedures, and shall be submitted with
the application form.
B. The application shall be accompanied by 15 copies of a sketch plot of
the proposed minor site plan, accurately drawn to a scale of not less
than one inch equals 50 feet. The sketch plot shall indicate:
(1) The title block, entitled: "Minor Site Plan of Lot _____, Block _____."
(2) The date of the plan and any revision dates, the scale and North
point.
(3) The layout of the proposed use, including floor plans and
elevations.
(4) A key map showing location of the subject lot(s) with reference to
surrounding areas and existing street intersections.
(5) The names and addresses of record owners and applicants, if
different than the owners.
(6) The location of all signs.
(7) The names of all owners and records of all properties within 200
feet and the blocks and parcel numbers of the property as shown on
§ 173-27 CLOSTER CODE § 173-28
164:540
§ 173-29. Filing for preliminary site plan approval.
§ 173-30. Procedural requirements for preliminary site plan
approval.
the latest tax record; in addition, all adjoining structures should be
indicated on the sketch plot.
(8) Boundaries of the property, building or setback lines and lines of
the existing street, lot reservations, easements and areas dedicated
to public use, including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way.
(9) A copy of any covenants, deed restrictions or exceptions that are
intended to cover all or any part of the tract.
(10) The dimensions of all existing and proposed parking areas.
(11) The proposed lighting, screening and landscaping.
(12) Such other information or data as may be required by the
municipal agency in order to determine that the details on the
minor site plan are in accordance with the standards of the Zoning
Ordinance151 or standards contained herein and other municipal,
county or state ordinances and regulations.
C. The municipal agency shall prepare a checklist setting forth the items
contained in Subsection B above which shall be provided to the
applicant along with the application form. The checklist shall be used
for purposes of determining the completion of the application pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3.
A. An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in
writing, in triplicate, on forms supplied by the approving authority.
Receipt of an application for preliminary site plan approval shall be
filed no less than 21 days prior to the regular meeting date of the
approving authority. Required fees, as provided in Article III, shall be
submitted with the application form.
B. The approving authority shall accept simultaneous applications for
preliminary and final site plan approval where so requested by the
applicant, provided that all of the conditions, requirements and
safeguards established for preliminary and final site plan approval are
adhered to.
A. Preliminary site plan review.
(1) The applicant shall submit the preliminary site plan application and
20 copies of plat maps and payment of all required fees to the
administrative officer, who shall submit copies of the preliminary
plat to the following:
151. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 173-28 (RESERVED) § 173-30
164:541
(a) Approving authority attorney.
(b) Borough Engineer.
(c) Planning consultant.
(d) Building Inspector/Chief Construction Official.152
(e) Board of Health.
(f) Fire Department.
(g) Police Department.
(h) Department of Public Works.
(i) Other municipal officials and agencies as directed by the
approving authority.
(2) Said professionals and Boards shall make recommendations to the
approving authority, in writing, within 35 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take said
recommendations into account, but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations which are not
essential to its determination.
(3) If a preliminary site plan application is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified, in writing, of the deficiencies therein by
the Board or the Board's designee for the determination of
completeness within 45 days of the submission of such application
or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted. [Amended
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
(4) Where adjustments or changes are required in the site plan
submission, the applicant shall be required to modify the plat in
order to qualify as a perfected application as to content and for
public hearing purposes.
B. County Planning Board and other governmental agency approvals.
(1) Any site plan application requiring County Planning Board or other
governmental agency approvals shall be submitted by the applicant
to the Bergen County Planning Board or other governmental
agency for review and approval. The approving authority may
condition any approval that it may grant upon the timely receipt of
a favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board
or other governmental agency by its failure to report thereon
within the required time period.
(2) A preliminary site plan requiring County Planning Board or other
governmental approval which may not have been received at the
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-30 CLOSTER CODE § 173-30
164:542
§ 173-31. Effect of preliminary site plan approval.
time of the public hearing in the community shall require the public
hearing to be continued until such time as the required reports
are received or by the failure to report thereon within the required
time period.
C. Other requirements.
(1) The applicant shall be required to submit proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property for which preliminary site plan approval is sought.
(2) All applicable fees shall be paid prior to any action by the approving
authority.
D. Public hearings. Upon submission of a perfected application, the
administrative officer shall schedule a public hearing for the applicant.
The applicant shall meet all of the requirements established in § 173-7
for public hearings.
E. Time period in which to act.
(1) The approving authority shall grant, condition or deny preliminary
site plan approval within 45 days of receipt of a perfected and
complete site plan application for a site plan of 10 acres or less or
within 95 days of submission of a perfected and complete
application for a site plan of more than 10 acres or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant for both
classes of site plans.
(2) Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
periods or to obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing,
shall constitute a preliminary approval by the approving authority.
A. Preliminary approval of a site plan shall confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of preliminary
approval:
(1) That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and on-tract
and off-tract improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the
specific site plan. The municipality may modify by ordinance such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as they may
relate to public health and safety, provided that such modifications
are in accord with amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent
to approval.
§ 173-30 (RESERVED) § 173-31
164:543
§ 173-32. Filing for final site plan approval.
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer, in writing,
in triplicate, on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for final approval of a site plan shall be filed no less than 21 days
prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required fees,
as provided in Article III, shall be submitted with the application form.
§ 173-33. Procedural requirements for final site plan approval.
(2) That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
(3) That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for an additional
period of one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(4) In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the
approving authority may grant the rights referred to in Subsection
A(1), (2) and (3) above, for such a time period, longer than three
years, as shall be determined by the approving authority to be
reasonable, taking into consideration the number of dwelling units
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter and the
approving authority may thereafter grant an extension to
preliminary approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under preliminary approval, the potential
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
section or sections awaiting final approval, economic conditions
and the comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if
the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
B. Failure to obtain final approval within the prescribed time limits, as
herein defined, shall void the preliminary plat approval.
A. Final site plan review.
(1) The applicant shall submit the final site plan application and 20
copies of the plat maps and payment of all required fees to the
administrative officer, who shall submit copies of the plat to the
following:
(a) Borough Engineer.
(b) Board of Health.
§ 173-31 CLOSTER CODE § 173-33
164:544
(c) Planning consultant.
(d) Department of Public Works.
(e) Approving authority attorney.
(2) Said professionals and Boards shall make recommendations to the
approving authority, in writing, within 45 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take said
recommendations into account, but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations if the approving
authority finds such recommendations not to be essential to its
determination.
(3) The approving authority shall review the application for final site
plan approval with or without conditions, provided that the
following requirements have been met:
(a) The detailed drawings, specifications and estimates meet all
applicable codes and ordinances.
(b) The final plans are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary site plan and conditions governing the same.
(c) All improvements have been installed or bonds posted to insure
the installation of improvements.
(d) The applicant agrees, in writing, to all conditions of final
approval.
(e) Proof has been submitted that no taxes or assessments for
local improvements are due or delinquent for which final site
plan approval is sought.
(f) All applicable fees have been paid prior to any final action by
the approving authority.
(g) Requirements of other governmental units have been complied
with.
B. County Planning Board and other governmental agency approval.
Whenever review or approval is required by the Bergen County
Planning Board or by other governmental agencies, a final site plan
application shall be submitted by the applicant for review and approval.
The approving authority shall condition any approval that it may grant
upon the timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board or other governmental agency by its failure to
report thereon within the required time period.
C. Time period in which to act.
(1) The approving authority shall grant, condition or deny final site
plan approval within 45 days of receipt of a perfected and complete
§ 173-33 (RESERVED) § 173-33
164:545
§ 173-34. Effect of final site plan approval.
site plan application or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
(2) Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
period or to obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing, shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the Borough Clerk as
to the failure of the approving authority to act shall be issued upon
the request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other evidence of approval.
D. Final site plan approval. Upon approval of the site development plan
and upon compliance with all conditions, the Engineer and the
Chairman and the Secretary of the approving authority shall be
authorized to sign the plan, and the Secretary shall affix the seal of the
Board. The tracing shall be and remain a permanent record of the
approving authority, and the applicant shall supply to the approving
authority the number of prints reasonably required for its records. A
print shall be forwarded to each of the professionals identified in §
173-33A herein.
A. Final approval shall terminate the time period of preliminary approval
for the section granted final approval and shall guarantee the applicant
that the zoning requirements applicable to preliminary approval and all
other rights conferred upon the applicant as part of preliminary
approval shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of
final approval.
B. Final approval shall expire two years from the date of final approval
unless the applicant has secured a building permit to commence
construction. The approving authority may extend final approval, and
the protection offered under § 173-33 for one year. Up to three such
extensions may be granted.
C. In the case of a site plan for a planned development of 50 acres or
conventional site plan for 150 acres or more, the approving authority
may extend the rights granted under final approval for such period of
time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the approving
authority to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter and the approving
authority may thereafter grant an extension of final approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the approving
authority to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval, the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development.
§ 173-33 CLOSTER CODE § 173-34
164:546
§ 173-35. Other site plan requirements.
D. The approving authority may, as a condition of final approval:
(1) Grant final approval only for designated geographic sections of the
development.
(2) Grant final approval for certain work but require resubmission for
final approval for designated elements, such as but not limited to
landscaping, signs, street furniture, etc., and require approval of
these elements as a prerequisite for a certificate of occupancy or
zoning permit.
(3) Condition the granting of a certificate of occupancy or zoning
permit subject to the applicant or developer or subsequent heirs or
assignees meeting certain requirements within a designated period
of time, not to exceed one year from the date of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy or zoning permit. This may include but is
not limited to the installation of improvements, reevaluation of
circulation patterns, etc.
A. Site plan amendments. Amended site plan applications shall be filed
with the approving authority and shall be considered at the next regular
meeting date of the approving authority, provided that the amended
application is received no less than 14 days before said meeting date
and said amendments are minor in nature.
B. Compliance.
(1) All proposed improvements of development indicated on the
approved site plan shall meet the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances and specifications of the community, county,
state or federal governments and other agencies with jurisdiction
over matters pertaining to site development.
(2) It shall be the joint responsibility of the Engineer and the Building
Inspector/Chief Construction Official to enforce their respective
rules and regulations to ensure compliance with the site plan
approval map and other specified conditions as may be imposed on
the development.153
C. Site plan binding. The site plan, as approved by the approving authority,
shall be binding upon the applicant. Any changes from the approved
plan shall require resubmission and reapproval by the approving
authority except as provided in § 173-35A.
D. Revocation of building permit or certificate of occupancy. In the event
of a failure to comply with any condition of site plan approval, the
Building Inspector/Chief Construction Official, on his or her own
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-34 (RESERVED) § 173-35
164:547
initiative or upon a recommendation from the Engineer, may revoke the
building permit or certificate of occupancy, as the case may be, and
seek to enjoin the violation or take such other steps as permitted by
law.154
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-35 CLOSTER CODE § 173-35
164:548
ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards for Subdivisions
§ 173-36. General.
§ 173-37. Streets.
The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map
shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets
or with a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet.
A. The applicant shall observe the following requirements and principles
of land subdivision in each subdivision or portion thereof.
B. The subdivision plat shall conform to the design standards that will
encourage good development patterns within the borough. Where
either an Official Map or Master Plan, or both, have been adopted, the
subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown
thereon. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, historic sites and public
areas shown on an adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall be
considered in the approval of subdivision plats.
A. Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage
through traffic unless deemed necessary by the approving authority.
B. Regional highways. Subdivisions abutting regional highways may be
required to provide a marginal service road or reverse frontage with a
buffer strip for planting or some other means of separation of through
and local traffic as the approving authority may determine to be
appropriate.
C. Pavement width of streets. The pavement width of all streets shall be a
minimum of 30 feet for all local streets and may be greater for collector
and arterial streets.
D. Minimum right-of-way width. The right-of-way width shall be measured
from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than 50 feet in any case,
except when shown at a greater width on the Master Plan or Official
Map of the borough or said street constitutes an extension of an
existing street with a greater width than 50 feet.
E. Substandard street right-of-way and pavement width. In connection
with subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the
street width requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall dedicate
additional right-of-way or pavement width along either one or both
sides of said road. If the subdivision is along one side only, one-half (1/2)
of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
F. Street grades. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed
6%. Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have
a minimum grade of less than one-half percent (1/2%).
§ 173-36 (RESERVED) § 173-37
164:549
§ 173-38. Block patterns.
G. Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right
angles as is possible and in no case be less than 60°. The block corners
at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a
radius of not less than 20 feet.
H. Street jogs. Street jogs shall have center-line offsets of not less than
125 feet.
I. Reverse curve tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be
introduced between reverse curves on arterial, collector and minor
streets.
J. Street line deflection. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they
shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
K. Change in grade. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper
sight distance.
L. Culs-de-sac.
(1) Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall be a minimum of 300 feet and
not be longer than 600 feet and shall provide a turnaround at the
end with a radius of not less than 50 feet and tangent whenever
possible to the right side of the street. Length is measured from the
center line of the existing right-of-way to the center of the radius
point of the bulb (cul-de-sac). Where culs-de-sac are constructed in
residential zones, no less than three new residences can be placed
on said cul-de-sac. [Amended 11-13-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:880]
(2) If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turnaround
shall be provided and provisions made for future extension of the
street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties.
M. Street names. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so
nearly duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets.
The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
N. Sidewalks. Where sidewalks are required, there shall be provided a
minimum walkway width of five feet constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the Borough Engineer.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of the lot required in the area by the Zoning
Ordinance155 and to provide for convenient access, circulation control
and safety of street traffic.
§ 173-37 CLOSTER CODE § 173-38
164:550
§ 173-39. Lots.
§ 173-40. Public use; service roads; floodways.
B. In blocks of 1,000 feet or more in length, pedestrian crosswalks may be
required in locations deemed necessary by the approving authority.
Such walkways shall be at least 10 feet wide in the right-of-way with a
five-foot-wide improved pavement surface. Said walkway may also
include other improvements, including streetlighting.
C. For all uses including commercial, industrial and planned development
group areas, block sizes shall be sufficient to accommodate the
proposed uses and to permit reasonable access, circulation and firefighting
and emergency services.
A. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.156
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved and improved street with a rightof-
way width of at least 50 feet, except as provided herein.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to such factors such as rock formations, drainage
conditions, watercourses, historic sites, flood conditions or similar
circumstances, the approving authority may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
A. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such
watercourses and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
B. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
C. Any public use or area shall be of suitable size, shape and location
under the provision of reservation contained herein.
D. In a large development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
155. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
156. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 173-38 (RESERVED) § 173-40
164:551
§ 173-41. Water mains, culverts and storm sewers.
All installations of water mains, culverts and storm sewers shall be
connected with an approved system and shall be adequate to handle all
present and probable future developments.
§ 173-42. Underground utilities.
§ 173-43. Topsoil protection, soil erosion and sediment control.
be at least 15 feet wide and shall be located in consultation with the
utility companies or municipal departments concerned.
A. For all major subdivisions, the applicant shall arrange with the serving
utility for the underground installation of all utility distribution supply
lines and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as a part of its
tariffs as the same are on file with the State of New Jersey Board of
Public Utility Commissioners and shall submit to the approving
authority prior to the granting of final approval a written instrument
from each serving utility which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this subsection; provided, however, that lots in such
subdivisions which abut existing streets where overhead electric or
telephone distribution supply lines have theretofore been installed on
any portion of the streets involved may be supplied with electric and
telephone service from such overhead lines, but the service connections
from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground. The
location of access facilities for servicing the utility in the proposed
subdivision shall be developed in conjunction with and as a part of the
complete subdivision plan.
B. Whenever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an
appropriate utility easement not less than 20 feet in width shall be
provided.
C. The approving authority of the Borough of Closter may, in its discretion,
waive the installation of the underground utilities where such
installation will result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties
to or exceptional and undue hardship upon the applicant by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary
and exceptional situations or conditions of the lands in such
subdivision.
D. Whenever underground utilities are installed in accordance with the
provisions hereof, fire alarm systems servicing the development may be
required to be installed in an appropriate subsurface distribution
system connecting the necessary alarm stations. The manner of
installation, number and location of alarm stations shall be in a manner
approved by the Fire Department.
§ 173-40 CLOSTER CODE § 173-43
164:552
§ 173-44. Sanitary sewers.
A. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
B. All applications for subdivision shall be in accordance with the Closter
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance,157 or, where same has
not been adopted, the applicant shall meet the requirements of Chapter
251 of the Laws of 1975, the New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act.158
A. Plan and profile of sanitary sewers. The applicant shall provide plans of
profiles for sanitary sewers as follows:
(1) Plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet.
(2) Profiles shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 50 feet
horizontally and one inch equals five feet vertically.
(3) Construction details shall be shown at a larger scale as may be
required for clarity.
(4) Plans shall be complete and show all existing and proposed
property lines, buildings, structures, utilities, geographical
features, street grades, rights-of-way, cellar and soil pipe elevations
and details of proposed sewer construction.
(5) All elevations shall be based upon mean sea level as established by
the New Jersey Geodetic Control Survey bench marks.
(6) Plans and profiles shall be clearly shown on sheets not exceeding
thirty-six by twenty-six (36 x 26) inches in dimension.
(7) Profiles shall show the rate of grade of sewers between manholes,
elevations of inverts and tops of manholes and stations of
manholes.
(8) Said plans and profiles shall be prepared by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey.
B. Design and calculations report.
(1) A report prepared by a licensed New Jersey engineer, including the
following:
(a) Design data and calculations of proposed sewers.
(b) Drainage area map indicating the entire drainage area to be
served presently and ultimately by the proposed sewers drawn
157. Editor's Note: See Ch. 167, Soil Removal.
158. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
§ 173-43 (RESERVED) § 173-44
164:553
to a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, except where the area
cannot be drawn on one sheet, then the scale shall be one inch
equals 500 feet.
(c) Flow quantities from the entire drainage area.
(d) Structural computations and load for all pipes.
(e) Design computations for all special structures.
(2) Where information pertinent to the design, such as borings, has
been collected or is required, such information shall be submitted
with the report.
C. Pipe specifications. The following standards for pipes shall apply.
(1) Sanitary sewer mains. The pipe shall be asbestos-cement pipe,
minimum Class 2400, or an approved substitute with the written
consent of the Sewer Engineer or Borough Engineer.
(2) House connections.
(a) The pipe shall be asbestos-cement pipe, minimum Class 2400,
or an approved substitute with the written consent of the
Sewer Engineer or Borough Engineer.
(b) House connections shall be installed from the main sewer to
the property line with an identifying stake.
(c) The minimum slope shall be one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot.
(d) Watertight plugs or caps shall be furnished at all dead ends.
D. Exfiltration and infiltration tests.
(1) After the pipe has been laid and backfilled, an exfiltration or
infiltration test shall be made on each section of the pipeline
between manholes.
(2) The maximum allowable amount of exfiltration or infiltration shall
not exceed a rate of 100 gallons per inch of pipe diameter, per mile,
per 24 hours.
E. As-built data.
(1) Drawings shall be submitted to the borough showing the final
locations and elevations of all installations, including all house
connections. The house connection shall be located at the property
line and referenced to a permanent marker.
(2) The as-built plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the State of New Jersey.
(3) The house connections shall be marked by an incised "S," two and
one-half (21/2) inches high on the top of the curb. A well-marked
§ 173-44 CLOSTER CODE § 173-44
164:554
stake is to be used if a curb does not exist. Upon installation of
curb, the location of the connection will be marked on the top of
the curb.
(4) The developer shall submit the original tracing on cloth, and two
copies of the as-built plan shall be submitted to the borough so that
additional copies may be reproduced therefrom.
§ 173-44 (RESERVED) § 173-44
164:555

ARTICLE IX
Site Plan Details
§ 173-45. Information to be indicated on site plan.
A. All applications for site plan approval shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a professional engineer or architect. They shall bear the
signature and seal of a licensed land surveyor as to topographic and
boundary survey data.
B. All site plans shall comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth
and shall contain the following information and data where applicable:
(1) A title block shall be indicated in the lower right-hand corner of the
plan and shall include the name and address of the record owner,
including the block and lot number of the site; the title of the
development; and the name, address, license number and seal of
the person preparing the plan. If the owner is a corporation, the
name and address of the president and secretary shall be
submitted with the application.
(2) A date block of the site plan adjacent to the title block containing
the date of preparation. All subsequent revisions shall be noted and
dated.
(3) A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding areas and existing street intersections within 1,000
feet of the boundaries of the subject premises.
(4) A scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch shall be used and a
graphic representation of the scale shall be displayed, and a North
arrow. All distances and dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of
a foot, and all bearings shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
(5) The names of all owners of adjacent property within 200 feet of the
subject premises, together with the block and lot numbers of said
property, as shown on the current municipal tax records.
(6) Zone boundaries shall be shown on the site plan as they affect the
parcel. Adjacent zone districts within 200 feet shall also be
indicated. Such features may be shown on a separate map or as a
key on the detail map itself.
(7) Survey data showing boundaries of the property, required building
or setback lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way.
(8) Reference to any existing covenants, deed restrictions, easements
or exceptions that are in effect or are intended to cover all or any of
the tract. A copy of such covenants, deed restrictions, easements or
exceptions shall be submitted with the application. If there are no
§ 173-45 (RESERVED) § 173-45
164:557
known covenants, deed restrictions, easements or exceptions
affecting the site, a notation to that affect shall be indicated on the
site plan map.
(9) Location of existing buildings on the site which shall remain and all
other structures, such as walls, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways,
etc., with the spot elevations of such structures. Structures to be
removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain
shall be indicated by solid lines.
(10) All distances, as measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersection with any
other street.
(11) Location plans and elevations of all proposed buildings and other
structures, including required yard and setback areas, building
height in feet and stories, lot coverage and improved lot coverage
calculations.
(12) Location, height, dimensions and details of all signs, either
freestanding or affixed to a building. Where signs are not to be
provided, a notation to that effect shall be indicated on the site
plan.
(13) Location of all storm drainage structures, soil erosion and sediment
control devices and utility lines, whether publicly or privately
owned, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of flow; and if any
existing utility lines are underground, the estimated location of
said already underground utility lines shall be shown.
(14) Existing and proposed contours, referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic datum, with a contour interval of one foot for slopes
of 3% or less; an interval of two feet for slopes of more than 3% but
less than 15%; and an interval of five feet for slopes of 15% or
more. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines and
proposed contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
(15) Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, where available, ponds and marsh areas, as may be
determined by a survey.
(16) All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading, and cross
sections showing the width of roadways, the location and width of
sidewalks, where required, and the location and size of utility lines
according to community standards and specifications.
(17) The proposed use or uses of land and buildings and the proposed
location of buildings, including proposed grades. Floor space of all
buildings and the estimated number of employees, housing units or
other capacity measurements, where required, shall also be
§ 173-45 CLOSTER CODE § 173-45
164:558
indicated. If the precise use of the building is unknown at the time
of application, an amendment plan showing the proposed use shall
be required prior to a certificate of occupancy.
(18) All means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site onto
public or private streets showing the size and location of driveways
and curb cuts, including the possible organization of traffic
channels, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional width and
other traffic controls which may be required. Improvements such
as roads, curbs, sidewalks and other design details shall be
indicated, including dimensions of parking stalls, access aisles,
curb radii, direction of traffic flow and other conditions as may be
required in the Zoning Ordinance159 or this chapter.
(19) The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading
areas showing the size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
(20) The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and all
sewer lines or alternative means of water supply or sewage
disposal and treatment in conformance with the applicable
municipal standards and appropriate utility companies, where
applicable.
(21) The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and time of
proposed outdoor lighting in conformance with applicable
standards of the community, including the type of standards to be
employed, the radius of light and the intensity in footcandles.
(22) The proposed screening and landscaping and a planting plan
indicating the natural vegetation to remain, the areas to be planted
and the type of vegetation to be utilized.
(23) The proposed stormwater drainage system so as to conform with a
design based on a fifteen-year storm, using a one-hour intensity of
two inches. All site plans shall be accompanied by a plan sketch
showing all existing drainage within 500 feet of any boundary and
all areas such as paved areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and any
other surface area contributing to the calculations and other
methods used in the determination.
(24) Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority in order to determine that the details on the
site plan are in accordance with the standards of the Zoning
Ordinance160 or standards contained herein and other municipal,
county or state ordinances and regulations.
(25) A table shall be provided on the site plan indicating in the left-hand
column the Zoning and Site Plan Ordinance requirements, as
159. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 173-45 (RESERVED) § 173-45
164:559
§ 173-46. Legend to be indicated on site plan.
The following legends shall be indicated on the site plan.
provided herein, and in the right-hand column the corresponding
dimension and areas for the proposed plan.
(a) Minimum lot area.
(b) Minimum lot width.
(c) Minimum lot depth.
(d) Maximum building or structure height (in feet and stories).
(e) Floor area or other volume measure of building.
(f) Minimum front yard.
(g) Minimum side yard(s).
(h) Minimum rear yard(s).
(i) Maximum lot coverage, by buildings.
(j) Maximum lot coverage, by impervious materials.
(k) Required planted areas.
(l) Number of required parking spaces.
(m) Distance to nearest residential zone district line.
(n) Number of employees projected to be on the site at the same
time.
C. The municipal agency shall prepare a checklist setting forth the items
contained in Subsections A and B above and § 173-45 which shall be
provided to the applicant along with the application form. The checklist
shall be used for purposes of determining the completion of the
application pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3. [Added 11-25-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991:617]
A. To be signed before submission:
I CONSENT TO THE FILING OF THIS SITE PLAN WITH THE
____________________ OF THE BOROUGH OF CLOSTER.
Applicant_________________________________ Date
B. To be completed before submission:
SITE PLAN OF
LOT ___________________ BLOCK _______________ ZONE
DATE ______________ SCALE
§ 173-45 CLOSTER CODE § 173-46
164:560
APPLICANT
ADDRESS
C. To be signed before submission:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT I HAVE PREPARED THIS SITE PLAN AND
THAT ALL DIMENSIONS AND INFORMATION ARE CORRECT.
Name
Title and License Number
D. 161To be signed before issuance of a building permit:
APPROVED BY THE ______________________________ OF THE BOROUGH
OF CLOSTER.
Date _______________ Chairperson
Date _______________ Secretary
E. To be signed before ________________ approval is given:
I HAVE REVIEWED THIS SITE PLAN AND CERTIFY THAT IT MEETS
ALL CODES AND ORDINANCES UNDER MY JURISDICTION.
Date _______________ Engneer
F. 162To be signed before issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS HAVE
BEEN INSTALLED OR THAT A PERFORMANCE GUARANTY HAS
BEEN POSTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § __________ OF THE SITE
PLAN ORDINANCE.
Building Inspector/
Chief Construction Official
Engineer
G. 163To be signed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL THE REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS OF
THIS SITE PLAN HAVE BEEN INSTALLED IN COMPLIANCE WITH
ALL APPLICABLE CODES AND ORDINANCES.
Date____________ Engineer
Date____________ Building Inspector/Chief Construction Official
OCCUPANCY PERMIT ISSUED _________ Date
161. Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I
§ 173-46 (RESERVED) § 173-46
164:561

ARTICLE X
Design Standards for Site Plan Approval
§ 173-47. General.
In reviewing any application for site plan approval, conditional use
approval, planned development or combinations thereof, the approving
authority, advisory boards, professional advisers and the applicant shall be
guided by the general and specific requirements contained herein.
A. Circulation.
(1) The circulation system shall consider pedestrian and vehicular
traffic movement within and adjacent to the plat, with particular
emphasis on the provision and layout of parking areas, off-street
loading and unloading, movement of people, goods and vehicles
from access roads, within the site and between buildings and
vehicles.
(2) All parking spaces shall be usable and safely and conveniently
arranged. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed
so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads
and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress to and egress from
the site.
B. Building design and layout. The design and layout of buildings and
parking areas shall be reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically
pleasing design and efficient arrangement. Particular attention shall be
given to safety and fire protection; impact on the surrounding
development; contiguous and adjacent buildings and lands; and
environmental and ecological considerations.
C. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement
of persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Directional lights
shall be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent
properties.
D. Buffering. Buffering, where required, shall be located around the
perimeter of the site to minimize headlights of vehicles, noise, light
from structures and the movement of people and vehicles and to shield
activities from adjacent properties. Buffering may consist of fencing,
evergreens, shrubs, bushes, deciduous trees or combinations thereof to
achieve the stated objectives.
E. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall plan
and shall be designed and integrated into building arrangements,
topography, parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall
include trees, bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals,
plants, sculpture, art, street furniture and the use of building and
paving materials in an imaginative manner.
§ 173-47 (RESERVED) § 173-47
164:563
§ 173-48. Off-street parking requirements.
F. Signs. Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing,
harmonious with other signs on the site and located so as to achieve
their purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
G. Utilities.
(1) Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply and solid
waste disposal shall be reviewed and considered. Particular
emphasis shall be given to the adequacy of the existing systems and
the need for improvements to adequately carry runoff and sewage
and to maintain an adequate supply of water at sufficient pressure.
(2) Solid waste disposal shall be reviewed to ensure frequent
collection, protection against vermin and rodents and aesthetic
considerations. All systems shall meet municipal specifications as
to installation and construction.
(3) Newly installed utility lines shall be installed underground. This
section shall take precedence over § 171-33D, which prohibits
opening of a road within three years of the time that the road is
sealed. [Added 10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-994]
H. Environmental considerations.
(1) Environmental elements relating to soil erosion and sedimentation,
preservation of trees, protection of watercourses and water quality,
noise pollution, topographic limiting areas, wetland areas and
other environmental and ecological factors will be reviewed, where
appropriate, to minimize adverse development affects.
(2) Provisions shall be made for the elimination of all loud and
offensive noise to the general public.
I. Compliance with Master Plan and municipal codes and ordinances. The
site plan shall be consistent with the Master Plan of the Borough of
Closter or any portion thereof adopted by the Closter Borough Planning
Board, as well as all Borough codes and ordinances, including Chapter
200, Zoning, and the Official Map.
A. Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be as set forth in Table X-1 below. If determination
of the number of required parking spaces results in a fractional space,
the fraction shall require one additional parking space.
B. Location of parking spaces.
(1) The approving authority shall approve the location of all proposed
parking spaces on the site and shall take into consideration the size
and topography of the site, visibility from the site to the adjoining
street, as well as within the parking area, conditions of safety
relating to the movement of people and vehicles and the
§ 173-47 CLOSTER CODE § 173-48
164:564
elimination of nuisance factors, including glare, noise, dust and
other similar considerations.
(2) Subject to other considerations as specified herein, off-street
parking shall not be located in a required front yard except where
the required front yard exceeds 20 feet. Parking shall be permitted
in an area located 20 feet or more from the street right-of-way line.
(3) Any parking area located between the principal building and the
minimum front yard setback shall be landscaped or screened. No
off-street parking area shall be located closer than five feet to any
side or rear lot line. These conditions shall apply to all surface and
abovegrade parking facilities.
(4) All parking facilities shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any
two intersecting streets or within the sight triangle of any driveway
and the street right-of-way.
TABLE X-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Automobile service stations 4 for each bay, plus 1 for each
employee in the maximum
working shift
Bank and saving institutions 1 for each 300 square feet of
floor area or 8 for each teller
window, whichever is greater
Bowling lanes 5 for each lane
Group gathering use facilities,
community buildings, social
halls, places of public assembly
(including churches and other
places of worship) Funeral
homes, mortuaries [Amended
4-14-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:649; 7-13-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994:671]
1 for each 3 seats or 1 for every
150 square feet of floor area (as
defined in § 200-5 of this Code),
whichever is is greater 15 for
each parlor or slumber room
Industrial and manufacturing
uses
1 for each 400 square feet of
floor area or 3 for each 4
employees in the maximum
working shift, whichever is
greater
Laboratory and research uses 1 for every 300 square feet of
floor area
Medical or dental clinics or
offices
5 for each doctor or dentist, plus
1 for each 100 square feet of
floor area
§ 173-48 (RESERVED) § 173-48
164:565
TABLE X-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Motels, hotels, motor lodges 1 for each rental unit and, in
addition, compliance with the
requirements for each particular
additional use located on the
property, such as restaurants,
eating and drinking establishments,
retail stores and meeting
rooms
Nursing homes, hospitals,
convalescing homes
1 for every 2 beds, plus 1 per
staff member and employee in
the maximum workshift
Offices, business and
professional (other than
medical and dental)
1 for every 250 square feet of
floor area
Residential dwellings 2 for each dwelling unit
Restaurants, eating and
drinking establishments,
catering halls
1 for each 2 1/2 seats, plus 1 for
each 2 employees
Restaurants, fast-food 1 for each 2 seats, plus 1 for
each 2 employees in the maximum
workshift, or a minimum of
40, whichever is greater
Retail stores, store groups,
shops, shopping centers
1 for each 150 square feet of
floor area where the floor area
shall not exceed 2,000 square
feet; 1 for each 175 square feet
of floor area where the floor area
shall exceed 2,000 square feet
Theaters 1 for every 3 seats
Wholesale establishments,
warehouses, furniture
1 for each 600 square feet of of
floor area
§ 173-48 CLOSTER CODE § 173-48
164:566
TABLE X-1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Mixed land uses Mixed land uses in the same
building shall be calculated as
the sum of the individual uses
unless the applicant can
demonstrate to the approving
authority that the parking
characteristics of the individual
use are such that the total needs
of the development are less than
the sum of the parts and the
number of spaces to be provided
will satisfy the lesser need
Other uses not provided herein To be determined by the approving
authority
C. Parking area design standards.
(1) Aisle width. Provisions shall be made for the safe and adequate
circulation of pedestrians and vehicles within and adjoining the
subject property. The width of all aisles providing direct access to
individual parking stalls shall be in accordance with the standards
established in Table X-2 below. Only one-way traffic shall be
permitted in aisles of less than 24 feet.
TABLE X-2
Minimum Aisle Width
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Minimum Width
(feet)
0 (parallel parking) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 (perpendicular) 24
(2) Size of parking stalls. Parking stalls for churches, community
buildings, manufacturing and industrial uses and business and
professional offices shall have a minimum area of 180 square feet
of space in width and 20 feet in length. For all other uses, there
shall be a minimum area of 200 square feet of space, exclusive of
aisles, which shall measure 10 feet in width and 20 feet in length.
(3) Circulation within parking area.
§ 173-48 (RESERVED) § 173-48
164:567
(a) Except for attendant parking, all parking spaces shall be
designed free and clear of any obstruction to individual
parking stalls. Such parking spaces shall be located in such a
fashion as to permit all vehicles to exit in a safe and orderly
manner. Under no condition shall vehicles be permitted to back
out of a parking lot driveway or otherwise block the free
movement of traffic within the parking area or specific points
of safety control, such as fire hydrants, doorways, elevators or
other similar locations.
(b) Aisle widths and circulation patterns shall be designed to
permit emergency and service vehicles, such as delivery
trucks, solid waste collection vehicles and the like, to have
reasonable access to and space for their intended functions.
(c) Pedestrian circulation within a parking area shall be, to as
great an extent possible, separated from vehicular traffic.
Safety zones, crossing points and sidewalk areas, where
warranted, shall be provided.
(d) The use of pedestrian carts or other similar accessory vehicles
shall not be permitted to be retained within the driving area of
the parking facility.
(4) Driveway design criteria.
(a) Location of driveways. All entrance and exit driveways to and
from a public or private street shall be so located to afford
maximum safety to said roadway, to provide for safe and
convenient ingress and egress and to minimize conflict with
the flow of traffic. In no case shall there be permitted
unrestricted access along the length of the street or streets
upon which the parking area abuts.
(b) Sight distances.
[1] The minimum sight distances established in Table X-3
below shall be adhered to between a driveway and the
adjoining street in accordance with the definition of a sight
triangle. Said driveway shall be designed in profile and
grading which shall be reviewed by the Municipal
Engineer.
[2] For the purpose of this chapter, sight distance
measurement shall be measured from the drivers seat of a
standing vehicle located on that portion of the exit
driveway that is immediately contiguous to the traveled
way with the front of the vehicle 10 feet behind the rightof-
way line of the road; with the height of the eye 3.75 feet
to the top of the object 4.5 feet above the pavement.
§ 173-48 CLOSTER CODE § 173-48
164:568
TABLE X-3
Minimum Sight Distance
From a Driveway and Adjoining Street
Allowable Maximum
Speed on Roadway
(miles per hour)
Minimum Sight Distance
(feet)
25 175
30 250
35 325
40 400
45 450
50 or more 500
(c) Where a site is located at the intersection of two streets, no
driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the
point where the curb return of the street intersection and the
curbline meet.
(d) No part of any driveway shall be located closer than 20 feet to
any other driveway on an adjoining parcel, nor shall more than
one driveway be located closer than 40 feet to another
driveway on the same site, as measured from the closest edge
of any two driveways along the same right-of-way line.
(e) No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a traffic circle
or on a ramp of an interchange or within 50 feet of the
beginning of any ramp or other portion of an interchange.
TABLE X-4
Driveway Widths, Depressed Curbs and Curb Return Radius
Standards
One-Way Operation Two-Way Operation
Type
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
3- to
10-
family
residence
12 to 15 32 to 35 20
minimum
22 to 26 44 to 50 20
minimum
30
maximum
30
maximum
§ 173-48 (RESERVED) § 173-48
164:569
TABLE X-4
Driveway Widths, Depressed Curbs and Curb Return Radius
Standards
One-Way Operation Two-Way Operation
Type
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet)
Curb
Return
Radius
(feet)
Over
10-family
residence
15 to 16 35 to 38 20
minimum
24 to 30 46 to 52 25
minimum
30
maximum
35
maximum
Commercial
and
industrial
15 to 30 35 to 50 35
minimum
30 to 50 50 to 70 35
minimum
45
maximum
45
maximum
Service
stations
20 to 30 35 to 50 20
minimum
40 to 50 50 to 60 20
minimum
35
maximum
35
maximum
(f) Geometric design. The geometric design of a driveway
connection to a public or private street shall be governed by
sound traffic engineering principles. The following guidelines
are utilized in preparing a geometric design, but some
deviation may be necessitated from time to time due to the
many variables encountered in the course of preparing a
design. The applicant should be aware, therefore, that
although the driveway layout may conform to these guidelines,
conditions may dictate deviations from them, and the
requirements of the Municipal Engineer shall be final.
[1] Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation
will intersect a public or private street at an angle to as
near 90° as site conditions will permit, and in no case will
the angle be less than 60°.
[2] One-way operation. Driveways used for vehicles in one
direction of travel (right turn only) shall not form an angle
smaller than 45° with a public street.
[3] The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to
adequately accommodate the volume and character of
vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the land
§ 173-48 CLOSTER CODE § 173-48
164:570
development for which a site plan is prepared. The
required maximum and minimum dimensions for
driveways connecting to a public or private street at 90°
are indicated in Table X-4. Driveways serving large
volumes of daily traffic or traffic over 25% of which is
truck traffic shall be required to utilize high to maximum
dimensions. Driveways serving low daily traffic volumes
or traffic less than 25% of which is truck traffic shall be
permitted to use low to minimum dimensions.
[4] Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to
prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
[5] Should the sidewalk be so close to the curb at a depressed
curb driveway as to cause the ramp to be too steep and be
likely to cause undercarriage drag, the sidewalk shall be
appropriately lowered to provide a suitable ramp gradient.
(g) The surface of any driveway shall be constructed with a
permanent pavement of a type specified by standards set by
the Municipal Engineer. Such pavement shall extend to the
paved portion of the public or private street pavement.
(5) Guardrails, wheel stops and parking lot striping.
(a) Guardrails shall be provided in appropriate locations where
required for safety purposes.
(b) Wheel stops, permanently anchored to the ground, may be
required in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles shall not
overhang or extend over sidewalk areas, unless an additional
sidewalk width of two and one-half (2 1/2) feet is provided to
accommodate such overhang.
(c) Parking stalls, driveways and aisles shall be clearly marked
and delineated. The approving authority may require that
certain areas be maintained for fire-fighting purposes or other
emergency purposes. These areas, as well as other pavement
signage, shall be appropriately designated.
(6) Minimum and maximum grades in parking areas. The minimum and
maximum parking grades shall be in accordance with the following
requirements:
§ 173-48 (RESERVED) § 173-48
164:571
Minimum and Maximum Grade Requirements
Area
Maximum Grade
(percent)
Minimum Grade
(percent)
Parking stalls and
service aisles
6 1/2
Main approach
walkways to
buildings
4 1/2
Collector or other
service walkways
8 1/2
Swales 10 2
Principal circulation
aisles
8 1/2
Driveways;
entrances and exits
6* 1/2*
*NOTE: For a distance of 100 feet from the street right-of-way line.
Driveway intersections with any roadway within a distance of 35
feet from the curbline, as measured along the center line of the
driveway, shall not exceed a grade of 1.5%.
(7) Maintenance of off-street parking and loading areas. Every parcel
of land used as a public or private off-street parking or loading area
shall be maintained in good condition, free of hazards and
deterioration. All pavement areas, sidewalks, curbs, drainage
facilities, lighting, bumpers, guardrails, markings, signs,
landscaping and other improvements shall be maintained in
workable, safe and good condition.
(8) Waiver of parking requirements. If any applicant can clearly
demonstrate to the approving authority that, because of the nature
of the operation or use, the parking requirements of this section
are unnecessary or excessive, the approving authority shall have
the power to approve a site plan showing less paved parking area
than required by this section; provided, however, that a landscaped
area of sufficient size to meet the deficiency shall be set aside and
reserved for the purpose of meeting future off-street parking
requirements in the event that a change of use of the premises shall
make such additional off-street parking spaces necessary.
(9) Other off-street parking requirements.
(a) Limitations as to use. All off-street parking areas shall be used
solely for the parking of passenger automobiles, and no
commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted on such parking lot.
§ 173-48 CLOSTER CODE § 173-48
164:572
(b) Nonavailability. At any time that the required off-street parking
facilities cease to be available as required, the certificate of
occupancy for the building or buildings built in conjunction
with such parking areas shall be canceled and become null and
void.
(c) Charges. There shall be no charge made for the use of offstreet
parking facilities and no cars other than self-propelled
passenger vehicles shall be permitted to use any of the offstreet
parking facilities herein required, and no service of any
kind shall be extended to the vehicle occupying such off-street
parking facilities, except for emergency purposes.
(d) Traffic markers; paint striping.
[1] The side perimeter of each parking space shall be
delineated by painted lines on the pavement for the length
of the parking space. The width of all lines shall not be less
than four inches nor more than six inches and shall be
uniform in the entire parking area. A second set of lines
shall also be painted on the ground for each space, which
lines shall each be parallel to the perimeter lines.
[2] One-way aisles shall be marked with directional arrows on
the ground not less than eight feet long with directional
arrows at each end of the aisle. Two-way aisles shall be
marked with two directional arrows on the ground, each
not less than eight feet long. Two-way aisles shall also be
marked with a center line not less than four inches wide.
Parking aisles that lead to private roadways or driveways
on the property shall be marked with stop signs in every
case where there are more than 20 parking spaces
provided off any aisle that leads into another interior
roadway or driveway.
[3] All traffic markers, traffic signs, traffic signals and traffic
control devices shall be constructed, erected, delineated
and maintained in accordance with the standards,
regulations and requirements set forth in the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, prepared by the United
States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration (1971), as the same now exists and as the
same may from time to time be interpreted and amended.
Copies of this publication are on file in the approving
authority office and the office of the Traffic Bureau of the
Police Department.
[4] All traffic markers and traffic signs, traffic signals,
directional arrows, parking space delineation lines and
traffic control devices shown on an approved site plan are
§ 173-48 (RESERVED) § 173-48
164:573
required to be installed and maintained in good condition
sufficient to serve their intended purpose.
D. Off-street parking construction.
(1) All off-street parking areas shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water in a manner so as not to unreasonably
impair the surroundings.
(2) All off-street parking areas, aisles and driveways shall be surfaced
with asphalt, bituminous or cement-binder pavement according to
specifications established for this purpose by the Borough
Engineer.
(3) All parking areas and access drives shall be edged by a concrete
curb or belgian block as set forth herein.
E. Required minimum design elements.
(1) General. The following items shall be provided and set forth on any
proposed site plan and shall be installed as shown and in
accordance with any site plan approved after the effective date of
this chapter. These items shall be considered as required, whether
or not they have been listed as specific conditions in connection
with any resolution of the approving authority for site plan
approval and whether or not the plans approved show the item, its
dimensions or composition.
(2) Concrete curbing. Poured-in-place portland cement or, at the
option of the applicant, belgian block is required along the
perimeters of any interior planted area and on the interior side of
any required planted buffer area. Curbing in any other areas on the
site shall also be of poured-in-place portland cement. Concrete
curbing installed shall be six by nine (6 x 9) inches and poured to a
depth of 20 inches and shall be Class B, 4,000 pounds per square
inch. The approving authority, with the advice of the Borough
Engineer, may permit other types of material to be used for
curbing, provided that the same are as durable, as strong, as
relatively maintenance free and as presentable and neat in
appearance as the type of curbing specified above.
(3) Concrete sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks shall be provided along
the entire perimeter of the building (except loading areas), which
shall be designed for the purpose of protecting the building and of
sufficient size to provide for safe and sufficient ingress and egress
for pedestrians going to, from and about the building. The
approving authority may, in its discretion, not require portions of
the perimeter to have sidewalks where the same serve neither of
the aforementioned objectives. The applicant may provide or the
approving authority may require a planted area between said
perimeter sidewalks and the building or buildings. Concrete
sidewalks, if elevated from adjacent areas, shall be six inches
§ 173-48 CLOSTER CODE § 173-48
164:574
§ 173-49. Off-street loading requirements.
higher in elevation than contiguous paved parking areas, aisles
or public or private roadways. All concrete sidewalks shall be of
poured-in-place portland cement concrete Class B, 4,000 pounds
per square inch.
A. In any district, in connection with every building or building group or
part thereof hereinafter erected which is to be utilized by industrial and
commercial uses or requires the distribution by vehicles of material or
merchandise and for any residential development containing 30 or
more dwelling units and for large-scale public and quasi-public uses,
there shall be provided and maintained, on the same zone lot with such
building, off-street loading spaces in accordance with the requirements
of Table X-5 below.
B. Each such loading space shall be not less than 12 feet nor more than 16
feet in width and shall be not less than 35 feet nor more than 60 feet in
length, depending upon the functions to be performed. The overall
floor-to-ceiling height or clear height distance shall not be less than 12
feet, which maximum height shall not exceed the height of the building.
[Amended 9-9-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:417]
TABLE X-5
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Land Use**
Floor Area
(square feet)
At Which First
Berth is Required
At Which Second
Berth is Required*
Industrial:
Manufactuing 5,000 40,000
Warehouse 5,000 40,000
Labratory, research 5,000 40,000
Commercial:
Wholesale 5,000 40,000
Retail 5,000 20,000
Service establishment 5,000 40,000
Commercial
recreation
5,000 100,000
Restaurant 2,000 25,000
Office building 5,000 100,000
Hotel 10,000 100,000
Funeral home 10,000 100,000
§ 173-48 (RESERVED) § 173-49
164:575
TABLE X-5
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Land Use**
Floor Area
(square feet)
At Which First
Berth is Required
At Which Second
Berth is Required*
Institutional, public:
School 10,000 100,000
Hospital, nursing
home
10,000 100,000
Auditorium, arena 10,000 100,000
*NOTE: An additional berth shall be required for each additional
amount of square feet as indicated as required between the need for
one- and two-berth intervals.
**NOTE: In the case of a multiple-use building, the amount of offstreet
loading required shall be equal to the sum of the parts unless
the same can be demonstrated to be in excess as shall be subject to
determination by the approving authority.
C. Except for required buffer areas, each such loading space may occupy
any required side or rear yard but shall not be located in the required
front yard. When adjoining a residential use, institutional use or place
of general assembly, a suitably screened or landscaped buffer shall be
provided.
D. Off-street loading spaces shall not be located within any fire prevention
zone, within 25 feet of any fire hydrant or within 10 feet of any stairway,
doorway, elevator or other general means of entry to and exit from a
building for the general public; nor shall they block or in any way
interfere with the free flow of pedestrians from any means of ingress or
egress; nor shall they interfere with the free flow of pedestrians or
vehicles. All such loading spaces shall be appropriately indicated by a
sign or other visual communication as to said location.
E. All loading and unloading operations shall be conducted entirely within
the boundaries of the lot concerned, and no vehicle or conveyance shall
in any manner use public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way for loading
or unloading operations other than ingress to or egress from the lot.
F. For purposes of this Chapter 173 and Chapter 200, Zoning, of the Code
of the Borough of Closter, the phrase "loading space" or "loading berth"
shall mean any space, dock, berth or bay utilized by any motor vehicle
or trailer for the purpose of receiving, shipping or transporting goods,
wares, equipment, commodities or persons between the motor vehicle
or trailer and the structure within which is located the loading space.
§ 173-49 CLOSTER CODE § 173-50
164:576
§ 173-50. Lighting.164
§ 173-51. Landscaping and buffer areas.
A. In connection with every site plan, the applicant shall submit plans for
all proposed exterior lighting. These plans shall include the location,
type of light, radius of light, height and intensity in footcandles. The
following design standards shall be followed:
(1) The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the
architectural style of the principal building.
(2) The maximum height of freestanding lights shall not exceed the
height of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is less.
(3) All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of
the cone of illumination to 150°.
(4) Where lights along property lines will be visible to adjacent
property, the lights shall be appropriately shielded.
(5) Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall be avoided,
except where properly screened from adjacent properties.
(6) Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected as to avoid
being damaged by vehicles.
(7) Lighting shall not be permitted which requires flashing or
intermittent illumination. Lighting which requires change in color,
intensity or hue shall likewise be prohibited.
B. Said lighting shall in no way interfere with, detract from or diminish in
any way the effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar safety or
warning device.
A. Landscaping. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each site plan
application. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs,
bushes, plant material, ground cover and natural features, such as
boulders and rock outcroppings.
B. Buffer areas. Buffers, including fences, landscaping, berms and
mounds, shall be used to minimize any adverse impacts or nuisances
from the site to adjacent areas and shall be provided:
(1) Along property lines shielding various uses from another.
(2) Where interior roads or driveways run parallel with roadways
exterior to the site.
(3) Where parking areas abut other properties.
164. Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2005:952, adopted 10-11-2005, adopted new signs
regulations which are included in Art. XVII, Signs. These regulations superseded former
Subsections B through S of this section. Consequently, this section, formerly designated
as “Lighting and signs,” has been redesignated as “Lighting.”
§ 173-50 (RESERVED) § 173-51
164:577
§ 173-52. Utilities and services. [Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No.
2007:986]
(4) In the general area of refuse storage areas, loading and unloading
areas and outdoor storage areas.
(5) As windbreak areas.
(6) To shield areas from deleterious noise or other adverse conditions.
A. Gas, electric and telephone service.
(1) Gas, electric and telephone service shall be provided by the
applicant in concert with the appropriate public utility providing
such service. Said service on the site shall be provided as a part of
an underground system.
(2) If such facilities cannot be reasonably provided due to topographic
or geologic condition of the land or due to technological
circumstances and where the applicant can adequately
demonstrate the lack of feasibility of the same to the satisfaction of
the approving authority, a waiver of this requirement may be
granted.
(3) Where existing utility lines, such as electric and telephone poles,
exist off-tract and require relocation as a result of the proposed
development, the approving authority shall be assured that said
relocation will not create or maintain any hazardous or dangerous
conditions.
B. Water supply and sanitary sewage disposal. Adequate provisions for
water supply and sanitary sewage disposal shall be indicated. Said
facilities shall include and not be limited to approvals, where
appropriate, of the engineer of the serving utility company, the
Department of Health and the Fire Department. The locations of all
proposed fire hydrants or similar facilities shall be indicated on the
plan, and said areas shall provide for appropriate fire lanes or
protective areas which shall not be impeded by parking areas or
standing vehicles or other obstructions, particularly in commercial
centers.
C. Stormwater drainage.
(1) Provisions shall be made for the drainage of surface runoff waters
in and from the premises so that flooding and erosion of the
property and the property of others will be prevented. Each site
plan submitted to the approving authority shall be reviewed by the
Engineer to establish requirements to prevent adverse drainage
conditions both on and off the site.
(2) The drainage systems shall be designed in conformance to
accepted engineering standards. To facilitate the review of
§ 173-51 CLOSTER CODE § 173-52
164:578
proposed drainage facilities for development, design calculations
prepared by the applicant's engineer shall accompany the
application. The design considerations shall include and not be
limited to drainage areas, runoff calculations, storm drains,
pipelines, inlet designs and manholes. Unless otherwise stipulated
by the Municipal Engineer, drainage facilities shall be designed on
the basis of a fifteen-year storm, using a one-hour intensity of two
inches.
D. Drainage and brook information. All existing watercourses shall be
accompanied by the following information:
(1) When a brook or stream is proposed for alteration, improvement or
relocation or when a drainage structure is proposed on a
watercourse, evidence of submission of the proposed change to the
New Jersey Division of Water Policy and Supply shall accompany
the site plan.
(2) Cross sections of watercourses, at an appropriate scale, showing
the extent of the floodplain (if defined), top of the bank, normal
water level and bottom elevations, at the following locations:
(a) At any point where a watercourse crosses a boundary of the
site development.
(b) At fifty-foot intervals for a distance of 300 feet upstream and
300 feet downstream of any proposed culvert or bridge.
(c) At a point 10 feet upstream and downstream of any point of
juncture of two or more watercourses.
(d) At a maximum of five-hundred-foot intervals along all
watercourses which run through or are within 50 feet of the
site.
(3) When ditches, streams, brooks or watercourses are to be altered,
improved or relocated, the method of stabilizing slopes, measures
to control erosion and siltation and typical ditch sections and
profiles shall be shown on the plan or accompany it.
(4) The boundaries of all areas that flood on or within 50 feet of the
site, during or after a fifty-year design storm.
(5) Profile of stream beds extending 200 feet upstream or 200 feet
downstream from the site.
(6) The total area in the drainage basin to the nearest downstream
drainage structure and the area of the site development which
drains to the structure.
(7) The location and extent of drainage and conservation easements
and stream encroachment lines.
§ 173-52 (RESERVED) § 173-52
164:579
§ 173-53. Street improvements.
(8) The location, extent and water level elevation of all existing and
proposed lakes or ponds in or within 50 feet of the site.
(9) Plans and computations for any storm drainage systems, including
the following:
(a) All existing and proposed storm sewer lines affecting the site,
showing the size and profile of the lines, direction of flow and
the location of each inlet, manhole and other appurtenances,
along with appropriate invert elevations where required.
(b) The location and extent of any existing and proposed dry wells,
groundwater recharge basins, retention basins or other water
conservation devices.
E. Sewer and drainage easements. The approving authority may require
as a part of the site plan approval that the applicant or owner dedicate
to the borough an easement not greater than 25 feet wide from each
side of the bank of the stream or drainage facility or sewer or drainage
pipe for access to any lot under consideration for site plan approval.
Such easements shall not be less than a minimum width of 15 feet.
F. Ambulance services.
(1) The developer or subsequent owner of any senior citizen housing,
nursing home, assisted-living facility or substantially similar site
designed to house at least 25 residents shall provide EMT-staffed
ambulance and ambulance service (24 hours per day, seven days
per week) on that site. EMT personnel shall be stationed within
close proximity to the site so that they can respond to a call within
five minutes. Staffing shall be comparable in formal training to that
of Closter’s Ambulance Corps squad. The ambulance vehicle
condition and equipment shall be comparable to the ambulance
being operated by the Closter Ambulance Corps and shall be
upgraded to remain comparable with the Corps’ then-existing
ambulance. The ambulance shall meet all other state, county and
local regulations. The ambulance and service shall be provided in
perpetuity at no cost to Closter.
(2) The on-site ambulance service shall be operated and housed in a
structure and parking approved by the Closter Planning Board.
(3) Any expenses incurred by Closter to enforce claims under or in
compliance with § 173-52F(1) or (2) shall constitute a lien in favor
of Closter, enforceable as a tax lien, on the deed-restricted portion
or the property to be a separate tax lot where the ambulance
service is to be housed, staffed, operated and maintained.
A. Curbing.
§ 173-52 CLOSTER CODE § 173-53
164:580
(1) General.
(a) Where curbing is lacking, an applicant for site plan approval
shall install curbing along the extent of all property fronting
public and private streets in accordance with municipal
standards and specifications.
(b) The Municipal Engineer may require curbing within parking
areas in order to facilitate drainage and to provide separation
between pedestrian and vehicular movement.
(2) Alignment and grade. Curb grading and alignment is to be
determined as established in the area, unless otherwise required
by the Municipal Engineer.
(3) Curbing at driveway openings. Where a proposed driveway is to
serve any land development of 50 or more parking spaces, curbing
need not be carried across the driveway opening as a depressed
curb, but rather may be swept back as curb returns. Where the
driveway serves a facility having less than 50 parking spaces, a
depressed curb driveway shall be utilized.
B. Street widening.
(1) The right-of-way width, measured from lot line to lot line, shall not
be less than 50 feet in width, except when shown at a greater width
on the Master Plan or Official Map or when said street constitutes
an extension of an existing street with a width greater than 50 feet.
(2) In connection with site plans that adjoin or include existing streets
that do not conform to widths as shown on the Official Map or
Master Plan or are less than 50 feet in width, the applicant shall
dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of said
road. If the site plan is along one side only, 1/2 of the required
difference in the roadway width shall be dedicated.
C. Sidewalks.
(1) Each land development requiring site plan approval may be
required to provide a sidewalk within the street right-of-way.
(2) Pedestrian walkways or sidewalks may also be required for any
development of 50 or more parking spaces within said parking area
to provide convenient and safe access for pedestrian circulation.
(3) Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, brick or other similar
material and shall be at least five feet in width.
(4) Sidewalks between parking areas and principal structures, along
aisles and driveways and wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur
shall be raised six inches or more above the parking area except
when crossing streets or driveways. Sidewalks, when constructed
§ 173-53 (RESERVED) § 173-53
164:581
§ 173-54. Refuse collection and storage.
§ 173-55. Other design standards.
along the building, shall be located not less than three feet from
the building.
A. Provision shall be made for the proper storage and collection of refuse.
All such storage shall be maintained within the confines of an enclosed
building or structure and shall be reasonably accessible for vehicular
collection on the site or shall be appropriately screened and landscaped
where outdoor storage is necessary.
B. The Board of Health shall approve the location and method of collection
on the site.
A. Retaining walls. Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and
adequate for the purpose intended. Said walls shall not detract from the
aesthetic beauty of the site when constructed and, to this end, shall be
fenced or landscaped in accordance with the plans to be approved by
the approving authority.
B. Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage, where permitted, shall be suitably
located and approved by the approving authority, who shall consider
the relationship of such areas to adjacent properties and roadways;
provided, however, that in all such cases where storage is permitted,
such areas shall be suitably screened, as provided in § 173-51B.165
C. Design standards for physically handicapped persons.
(1) Design standards, when applicable. In accordance with Chapters
220, 221 and 224 of the Laws of 1975,166 all plans and
specifications for the construction or remodeling of any public
building, as defined herein, shall provide facilities for the physically
handicapped.
(2) Design facilities, buildings.
(a) All public buildings shall contain at least one principal
entrance accessible to and usable by physically handicapped
persons, which shall be either ramped or at ground level.
(b) On each floor open to the public, at least one water closet shall
be provided for each sex. In general, toilet facilities shall be
provided to accommodate wheelchair occupants, which
facilities shall include adequate stall door width, grab rails,
sufficient space and appropriate height.
165. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
166. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:32-1 et seq.
§ 173-53 CLOSTER CODE § 173-55
164:582
(c) A drinking fountain of suitable height and extension for
wheelchair occupants on every floor open to the public shall be
provided.
(d) In any multistory building, an elevator sufficient in size to
accommodate a wheelchair shall be provided.
(e) At least one public telephone, at a height accessible to
wheelchair occupants, shall be provided.
(3) Parking lot design.
(a) A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces, but
not fewer than two parking spaces, shall be designed and
designated for physically handicapped persons. Said spaces
shall be the most accessible and approximate to the building or
buildings which the parking spaces serve.
(b) Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly
visible sign displaying the international symbol of access along
with the following wording: "These spaces reserved for
physically handicapped drivers."
(c) Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in and out of either
side of an automobile onto a level, paved surface suitable for
wheeling and walking.
(d) Where possible, such spaces shall be so located that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to
wheel or walk behind parked cars.
(e) Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit
handicapped people access from parking areas to sidewalks.
(4) Sidewalks. A sidewalk hereafter constructed or reconstructed on
public or private property for public use shall be constructed in a
manner that will facilitate use by physically handicapped persons.
At points of intersection between pedestrian and motorized lines of
travel and at other points where necessary to avoid abrupt changes
in grade, a sidewalk shall slope gradually to the street level so as to
provide an uninterrupted line of travel.
D. Architectural screening of mechanical equipment. Architectural
screening of any mechanical equipment on the roof or outside of any
building shall be installed so as to screen the mechanical equipment
from view. "Architectural screening," for the purposes of this section,
shall be deemed to mean the use of metal, stone or other relatively
maintenance-free materials in slats or other designs so as to screen and
prevent the direct view of the mechanical equipment. The term
"mechanical equipment" includes any fans, air-conditioning equipment,
§ 173-55 (RESERVED) § 173-55
164:583
elevator housing, water towers, compressors, heating equipment and
any other equipment of any kind.
E. Screening and confinement of materials.
(1) Any materials left or kept outside of a building shall be screened
and kept within limited confines. Any material, trash or refuse or
any combination thereof kept or left outside of a building and any
containers for said material shall either be:
(a) Finished and screened in a manner shown on the proposed site
plan designed to meet the applicable requirements herein;
(b) Enclosed on all four sides with the same material that is used
for the outer surface of the exterior walls of the building
adjacent thereto except for entry gates; or
(c) Enclosed and screened in any other manner approved by the
approving authority, provided that the same is designed to
effectively confine the material within the enclosed area and to
screen the same from other areas outside the building and is a
material that is not likely to create problems of maintenance,
sanitation or a nuisance.
(2) Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize the storage
of any material in any zone where such use of the property is not
otherwise permitted by the Zoning Ordinance167 and all applicable
laws and regulations. If the applicant does not propose any outside
storage of said materials, the plan shall so indicate. The applicant
shall not thereafter store any of said materials outside of the
building unless a plan is submitted to and approved by the
approving authority for said purpose.
F. Fencing. The site plan shall show the location, specifications and height
of any fencing required under any ordinance of the Borough of Closter
and of any fencing proposed by the applicant. The approving authority
may require additional fencing for reasons of traffic or pedestrian
safety in connection with the particular problems associated with the
property under consideration and its proposed use.
167. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 173-55 CLOSTER CODE § 173-55
164:584
ARTICLE XI
On-Tract Improvements
§ 173-56. Required improvements.
§ 173-57. Performance guaranty.
A. Before recording final subdivision plats or approving site plan plats, the
approving authority shall require that the applicant shall have installed
or shall have furnished performance guaranties for the installation of
on-tract improvements in accordance with borough specifications as
follows: streets, street signs, grading, pavement, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, walkways, streetlighting, shade trees, water mains, fire
hydrants, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of
sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and sediment
control devices, public improvements of open space and surveyor's
monuments as required by the Map Filing Law, P.L. 1960, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.).
B. All such required improvements shall be certified by the Borough
Engineer unless the applicant shall have filed a performance guaranty
sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all such improvements or
uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by the Borough Engineer.
A. The performance guaranty shall be furnished in favor of the borough in
an amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation for improvements it
may deem necessary or appropriate, as specified in § 173-56 herein.
B. The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
governing body by resolution. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the
cost of the installation as determined as of the time of the passage of
the resolution. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
C. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the borough for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the borough may either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such
improvements.
D. Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of the same to the public system, the
obligor may notify the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Municipal Clerk, of the completion or
substantial completion of said improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Municipal Engineer. Thereupon, the Municipal Engineer
shall inspect all of the improvements of which such notice has been
given and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the governing
§ 173-56 (RESERVED) § 173-57
164:585
§ 173-58. Maintenance guaranty.
body, indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of such
improvements, with a statement of reasons for any rejection. If partial
approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements as approved or
rejected shall be set forth. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:372]
E. The governing body shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the report of the Municipal Engineer and
shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of
said report and the action of said approving authority with relation
thereto not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
obligor of the completion of the improvements. Where partial approval
is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its
performance guaranty, except for that portion adequately sufficient to
secure provision of the improvements not yet approved, provided that
30% of the amount of the performance guaranty posted may be retained
to ensure completion of all improvements. Failure of the governing
body to send or provide such notification to the obligor within 65 days
shall be deemed to constitute approval of the improvements, and the
obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from all liability, pursuant to
such performance guaranty for such improvements. [Amended
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
F. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
G. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest, by legal proceedings, any determination of the
governing body or the Borough Engineer.
H. The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Municipal Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of improvements, provided that the municipality may require
of the developer a deposit for all or a portion of the reasonably
anticipated fees to be paid to the Municipal Engineer for such
inspection. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
I. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, the provisions of this section shall be
applied by stage or section. [Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:372]
A. Prior to the acceptance of any improvement herein, a maintenance
guaranty shall be furnished in favor of Closter Borough for a period not
exceeding two years after final acceptance of the improvement, in an
amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement.
§ 173-57 CLOSTER CODE § 173-58
164:586
§ 173-59. Other governmental agencies or public utilities.
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a performance or a maintenance guaranty to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case
may be, shall be required by the borough for such utilities or improvements.
§ 173-60. Inspection and approval.
All improvements listed in Articles XI and XII shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the Borough Engineer, who shall be notified by the
applicant at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and approved.
B. Simultaneous with the submission of a maintenance guaranty, the
applicant shall file with the borough as-built drawings accurately
showing the location, profile and size of all storm drains, catch basins,
sanitary sewers, water mains and all utility and service connections
constructed in the subdivision or site plan.
§ 173-58 (RESERVED) § 173-60
164:587

ARTICLE XII
Off-Tract Improvements
§ 173-61. When required.
§ 173-62. Approving authority determination.
Each subdivision or site plan requiring approving authority action shall be
subject to a determination and findings as follows:
A. Any subdivision or site plan requiring off-tract improvements, as
defined herein, shall comply with the provisions of this section of this
chapter.
B. An off-tract improvement shall be one or more required improvements
which are necessary for the successful completion of a development in
the interest of furthering the public health, safety and general welfare,
and where said improvements are located off-tract.
C. An off-tract improvement shall be required where either the existing
facilities serving the area or subarea are already operating at deficient
levels of service or the inclusion of new development will make such
present level of service deficient according to engineering standards
utilized in determining such levels of service.
D. The proportionate contribution of any such off-tract improvement to the
applicant shall be reasonably related to the relative benefit or use of the
total area so served.
E. Under the conditions of this chapter, off-tract improvements shall be
limited to new or improved water distribution, sanitary sewage disposal
and distribution and stormwater and drainage distribution facilities and
all necessary appurtenances thereto; to utility easements; and to new
or improved street and right-of-way widths, traffic regulation and
control devices, intersection improvements, utility relocation where not
provided elsewhere and other traffic, circulation and safety factors
which are directly related to the property or properties in question.
F. Off-tract improvements shall not include the improvement costs for an
entire utility system or street system or major segment thereof,
including sewage treatment plants or water supply or treatment
facilities or other similar undertakings, unless said improvement is
significantly affected by the property or properties in question.
A. That certain off-tract improvements are or are not necessary to
implement such subdivision or site plan.
B. That, in instances where off-tract improvements are required, the terms
and conditions which shall be imposed upon the applicant shall ensure
the successful and reasonable implementation of the same.
§ 173-61 (RESERVED) § 173-62
164:589
§ 173-63. Methods of implementation.
C. Regulations governing off-tract improvements shall be based upon
circulation and comprehensive utility plans pursuant to the adopted
Master Plan of the Closter Planning Board or the adopted utility or
circulation plans of the Borough of Closter or other governmental or
utility authority.
D. In the event that the approving authority determines that one or more
improvements constitute an off-tract improvement, the approving
authority, by resolution, shall notify the governing body of the same,
specifying the authority's recommendation relative to the estimated
cost of the same, the owner or developer's pro rata share of the cost and
possible methods or means to implement the same, including but not
limited to performance and maintenance guaranties, cash
contributions, development agreements and other forms of surety.
E. Where an applicant pays, under protest, the amount determined as the
pro rata share, he or she shall institute legal action within one year of
such payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination
as to the fairness and reasonableness of such amount.
F. The approving authority shall not take any final action on a preliminary
subdivision or site plan until all aspects of such conditions have been
mutually agreed to by both the applicant and the governing body and a
written resolution to that effect by the governing body has been
transmitted to the approving authority.
A. Performance and maintenance guaranties. Where a performance or
maintenance guaranty or other surety is required in connection with an
off-tract improvement, the applicant shall be required to follow the
same procedure and requirements as specified in Article XI.
B. Development agreement. Where a development agreement is required,
governing off-tract improvements or other conditions as may be
required by this chapter or by the approving authority, said agreement
shall be in accordance with §§ 173-20E and 173-30E. Said agreement
may specify the amount of cash contributions, if any, the method of
payment and the obligation or obligations to be undertaken by the
borough.
C. Cash contributions; when not required. Cash contributions for off-tract
improvements shall not be required under the following terms or
conditions:
(1) Where other county or state agencies or utility authorities have
jurisdiction over the subject improvement and require a cash
contribution, guaranty or other surety of the applicant in lieu of
such conditions imposed by the Borough of Closter.
§ 173-62 CLOSTER CODE § 173-63
164:590
§ 173-64. Pro rata formula in determining applicant's share of
improvements.
Where a cash contribution or other financial distribution is determined, the
following criteria shall be utilized in determining the proportionate share of
such improvement to the applicant.
(2) Where a benefit assessment or other similar tax levy is imposed
upon the applicant and other landowners similarly situated within a
designated service area for the off-tract improvements provided.
(3) Where the applicant, where legally permissive, can undertake the
improvements in lieu of the municipality, subject to standards and
other conditions as may be imposed by the Borough of Closter.
(4) Where the proportionate increase to the present system constitutes
less than 5% of the system's or systems' capabilities.
D. Cash contribution; method of payment.
(1) Where a cash contribution is required, said contribution will be
deposited with the Treasurer of Closter Borough, with transmittal
letters forwarded to the governing body, the Borough Engineer and
the approving authority.
(2) Any and all moneys received by the Treasurer shall be deposited in
an escrow account for the purpose of undertaking the
improvements specified. Where such improvements are not
undertaken or initiated for a period of 10 years, the funds shall be
returned to the owner of record of said properties, provided that
the conditions specified in § 173-63C have not been imposed.
Where such condition does exist, funds held in escrow will be
returned as soon as practical to the owner of record of said
properties.
A. Street widening, alignment, corrections, channelization of
intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements not
covered elsewhere, the construction of new streets and other similar
street or traffic improvements. The applicant's proportionate cost shall
be in the ratio of the estimated peak-hour traffic generated by the
proposed property or properties to the sum of the present deficiency in
peak-hour traffic capacity of the present facility and the estimated
peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed development. The ratio
thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
B. Water distribution facilities, including the installation of new water
mains, the extension of existing water mains, the relocation of such
facilities and the installation of other appurtenances associated
therewith. The applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the
estimated daily use of water from the property or properties, measured
in gallons per day, for the existing system or subsystem and the
§ 173-63 (RESERVED) § 173-64
164:591
estimated daily use of water for the proposed development. The ratio
thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
C. Sanitary sewage distribution facilities, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of collector and interceptor sewers and the
installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith. The applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the
ratio of the estimated daily flow, measured in gallons, to the sum of the
present deficient capacity for the existing system or subsystem and the
estimated daily flow from the proposed project or development. In the
case where the peak flow from the proposed development may occur
during the peak flow period for the existing system, the ratio shall be
the estimated peak flow rate from the proposed development, measured
in gallons per minute, to the sum of the present peak flow deficiency in
the existing system or subsystem and the estimated peak flow rate from
the proposed development. The greater of the two ratios thus
calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies and shall be the
ratio used to determine the cost to the applicant.
D. Stormwater and drainage improvements, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of transmission lines, culverts and catch
basins and the installation, relocation or replacement of other
appurtenances associated therewith. The applicant's proportionate cost
shall be in the ratio of the estimated peak surface runoff as proposed to
be delivered into the existing system, measured in cubic feet per
second, to the sum of the existing peak-hour flow, measured in cubic
feet per second, deficient for the existing system and the estimated
peak flow as proposed to be delivered. The ratio thus calculated shall be
increased by 10% for contingencies.
§ 173-64 CLOSTER CODE § 173-64
164:592
ARTICLE XIII
Open Space, Public Areas, Farmland Assessment Areas Subject to
Subdivision and Site Plan Approval and Planned Developments
§ 173-65. Standards for the establishment of open space
organizations.
A. Under the provisions of this chapter and state statutes, the Borough of
Closter, other governmental agencies, the Board of Education and
state, county and other public bodies can be designated to maintain and
accept public open space for recreational or conservational uses. These
public agencies can accept and maintain such open spaces, provided
that the dedication is not conditioned upon the same being made
available to public use.
B. Where a subdivision or site plan is required, this chapter shall require
that the applicant provide for an organization for the ownership and
maintenance of any open space for the benefit of owners or residents of
the development, if said open space is not dedicated to the municipality
or other governmental agency. Such organizations shall not be
dissolved and shall not dispose of any open space, by sale or otherwise,
except to an organization conceived and established to own and
maintain the open space for the benefit of such development, and
thereafter such organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of
its open space without first offering to dedicate the same to Closter
Borough wherein the land is located.
C. In the event that such organization shall fail to maintain the open space
in reasonable order and condition, the administrative officer designated
by resolution to administer this section may serve written notice upon
the owners of the development setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition, and said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies
of maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof and shall state the date
and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the
notice. At such hearing, the designated municipal body or
administrative officer may modify the terms of the original notice as to
deficiencies and may give a reasonable extension of time, not to exceed
65 days, within which they may be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in
the original notice or in the modification thereof shall not be cured
within said 35 days or any permitted extension thereof, the borough, in
order to preserve the open space and maintain the same for a period of
one year, may enter upon and maintain such land. Said entry and
maintenance shall not vest in the public any rights to use the open
space except when the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by
the owners. Before the expiration of said year, the designated borough
body or officer, as the case may be, shall, upon its own initiative or upon
the request of the organization theretofore responsible for the
maintenance of the open space, call a public hearing upon 15 days'
written notice to such organization and to the owners of the
§ 173-65 (RESERVED) § 173-65
164:593
§ 173-66. Reservation of public areas.
development, to be held by such borough body or officer, at which
hearing such organization and the owners of the development shall
show cause why such maintenance by the borough shall not, at the
election of the borough, continue for a succeeding year. If the
designated borough body or officer shall determine that such
organization is ready and able to maintain said open space in a
reasonable condition, the borough shall cease to maintain said open
space at the end of said year. If the borough body or officer shall
determine that such organization is not ready and able to maintain said
open space in a reasonable condition, the borough may, in its discretion,
continue to maintain said open space during the next succeeding year,
subject to a similar hearing and determination in each year thereafter.
The decision of the borough body or officer in any such case shall
constitute a final administrative decision, subject to judicial review.
D. If a municipal body or officer is not designated by resolution to
administer this section, the governing body shall have the same powers
and be subject to the same restrictions as provided in this section.
E. The cost of such maintenance by the borough shall be assessed pro rata
against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space in accordance with assessed value at the
time of the imposition of the lien and shall become a lien and tax on said
properties and be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied and
assessed thereon and enforced and collected with interest by the same
officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
A. Where applicable.
(1) If the Master Plan of the Borough of Closter or the Official Map of
the Borough of Closter provides for the reservation of designated
streets, public drainageways, flood control basins or public areas
within the proposed development, before approving a subdivision
or site plan, the approving authority may further require that such
streets, ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and
sizes suitable to their intended uses. The approving authority may
reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or
areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the approval
of the final plat or within such further time as may be agreed to by
the developer.
(2) Unless during such a period or extension thereof the government
entity having jurisdiction shall have entered into a contract to
purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according to law
for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets,
ways, basins or areas, the applicant shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land
for private use in accordance with applicable development
regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
§ 173-65 CLOSTER CODE § 173-66
164:594
§ 173-67. Valuation, assessment and taxation of farmland.
streets and roadways, flood control basins or public drainageways
necessitated by the subdivision or land development and required
for final approval.
B. Compensation to applicant. The applicant shall be entitled to just
compensation for actual loss found to be caused by such temporary
reservation and deprivation of use. In such instances, unless a lesser
amount has previously been mutually agreed upon, just compensation
shall be deemed to be the fair market value of an option to purchase the
land reserved for the period of reservation, provided that determination
of such fair market value shall include but not be limited to
consideration of real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved
and prorated for the period of reservation. The applicant shall be
compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering or
other professional services incurred in connection with obtaining
subdivision or site plan approval caused by the reservation.
A. Any parcel of land receiving preliminary subdivision, site plan or
planned development approval for a use other than agricultural or
horticulture, notwithstanding its valuation, assessment and taxation as
an agricultural or horticultural use pursuant to the provisions of the
Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et
seq.), shall be valued, assessed and taxed as of January 1 of the year
following such preliminary approval as other land in the taxing district,
such value and assessment to be established and taxes paid in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 8 and 9 of the Farmland
Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.),
provided that the provisions hereof shall apply serially to any
development whose preliminary approval proposes construction in
stages and separate application for final approval for each stage and
only that stage of the development designated for the earliest
application for final approval shall be valued, assessed and taxed as
provided herein until certificates of occupancy for 50% of the building
permits in such stage have been issued, at which time the second stage
shall be valued, assessed and taxed as provided herein, and so on until
qualification for valuation, assessment and taxation pursuant to the
provisions of the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.) lapse for the last stage of such development.
B. Any parcel of land otherwise qualifying as an agricultural or
horticultural use pursuant to the provisions of the Farmland
Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.), for
which preliminary approval shall have lapsed pursuant to law or for
which the owner thereof shall have made a request, in writing, to the
governing body for rescinding such preliminary and all subsequent
approvals, shall be assessed, valued and taxed in the manner provided
in the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48 (N.J.S.A.
§ 173-66 (RESERVED) § 173-67
164:595
54:4-23.1 et seq.), as of January 1 of the year following such lapse or
rescission.
C. Any parcel of land to which the provisions of Subsection A hereof are
applicable but which cannot be developed because of the lack of
available sanitary sewage or water supply capacity necessary to serve
such development shall be exempt from the operation of the provisions
of Subsection A herein for the period from January 1 of the year
following the calendar year in which such development becomes
impracticable because of such lack of capacity to January 1 of the year
following the calendar year in which such capacity becomes available.
D. The provisions of this section shall apply to any parcel of land
designated as an agricultural or horticultural use, pursuant to the
provisions of the Farmland Assessment Act of 1964, P.L. 1964, c. 48
(N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.), which has tentative or subsequent planned
development approval or site plan approval on the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 173-67 CLOSTER CODE § 173-67
164:596
ARTICLE XIV
Appeals and Penalties
§ 173-68. Appeals to governing body.
A. Any interested party may appeal to the governing body the affirmative
decision of the Board of Adjustment approving an application pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d with a simultaneous application for a major or
minor subdivision or site plan approval.
B. An appeal from any final decision of the Board of Adjustment other than
an appeal described in § 173-68A herein and an appeal from any final
decision of the Planning Board may be taken to the governing body as
provided herein and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
C. Such appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of
such final decision as provided by law. The appeal to the governing body
shall be made by serving the Borough Clerk in person or by certified
mail with a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, the name
and address of the applicant and the name and address of his or her
attorney, if represented. Such appeal shall be decided by the governing
body only upon the record established before the approving authority.
D. Notice of meeting. Notice of the meeting to review the record below
shall be given by the governing body by personal service or certified
mail to the appellant, to those entitled to notice of a decision and to the
approving authority at least 10 days prior to the date of the meeting.
The parties may submit oral and written arguments on the record at
such meeting, and the governing body shall provide for verbatim
recording and transcripts of such meeting.
E. Decision by the governing body. The governing body shall conclude a
review of the record below not later than 95 days from the date of
receipt of the transcript of the hearing unless the appellant consents, in
writing, to an extension of such time period. The appellant shall arrange
for a transcript or otherwise for use by the governing body. Failure of
the governing body to hold a hearing and to conclude a review of the
record below and to render a decision within the specified time period,
without written consent to an extension in time by the appellant, shall
constitute a decision affirming the action of the approving authority.168
F. Action of governing body. The governing body may reverse, remand or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the final decision of the approving
authority. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the governing body shall be necessary to reverse,
remand or modify any final action of either Board.
G. Appeal stays all proceedings. An appeal to the governing body shall stay
all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I
§ 173-68 (RESERVED) § 173-68
164:597
§ 173-69. Violations and penalties.
decision appealed from was made unless the approving authority
certifies to the governing body, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with the approving authority, that by reasons of fact stated in
the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than
by an order of the Superior Court on application upon notice to the
approving authority from whom the appeal is taken and on good cause
shown.
H. Copy of decision; notice. The governing body shall mail a copy of the
decision to the appellant or, if represented, to his or her attorney,
without separate charge, and for a charge of $0.15 per page to any
interested party who requests it, not later than 10 days after the date of
the decision. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the
official newspaper of the Borough of Closter. Such publication shall be
arranged by the borough. The period of time in which an appeal to the
court of competent jurisdiction may be made shall run from the date of
the first publication by the borough.
A. Premature sale. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted,
any person transfers or sells or agrees to sell, except pursuant to an
agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision approval, as
owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision for which
the borough approval is required, such person shall be subject to a
penalty of $1,000. Each lot disposition shall be deemed a separate
violation.169
B. Civil action. In addition to the foregoing, Closter Borough may institute
and maintain a civil action for injunctive relief and to set aside and
invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract or sale if a
certificate of compliance has not been issued in accordance with law by
the borough.
C. Effect on transferee, purchaser or grantee. In any such action, the
transferee, purchaser or grantee is entitled to a lien upon the portion of
the land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the
possession of the developer or his or her assigns or successors to
secure the return of any deposits made or purchase price paid and,
also, a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense,
if any. Any such action must be brought within two years after the date
of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said
land or within six years, if unrecorded.
D. Other penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as set
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-68 CLOSTER CODE § 173-69
164:598
forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties, of this Code. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
§ 173-69 (RESERVED) § 173-69
164:599

ARTICLE XV
Interpretation and Validity
§ 173-70. Adoption of amendments.
All amendments to this chapter shall be adopted in accordance with the
provisions of New Jersey law.
§ 173-71. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this chapter, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided
that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
§ 173-70 (RESERVED) § 173-71
164:601

ARTICLE XVI
Site Work Permit
[Added 9-26-1990 by Ord. No. 1990:601]
§ 173-72. Permit required.
Whenever the Closter Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall approve
any development pursuant to which the execution of a developer's
agreement is required, the developer or his or her authorized agent or
representative shall make written request (copy to the Borough Clerk) to
and obtain from the Borough Engineer a site work permit. No work shall be
performed, including but not limited to demolition or site clearance, until
the site work permit is issued.
§ 173-73. Procedure for obtaining permit.
§ 173-74. Site work permit fee. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
Every individual or entity seeking a site work permit shall pay a
nonrefundable fee as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, to the
Borough of Closter along with the request for a site work permit and deliver
the fee to the Borough Clerk along with the copy of the request for a permit.
§ 173-75. Enforcement. [Amended 11-13-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:732]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer, Property Maintenance
Officer or the Police Department of the Borough of Closter.
§ 173-76. Violations and penalties.
A. No person shall request a site work permit unless he or she shall first
comply with the following prerequisites:
(1) The developer must sign the developer's agreement in triplicate
and return all copies to the Borough Clerk.
(2) The developer shall post through the office of the Borough Clerk
the required legal and engineering escrows; monument fees;
submission fees; performance guaranty; certificate of insurance;
deed(s) of easement, if required; and any other item required by
the developer's agreement and the Board of Adjustment or the
Planning Board or Borough Attorney resolution.
B. The Borough Clerk shall notify the Borough Engineer when all
requirements of Subsection A hereof have been met.
C. Upon receipt of notification of the Borough Clerk and receipt of the site
work permit fee, the Borough Engineer shall issue a site work permit in
a form prepared by the Borough Engineer.
§ 173-72 (RESERVED) § 173-76
164:603
A. Any person or persons who violate this Article shall, upon conviction for
each and every violation thereof, be subject to a fine as set forth in
Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of
this Code. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
B. In addition to the penalty set forth in Subsection A of this section, the
Zoning Officer may issue a notice of violation and orders to terminate
directing discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and
correction of the violation.
§ 173-76 CLOSTER CODE § 173-76
164:604
ARTICLE XVII
Signs
[Added 10-11-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:952]
§ 173-77. Title.
This article shall hereafter be known and may be cited as the "Sign
Ordinance."
§ 173-78. Statement of purpose.
The purpose of this article with respect to signs is to ensure the health,
safety and welfare of the general public, as well as to provide uniform
sign and signing lighting standards and regulations that promote a positive
image of the Borough of Closter, reflecting order, harmony and pride and
thereby strengthening the economic stability of the Borough's business,
industrial, cultural, historical and residential areas.
§ 173-79. Definitions of terms and word usage. [Amended 5-14-2014
by Ord. No. 2014:1163]
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this article. Words used in
the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the
plural and the plural the singular. The word "structure" shall include the
word "building"; the word "person" includes a corporation as well as an
individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word "occupied"
includes the words "designed or intended to be occupied"; and the word
"used" shall include the words "arranged, designed, constructed, altered,
converted, rented, leased or intended to be used." The word "may" is
permissive. For the purposes of this article, the terms used herein are
defined as follows:
ALTERING — To make a change in, to modify, to vary in some degree or to
change some of the elements, ingredients or detail without substituting an
entirely new sign or components or destroying the identity of the sign being
changed.
ANIMATED SIGN — A sign that uses the sequential switching on and
off of graphically arranged fluorescent lamps, cathode tubes, LEDs or
incandescents so as to provide the illusion of movement.
APPLIQUE — A graphic element made separately then affixed to a cloth or
fabric covering such as an awning.
AREA OF SIGN — The area enclosed by the perimeter of the sign, including
its background, if any, but excluding the structure of the sign. For signs
having no background, an imaginary rectangle surrounding all letters or
symbols shall serve as the basis for sign area calculation as illustrated in the
example in Figure 1 below. For parallel double-faced ground signs, erected
as a single or joined units, the maximum area permitted shall be calculated
on one side (the largest) only.
§ 173-77 (RESERVED) § 173-79
164:605
Figure 1 (Sign without background)
AWNING SIGN — A projecting sign made of nonrigid material, such as
heavy canvas, supported by a framework that is attached to a building's
substrate. The awning sign extends outward from the building and so
provides shaded cover and protection from weather for customers and
pedestrians. An awning sign will have lettering and/or graphics painted or
screen printed on its exterior surface. It may or not be illuminated. (See also
"backlit awning" and "canopy sign.")
BACKLIGHTED LETTER — An illuminated reverse channel letter where
the light from the letter is directed against and reflected off the surface
behind the letter thereby producing a glowing effect around the letter. (Also
referred to as "halo lighting.")
BACKLIT AWNING — An awning sign that is lit from underneath by
fluorescent or other high-output lighting. The light shines through the
awning fabric, illuminating whatever text or graphics are on it and
providing effective nighttime readability. The light emanating from
underneath the awning also provides light to the sidewalk or street below.
(Also called "illuminated awning." See also "awning sign" and "canopy
sign.")
BACKLIT SIGN — A sign where the sign face is illuminated from behind.
(Also called "illuminated sign." See also "internally illuminated sign" and
"exterior illuminated sign.")
BANNER — A sign made of nonrigid material, such as canvas or vinyl,
and typically having no enclosing or supporting framework. Often intended
for temporary use, a banner sign can be screen printed or painted, and is
commonly hung from a pole or mounted to the facade of a building. (See
also "flag" and "pennant.")
BENCH SIGN — A sign mounted onto, or incorporated into, a seat in a
public area such as a bus stop bench. (See also "street furniture.")
§ 173-79 CLOSTER CODE § 173-79
164:606
BILLBOARD — A large (15 square feet in area or larger) outdoor sign
used for advertising and typically seen along highways, main streets and
other high traffic areas. An advertiser will rent a billboard and display its
advertisement on it for a set length of time.
BLADE SIGN — A type of projecting sign mounted such that the face of the
sign is perpendicular to the normal flow of traffic.
BLANK — An uninstalled sign panel with no lettering or graphics applied.
(Also called an "insert.")
BLOCK COLOR — An area of solid color having no gradation.
BORDER — A line or band of color or material that defines that outer edges
of a sign and/or elements within the sign.
BOX SIGN — A sign that is self-enclosed in a typically square or rectangular
structure with or without internal lighting. Can be single- or double-faced.
(See also "light box.")
BRIGHTNESS —
BUILDING CODE — Regulations issued by state and local governments
that establish standards for the construction, modification and repair of
buildings and other structures in the interest of public health, safety and
general welfare.
BUILDING-MOUNTED SIGN — Any sign that is applied or attached to a
building in some manner.
BUNTING — Patriotic and festive decorations made from such cloth, or from
paper, usually in the form of draperies, wide streamers, etc., in the colors of
the national flag.
CANDELA — A unit of luminosity used to express the intensity of a light
source as measured in a specific direction. The higher the number of
candela measured, the greater the intensity of the light.
CANOPY SIGN — A projecting sign made of nonrigid material, such as
heavy canvas, supported by a framework that at one end is attached to
a building's substrate and at the other end supported by one or more
poles. The canopy sign extends outward from the building and acts as a
roof over the area it covers, providing weather protection for customers,
pedestrians and possibly even vehicles. A canopy sign will have lettering
and/or graphics painted or screen printed on its exterior surface. It may or
not be illuminated. (See also "awning sign" and "backlit awning.")
The perceived amount of light that a visual target emits or reflects. Its
relative luminance.
A.
The amount of white in a given color. The greater the amount of white,
the brighter the color is said to be.
B.
Brightness is one of the three attributes of color along with hue and
saturation.
C.
§ 173-79 (RESERVED) § 173-79
164:607
CHANNEL LETTER — A three-dimensional letter formed out of channel into
which a light source, such as a neon tube, may be placed.
CLEARANCE — The measured distance between the lowest portion of a sign
and the highest point of the grade underneath. (Also called "height above
grade.")
CONSTRUCTION SITE SIGN — A temporary sign, typically large and
freestanding, displayed at construction sites to promote and provide
information about the company or companies involved in the project. These
can include the contractor, architect, developer, etc. (Also called a "job site
sign.")
DIMENSIONAL LETTER — Any letter, logo or symbol that has a raised
profile in relation to the sign substrate.
DIRECT ILLUMINATION — Illuminating a sign by means of an external light
source directed at the sign face. (See also "exterior illuminated sign.")
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign providing information, either written or
visual, that helps direct a person to a destination.
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign that provides an organized list of names of
people, offices or facilities located within a given building or area. Usually
located at a public access point such as a building lobby, a directory sign
may provide simple text listings or also include maps and other wayfinding
information.
ELECTRIC SIGN — Any sign that contains and utilizes electrical
components.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and shall
also include the painting of a wall sign.
EXTERIOR ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that is illuminated by an external
light source directed at the sign face. (See also "direct illumination.")
FACADE — The exterior walls of a building, especially the front or the most
prominent side of the building.
FASCIA SIGN — A sign mounted to a wall or other vertical surface. A flat
sign that is mounted on a wall and the face of which runs parallel to the
wall. A fascia sign does not typically project from the wall.
FLAG — A sign made of nonrigid material, such as canvas or vinyl, and
having no enclosing or supporting framework. A flag is usually rectangular
or triangular in shape and is attached at one end to a pole. Often intended
for temporary use, a flag can be screen printed or painted. (See also
"banner" and "pennant.")
FLASHING SIGN — An illuminated sign having an intermittent or flashing
light source as a means of drawing attention to its message.
FLAT SCREEN — Generic term for a LCD display.
FLUORESCENT LAMP — A light source consisting of a glass tube lined
with a phosphor coating and filled with mercury vapor. When an electric
§ 173-79 CLOSTER CODE § 173-79
164:608
current is applied, the gas emits ultraviolet radiation that in turn excites the
phosphor coating causing it to radiate visible light. Fluorescent lamps are
more energy efficient than incandescent lamps.
FOOTING — The base of a sign's supporting structure. The footing is
typically secured to a foundation or other anchor such as a building's roof.
FOUNDATION — A concrete substructure that anchors a sign and its
supporting structure to the ground. (See also "footing.")
GROUND SIGN — A sign that is not attached to a building, has its own
support structure and is typically secured to a foundation or with guy wires.
A sign supported directly on the ground by a footing, base and pedestal or
by pole(s) or upright(s) set in or on a footing and/or base.
HALO LIGHTING — A type of sign lighting where a light source located
within or behind a sign is allowed to reflect off the mounting surface. The
result is that the sign appears to be surrounded by a halo of light.
HANGING SIGN — A projecting double-faced sign mounted to a wall or
pole and hung from a bracket or support arm. (Also known as a "projecting
sign.")
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign that provides the name of the business
displaying the sign.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign where the sign face is illuminated in some
manner. (Also called "backlit sign." See also "internally illuminated sign"
and "exterior illuminated sign.")
INCIDENTAL SIGN — A sign intended for informational purposes as
opposed to commercial or advertising purposes. Typically smaller in size,
examples of incidental signs include parking signs, restroom signs, and
entrance and exit signs.
INTERIOR SIGN — Any sign located within a building or structure.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign that is illuminated by a light
source contained within the sign structure or housing. (See also "backlit
sign" and "exterior illuminated sign.")
JOB SITE SIGN — A temporary sign, typically large and freestanding,
displayed at construction sites to promote and provide information about
the company or companies involved in the project. These can include the
contractor, architect, developer, etc. (Also called a "construction site sign.")
LIGHT BOX — A sign that is self-enclosed in a typically square or
rectangular structure and houses an internal light system for illumination
of the sign face. (See also "box sign.")
LIGHT-EMITTING DIODE (LED) — A small electronic device that emits light
when electrically charged. In computer controlled arrays, LEDs can be used
to create an electronic message center.
LIQUID CRYSTAL DISPLAY (LCD) SIGN — A type of flat-panel display that
recreates an image or message through the manipulation of electrically
§ 173-79 (RESERVED) § 173-79
164:609
sensitive crystals suspended in a liquid medium. Commonly used in
electronic message centers.
LOGO — A visually distinctive name and/or symbol that identifies a
business, product or service. (See also "trademark.")
MAINTENANCE; MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS — Replacement, without
substantial change, of any part or supports of a sign without repainting,
without change of text, design or size of a sign, without removal of the sign
from the wall or supporting structure.
MALL SIGNAGE — A general term for on-premises signs located within a
multitenant building or mall.
MARQUEE SIGN — A permanent structure attached to the front of a
building and which incorporates a large message center. Typically
illuminated and often ornate in design, a marquee sign projects over the
entrance of the building and provides a canopy over at least a portion of
the sidewalk or street. Marquee signs are often used by movie theaters and
concert halls.
MEMORIAL SIGN — A sign, typically a plaque, which commemorates a
person, place or event.
MENU BOARD — A changeable point-of-purchase sign that provides a list
of products and prices. It is a type of sign commonly seen in sandwich shops
and other fast-service restaurants where it is used to display the menu. (See
also "variable message sign.")
MOBILE SIGN — A large sign mounted on a trailer or back of a truck. The
sign may or may not be illuminated. (Also called a "mobile billboard.")
MONUMENT SIGN — A freestanding sign that stands directly on the
ground or ground-level foundation. A monument sign is often used to mark
a place of significance or the entrance to a location. (See also "low-profile
sign.")
NAMEPLATE — A small wall-mounted or freestanding sign made of plastic
or metal that states the name, occupation and/or title of the occupant of an
office, desk or building.
NATIONAL ELECTRIC CODE (NEC) — A set of codes and standards set
forth by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) for the safe use of
electrical wiring and equipment.
NEON SIGN — A sign that incorporates one or more neon lamps. The sign
message is created by bending and forming the neon tubes into lettering
and/or iconic graphical shapes.
NEON TUBING — The vacuum tubing (typically clear) used to hold the inert
gas (neon gas) used in a neon lamp. Neon tubing can be bent and formed
into almost any shape to create lettering and iconic graphics. The color of
the tubing and coatings applied to it may alter the color of the light emitted.
§ 173-79 CLOSTER CODE § 173-79
164:610
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign that is not located on or directly adjacent to
the business or property to which it relates. A billboard is an example of an
off-premises sign. (See also "on-premises sign.")
ON-PREMISES SIGN — Any sign that is located on or directly adjacent to
the business or property to which it relates. (See also "off-premises sign.")
OPEN CHANNEL LETTER — A channel letter with returns that project
forward from face of letter such that the neon tubing is visible.
PAINTED WALL SIGN — A sign that is painted directly onto an exterior wall
of a building.
PAN CHANNEL LETTER — A dimensional letter that is constructed with
integrated face, back and sidewalls so as to make the letter appear as a
single solid unit.
PARAPET — A low wall built along the edge of a building's roof.
PARAPET SIGN — A sign mounted on the parapet of a building. (See also
"building-mounted sign.")
PENNANT — A triangular flag. (See also "banner.")
PERMANENT SIGN — Any sign that is affixed to a building or structure in
such a manner as to give it the support necessary to resist environmental
loads over time and to preclude easy removal.
PERMIT — A legal document (license) granted by the appropriate
government agency that gives official permission to take a specific action,
e.g., erect a sign.
POLE SIGN — A freestanding sign, usually double-faced, mounted on a
round pole, square tube, or other fabricated member without any type of
secondary support.
PORTABLE SIGN — A freestanding, on-premises sign, not designed to be
permanently affixed in place. These could include freestanding signs or
notices as well as point-of-purchase signs.
POST AND PANEL SIGN — A sign panel with one or more posts.
POST-MOUNTED SIGN — A sign that is attached to one or more sign poles.
PRECINCT SIGN — A sign marking the entrance to a town, neighborhood,
development, park or other public area. (Also called "gateway sign.")
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign that is attached to a building but extends
beyond the building structure. Regulators often set a predetermined
distance that a sign must extend beyond a building for it to be considered
a projecting sign. A decorated awning is an example of a projecting sign.
(Also called "blade sign.")
PYLON SIGN — A freestanding sign that is not a pole or ground sign.
READERBOARD — A sign on which copy can be changed manually. It
usually consists of a panel on which individual letters or pictorials are
mounted. Like a window sign, it can advertise special prices or items. It can
also be placed so that it can be easily seen from a passing motor vehicle.
§ 173-79 (RESERVED) § 173-79
164:611
REGULATORY SIGN — Signs installed by various government bodies to
inform the public of traffic laws and other regulations.
RE-LETTERING — To change the lettering or descriptive symbol on a sign
without changing any of the structure, parts or components of the sign.
RETRACTABLE AWNING — A cantilevered structure, entirely supported
from a building, and constructed so that the awning cover and supporting
frame retracts completely against the building. This relieves the awning
from wind, rain and snow pressure and loads normally associated with
extended fixed frame awning or canopies.
REVERSE CHANNEL LETTER — A channel letter that has a face and sides
but no back, and is pinned out from a background surface. When the neon
tube inside the letter is illuminated, it produces a halo effect around the
letter.
REVOLVING SIGN — A sign that has the ability to turn 360° because of the
presence of an electric motor to drive its movable parts. All or a portion of
the sign may revolve at a steady or variable speed.
ROOF SIGN — A sign structure that is erected on or above a roof or that is
installed directly on a roof's surface.
SANDWICH SIGN — A moveable sign not secured or attached to the ground
or surface upon which it is located, but supported by its own frame and most
often forming the cross-sectional shape of an A. (Also known as "sidewalk
sign.")
SIDEWALK SIGN — A moveable sign not secured or attached to the ground
or surface upon which it is located, but supported by its own frame and most
often forming the cross-sectional shape of an A. (Also known as "sandwich
sign.")
SIGN — Any device, structure, display or placard which is affixed to, placed
on or in proximity to, or displayed from within a building to attract the
attention of the public for the purposes of advertising, identifying or
communicating information about goods and services.
SIGN BAND — A horizontal area above a multitenant building entrance,
architecturally designed to accommodate signage in a signcentric manner.
SNIPE SIGN — An overlay sign added to an existing sign layout, as an
additional message to the main sign, for example a band across a corner
saying "coming soon." Also a term for illegal posting of handbills and
posters without permits.
SPINNER SIGN — A sign, either freestanding or wall-mounted, where the
messages rotate in the wind. A spinner sign is not considered an animated
sign.
SPOTLIGHT — A source of illumination for an extremely illuminated sign; a
lamp with a strong focused beam directed toward a sign.
STATIONARY SIGN — A sign with a power cord for attachment to a source
of electrical power that is not readily moveable or portable.
§ 173-79 CLOSTER CODE § 173-79
164:612
STONE SIGNS — Typically sandstone, granite, marble, limestone and other
common decorative stone material. Letters can be stud-mounted to stone or
they can be carved or incised into the face of the stone.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign that is not intended to be permanently
installed. Banners and signs at construction sites are good examples of
temporary signs. Often, sign codes seek to limit the length of time a
temporary sign can remain in place.
UNDER-CANOPY SIGN — A sign designed to be mounted underneath a
canopy.
WALL-MOUNTED SIGN — A single-face sign mounted on a wall. (See also
"wall sign.")
WALL SIGN — In the most literal sense, a sign that is painted on a wall. The
term is often expanded to include flat signs that are placed on or attached
to the wall of a building. These latter signs are also called fascia-mounted
signs and wall mounts. (Also known as a "wall-mounted sign.")
WIND LOAD — The basic term for describing the design strength of a sign.
Standard windload is 30 PSF (pounds per square foot), which can withstand
winds up to approximately 90 miles per hour. Heavy windload is 55 PSF,
which can withstand approximately 110 miles per hour.
WINDOW SIGN — A sign that is mounted for display on a window and
intended to be viewed from the outside.
§ 173-80. Grandfathering. [Amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1163]
Permanent signs whose existence can be substantiated by way of permit
documentation and/or inclusion within the photographic record of Borough
signage as of March 15, 2005, shall be considered grandfathered and
given preexisting/nonconforming status so long as such signs are routinely
maintained but not enlarged, extended or relocated. Grandfathered signs
afflicted with damage equal to or greater than 50% from weather, etc.,
shall lose such status and any replacement or repair will be considered new
signage subject to present regulations.
§ 173-81. Sign Review Committee. [Amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1163]
A. There shall be established a Sign Review Committee whose purpose is
to assist the business community with signs, the permitting process by
giving nonbinding guidance to an applicant and to enhance the Closter
business streetscape by encouraging appropriateness as well as
creativity in proposed signs.
B. Composition: three full members, two alternate members. At least four
of the members must be Closter residents. All members must have at
least one of the following attributes: New Jersey licensed design
professional (landscape architect, architect, engineer, etc.), sign
§ 173-79 (RESERVED) § 173-81
164:613
§ 173-82. Application process. [Amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1163]
§ 173-83. Sign requirements. [Amended 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:
1007; 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1163]
industry member (design, graphics, etc.), local business person, or
membership on the Borough Zoning Board of Adjustment, Planning
Board, Historic Preservation Commission or Improvement Commission.
C. Duties. Upon request by the applicant, the Committee shall review new
sign proposals for appropriateness. Provide guidance for design, size,
color schemes, and location. Following the completion of this review,
the Committee shall forward their written recommendations to the
Zoning Officer.
D. Meetings: once per month, unless a special meeting is requested by the
applicant.
A. Upon considering aesthetic guidelines for design options as established
by the Sign Review Committee, a zoning permit application shall be
submitted to the Zoning Officer to ensure compliance with those
criteria defined within this article. Said application shall include written
permission from the landlord and three copies of plans depicting
existing and proposed signage in color and drawn to scale.
(1) Note No. 1: An applicant may choose to appear before the Sign
Review Committee prior or subsequent to filing a zoning permit
application.
(2) Note No. 2: If a zoning permit application is denied, the applicant
can opt to receive guidance from the Sign Review Committee
before reapplying to the Zoning Officer or seek variance relief from
either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
whichever has jurisdiction. However, use of the Sign Review
Committee in no way extends the statutory appeal period.
(3) Note No. 3: The aesthetic guidelines are suggestions which shall
become binding upon the adoption of part or all of these guidelines
by ordinance of the Mayor and Council.
B. If applicable, upon issuance of a zoning permit, a construction permit
shall be obtained from the Building Department for compliance with
relevant building and/or electrical codes as per the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code. An applicant may appeal the determination by the
Construction Official to the Bergen County Construction Board of
Appeals.
A. General requirements (for all types of signage located in all zoning
districts).
§ 173-81 CLOSTER CODE § 173-83
164:614
(1) Any new or altered sign requires a zoning permit with the
exception of certain temporary signs as delineated herein.
(2) If applicable, signs defined by this article shall be designed and
constructed in conformity with the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code and should meet the aesthetic guidelines
established by the Sign Review Committee.
(3) Except for election, civic event, garage, yard sale and nonprofit
signs, the content of all signs shall pertain only to the use within
the premises upon which the sign is located.
(4) The building street address on an awning or door shall be visible to
assist emergency service personnel.
(5) The name of the business shall be posted in the English language.
Signs containing a language in addition to English shall contain
information whereby both the English and other language(s) are
equal in both dimensional proportion and translation sufficient to
ensure the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants thereof and
the public at large.
(6) Signs may not be attached to trees or light/utility poles.
(7) The use of vehicles whose primary purpose is advertising is
prohibited.
(8) The use of stickers is prohibited.
(9) Any signage located on or extending over a public right-of-way
must be approved by the relevant governing agency (Borough,
Bergen County, etc.) prior to installation.
B. Permanent signs.
(1) Wall signs. No wall sign shall exceed two square feet in area for
every linear foot of storefront, up to 36 square feet maximum.
(a) A wall sign must adhere to the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code and shall be constructed of metal or
integrated wood or other approved noncombustible materials,
except for structural trim.
(b) A wall sign attached to the exterior surface of a structure shall
not project beyond the ends or the top of the surface to which it
is attached.
(c) A wall sign shall be parallel to, and not protrude more than 12
inches from, the wall of said structure to which it is attached. If
the sign protrudes more than six inches from the surface to
which it is attached, said sign must be positioned at least eight
feet above the sidewalk or ground beneath it.
§ 173-83 (RESERVED) § 173-83
164:615
(d) A wall sign shall not be erected to cover windows or
architectural details.
(e) If a building has more than one exposure, each exposed side
may have an ancillary wall sign no larger than 50% of the
principal wall sign.
(2) Awnings, canopies and marquees. No awnings, canopies or
marquees shall be installed above the first floor of any building or
structure; they shall be constructed of woven fabric, and all frames
and supports shall be constructed of metal; they shall be
constructed and erected so that the lowest portion thereof is no
less than eight feet above ground level. Marquee signs may extend
to within one foot of the curbline. Canopies and awnings may
project no further than 36 inches from the building into the public
right-of-way. No advertising shall be placed on any awning, canopy
or marquee except for the address, logo, name and type of business
conducted within the premises. Logos shall not be larger than 10%
of the total space of the awning.
(3) Freehanging perpendicular/blade signs. These signs shall be
limited to one per store occupancy and shall not exceed six square
feet in area. They must have a clearing height of 10 feet and be
erected and secured in such a manner as to preclude their
becoming a safety hazard to the public.
(4) Ground signs. No ground sign shall exceed 16 square feet in area,
and there shall be no more than one ground sign per property,
except in Zoning District 5 (Industrial) where there may be one
sign for every 75 feet of frontage. Such signs must be set back at
least 15 feet from the curbline and cannot interfere with sight
triangles. It shall be unlawful to erect any ground sign whose total
height is greater than 15 feet above ground level.
(5) Pylon signs.
(a) Gasoline stations and automobile dealerships shall,
notwithstanding other provisions of this article, be permitted
one freestanding or pylon sign advertising the name of the
station, agency, or garage, and for the principal products sold
on the premises, including any special company or brand
names, insignia or emblem, provided that each such sign shall
not exceed 35 square feet in area on a side nor be erected
within five feet of the property line and not less than 10 nor
more than 20 feet above the ground. Such pole or pylon sign
shall be illuminated only by internal illumination and shall be
constructed according to the UCC. There shall be no light
leakage beyond the sign.
(b) Shopping centers situated on more than three acres may erect
pylon or pole signs. Construction, size and details are subject
§ 173-83 CLOSTER CODE § 173-83
164:616
to approval by either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, whichever has jurisdiction.
(6) Directory signs. The total area of a directory sign shall not exceed
one square foot per tenant or eight square feet in total, whichever
is larger. A directory sign shall not be included into the
computation of square footage for either ground or wall signs.
(7) Directional signs. Such signs shall not exceed 27 inches in length,
12 inches in height, and the top shall not be greater than 60 inches
in height from the ground.
(8) Window signs. The maximum coverage of all permanent window
signs located on all floors of a building shall not exceed 30% of all
window space on each floor. Windows blocked completely by solid
color or opaque paint are not considered signs. In multiple-tenant
buildings, landlords shall apportion permitted space to tenants.
(9) Motion-animated signs. Such signs must be turned off no later than
11:00 pm.
(10) A-frame/sandwich board signs. They shall be displayed only during
regular business hours and must be removed during nonbusiness
hours. They shall be no more than 10 square feet in area on each
side, no more than five feet in height and no more than three feet in
width. Such installations must be approved by the Construction
Official for safety. Only one such sign is permitted for each business
and it shall pertain only to the use within the premises on which the
sign is positioned. Each sign must be set back a minimum of two
feet from the curbline or pedestrian walkway. This provision may be
waived by the Code Enforcement Officer in the interest of safety.
(11) Memorial signs. Such signs must be approved by the Mayor and
Council.
C. Temporary signs. All temporary signs require the issuance of a zoning
permit. Temporary signs must be removed no later than 40 days
following the date of a zoning permit being issued. All such signs must
have contact information. The following temporary signs are exempt
from the zoning permit requirement of this section: construction signs;
municipal signs; traffic signs; legal notices; danger and emergency
signs; window signs; real estate signs; election signs; educational/
charitable/civic/religious signs.
(1) Street banners. Signage extending above thoroughfares must be
suspended a minimum of 16 feet above any street and must be
securely fastened to a building or structure dedicated to displaying
temporary signs. The total area of such signs shall not exceed 18
square feet.
(2) Educational/charitable/civic/religious signs. Such signs shall not
exceed 18 square feet.
§ 173-83 (RESERVED) § 173-83
164:617
(3) Rental signs (for-rent signs provided by real estate firms) must be
removed within three days of closing or tenant occupancy. The
maximum size allowed for residential and nonresidential signs is 24
inches by 36 inches and 48 inches by 48 inches, respectively.
(4) Real estate signs. Such signs shall be mounted on their own stakes
and stanchions along any public street in a safe manner, without
projecting over the curbline or pedestrian walkway, and must be
removed by the end of the day in which a real estate showing
occurs.
(5) Election signs. Temporary election signs shall not be erected prior
to 30 days before any election and shall be removed not more than
four days after the election. Cost of removal after that time shall be
charged to the responsible entity which must be included on each
sign. Such signs shall not be larger than 16 by 26 inches (or four
square feet) or be higher than three feet from the ground. Election
signs only may be placed closer than six feet from the curbline. It
shall be unlawful for any person to post a political campaign and/or
promotional sign on any street, sidewalk, or curb, and no political
campaign and/or promotional sign shall be affixed to any tree,
shrub, utility pole, light pole, telephone pole or other structure
lying in or over a public easement. All political campaign and/or
promotional signs shall be set back at least three feet from all
street lines. Not more than 3/10 of the square footage of any
window or window display area shall be covered by political and/or
promotional signs. All political and/or promotional signs shall
clearly identify the person responsible for posting same. Political
campaign and/or promotional signs in violation of this section are
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as such
by the Borough's Code Enforcement Officer.
(6) Business grand openings, closings and change of ownership or
management, or special promotions. Such signs, including
banners, flags, buntings, etc., shall be permitted for no more than
40 days, and no more than once in every twelve-month period, and
only on the advertised premises. Banners must be securely
installed as approved by the Construction Official and shall not
extend upon or across any sidewalk or public property.
(7) Yard or garage sale signs. Application shall be made for special
permits to erect garage or yard sales signs to the Construction
Official or his/her designee, who shall assign a number to each
permit upon payment of the required fee. No more than four
temporary signs may be erected under each permit, each sign must
show the permit number, and no more than two such permits shall
be issued to any one address in each calendar year. Such signs shall
not exceed three square feet in size and can only be displayed
during a period including the day before and the day after the sale.
§ 173-83 CLOSTER CODE § 173-83
164:618
§ 173-84. Zoning limitations: residential districts. [Amended
5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1163]
Zoning District Nos. 1, 2 and 6: residential zones. The following signs, and
none other, unless expressly permitted by another section of this article, are
permitted to be erected in Zoning District Nos. 1, 2 and 6, and must be in
conformance with the regulations in this article:
(8) Construction signs. No more than three construction/builder signs
may be erected, without permit or fees, between the granting of a
construction permit and the granting of a certificate of approval or
occupancy, but not more than 12 months after the granting of the
construction permit. Each sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in
area and shall be situated at least 15 feet from the curb. The total
of all signage shall not exceed 36 square feet.
D. Sign illumination.
(1) Holiday lighting. For the winter holiday season, lighting may be
installed after Thanksgiving and must be removed by January 15
each year. Other than the winter holiday season, holiday lighting is
permitted 10 days before and 10 days after any other holiday.
(2) No uncovered neon or fluorescent bulbs are permitted on any sign.
All internally illuminated signs must be shielded or covered in a
manner so as to prevent the exposure of an uncovered light source
of any sort providing direct glare.
(3) No illumination shall be permitted which may cause interference
with traffic control signs or lights, or lights of an emergency
vehicle, or cause interference with radio or television signals.
(4) Externally lighted signs, floodlights, or spotlights used for the
illumination of signs shall be shielded to project light only onto the
sign area and not beyond the sign, so there is no glare upon the
street or adjacent property.
(5) Tube lighting used as an outline is permitted.
A. House numerals not exceeding one square foot per individual numeral.
B. Professional nameplates not exceeding six inches in height or 18 inches
in length identifying lawful occupants of the premises.
C. Bulletin boards or signs not to exceed 16 square feet in area for public,
charitable or religious institutions, where the same are located on the
premises of said institutions.
D. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and the date of erection
when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or
other incombustible materials.
§ 173-83 (RESERVED) § 173-84
164:619
§ 173-85. Maintenance. [Amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1163]
§ 173-86. Inspections. [Amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1163;
11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1215]
Every sign shall be subject, at any time, to the inspection and approval of
the Zoning Officer, Code Enforcement Officer or the Construction Official.
The inspection shall include a review of bonds and/or liability insurance for
the sign(s). Failure to comply with § 173-87 (below) shall be grounds for
revocation of a sign permit and the issuance of a notice of violation. The
violation may be cured by submitting proof of compliance with § 173-87
within 10 days of the date of the notice of violation. Proof must be provided
to and acceptable to the Borough's Building Department and Risk Manager.
E. Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs
and danger and such temporary emergency or nonadvertising signs as
may be approved by the Chief of Police.
F. Flags of the United States, the State of New Jersey or other
governmental or quasi-public agencies.
G. Signs of any governmental agency deemed necessary to the public
welfare.
H. Temporary election signs.
I. Garage and yard sale signs.
J. Real estate signs.
K. Religious institution signs located on the property of the institution.
A. All signs must be maintained in good repair. Specifically, no owner or
occupant of premises on which a sign is located may permit any type of
deterioration, including the following conditions: chipped or peeling
paint; torn paper or damaged lettering or material of any kind; illegible
material, whether by reason of fading, obliteration or any other
condition; a dirty, torn, broken or otherwise damaged awning, canopy
or marquee.
B. All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports,
braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in repair in accordance with the
provisions of this article and the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code. When not galvanized or constructed of approved corrosionresistive
noncombustible materials, signs shall be painted when
necessary to prevent corrosion. If a sign is physically damaged, it must
be repaired within 60 days.
C. Housekeeping. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or
lessee of every sign to maintain an immediate premises occupied by the
sign in a clean sanitary and healthful condition.
§ 173-84 CLOSTER CODE § 173-87
164:620
§ 173-87. Bonds and liability insurance. [Amended 5-14-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014:1163170]
§ 173-88. Removal of certain signs. [Amended 5-14-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014:1163]
A. Filing. A person shall not erect, install, remove, rehang or maintain over
public or quasi-public property any sign for which a permit is required
under the provisions of this article until an approved bond shall have
been filed in the sum of $100,000 as herein required or until an
insurance policy shall have been filed for public liability in the amount
of $1,000,000 combined single limit, naming the Borough of Closter as
an insured or as an additional insured as herein required.
B. Conditions. Such bond or insurance policy shall protect and save the
Borough of Closter harmless from any and all claims or demands for
damages by reason of any negligence of the sign hanger, contractor or
agents or by any reason of defects in the construction or damages
resulting from the collapse, failure or combustion of the sign or parts
thereof.
C. Notice of cancellation. The obligation herein specified shall remain in
force and effect during the life of every sign and shall not be canceled
by the principal or surety until after a thirty-day notice to the Borough
Clerk by certified mail, return receipt requested, if the cancellation
takes place prior to the removal of the sign or banner.
A. Abandoned signs. An abandoned sign shall be taken down and removed
by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building
or structure upon which such sign may be found within 20 days after
vacancy of the building and/or tenant space. Twenty days after written
notification and upon failure by the property owner to remove said sign,
the Zoning Officer, Construction Official or the Code Enforcement
Officer is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any
expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the building or
structure to which such sign is attached.
B. The Zoning Officer, Construction Official or Code Enforcement Officer
shall have the discretion to prohibit the erection and/or to order the
removal of any signs he or she deems to present a hazard to the public
or that has been erected without the application for and granting of the
proper permits and fees, or in the case of signs which do not require
permits, but do not conform to the provisions of this article.
170. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 173-87, Fees and exemptions from
permits and fees, and redesignated former §§ 173-88 through 173-92 as §§ 173-87 through
173-91, respectively.
§ 173-87 (RESERVED) § 173-89
164:621
§ 173-89. Zoning variances. [Amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1163]
A zoning variance granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, Subdivision D,
which varies a use allowed in a particular district for particular premises,
shall be deemed to vary the provisions of this article in the same respect for
the premises.
§ 173-90. Appeals. [Amended 5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1163]
Any interested party may appeal a decision of the Zoning Officer with
regard to this article by filing an appeal with the Borough of Closter
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment (whichever board has
jurisdiction over the application), as appropriate, within 20 days of the
decision of the Zoning Officer. Such appeal shall be considered by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with the
standards and time limitations as contained in the New Jersey Municipal
Land Use Act. Any interested party may appeal the decision of the
Construction Official by filing an appeal with the Bergen County
Construction Board of Appeals. See also § 173-82A(1), (2) and (3).
§ 173-91. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended
5-14-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1163]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General
Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code. Violations of
certain provisions of the Code may be enforced by the Closter Police
Department, the Zoning Officer, the Construction Official and/or the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 173-89 CLOSTER CODE § 173-91
164:622
Chapter 176
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Fences — See Ch. 103.
Water — See Ch. 189.
Zoning — See Ch. 200.
Fees — See Ch. A301.
§ 176-1. Definitions.
The words, terms or phrases listed herein, for the purpose of this chapter,
shall be defined as follows:
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any pool, tank or plunge designed, used
and maintained for swimming purposes by an individual for use by his or
her household and guests and located on a lot as an accessory use to a
residence. Unless otherwise qualified, the term "private swimming pool"
shall be construed as including both artificial and partly artificial pools. The
term "partly artificial pool" shall mean a pool formed from a natural body
of water which has either so limited a flow or such an inadequate flow that
water must be maintained by artificial means. The term "artificial pool" shall
mean a pool composed entirely of artificial construction.171
WADING POOL — Any artificially constructed pool not designed or used for
swimming.
§ 176-2. Permits required; plans; fees.
A. Application for permits for the construction and maintenance of any
private swimming pool, wading pool, tank or plunge, as herein
provided, shall be made to the Building Inspector by the owner of the
property or by the contractor who will construct the same. The
application shall be accompanied by duplicate sets of plans,
specifications and plot plans of the property. The plot plan shall show
the accurate location of the proposed pool on the property, together
with any proposed accessory buildings as heretofore mentioned. The
plot plan shall also show the location, height and type of all existing
fencing or walks on the boundary lines of the property, together with
the type and height of fencing or enclosure as may be required by
§ 176-5 of this chapter. The application shall disclose the total cost of all
improvements to be made in connection with the construction of the
private swimming pool. [Amended 10-12-1977 by Ord. No.
1977:315]
171. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 173-91 SWIMMING POOLS § 176-2
176:623
§ 176-3. Location requirements.
§ 176-4. Health requirements.
B. Applicants shall pay to the Borough of Closter a fee as set forth in
Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits. This private swimming pool permit
fee shall be exclusive of the permit fee required for any accessory
structure to be used in connection with such swimming pool.
[Amended 10-13-1971 by Ord. No. 1971:226; 10-12-1977 by Ord.
No. 1977:315172]
C. No permit for a private swimming pool or wading pool shall be issued
by the Building Inspector until the plans, specifications and plot have
been approved by the Sanitary Inspector and Borough Engineer and
such approval has been properly certified on the above plans. Such
approval must be directly obtained from the Sanitary Inspector by the
applicant.
A. None of the installations as set forth in § 176-1 hereof shall be erected
or placed nearer to a street property line or nearer to a side or rear
property line than herein set forth for the respective zoning districts as
set forth in the Zoning Ordinance,173 as follows:
(1) District No. 1 (Residence Area A):
(a) Front: not less than the required setback for the front of the
house.
(b) Side: fifteen (15) feet.
(c) Rear: fifteen (15) feet.
(2) District No. 2 (Residence Area B):
(a) Front: not less than the required setback for the front of the
house.
(b) Side: ten (10) feet.
(c) Rear: ten (10) feet.
B. Pools are not permitted in any other zone or district. Any pool shall be
located not less than twenty (20) feet from any individual sewage
disposal system. The drain outlet of any pool shall not connect in any
manner to any component of any individual sewage disposal system nor
shall the discharge drain into any sewage disposal system.
A. Water supply. There shall be no physical connection between a potable
water, public or private supply system and such private swimming pool
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
173. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 176-2 CLOSTER CODE § 176-4
176:624
§ 176-5. Fencing requirements.
at a point below the maximum water level of the pool or to a
recirculating or heating system of a pool unless such physical
connection is so installed and operated that no pool water can be
discharged or siphoned into a potable water supply system.
B. Water purity. The physical, chemical and bacterial qualities of the water
in private swimming pools shall comply with the latest requirements
made by the American Public Health Association and by the New Jersey
State Department of Health.
C. Design requirements. Private swimming pools shall be so designed and
constructed as to facilitate emptying and cleaning and shall be
maintained and operated in such manner as to be clean and sanitary at
all times. The interior of the pool shall be constructed with a smooth
finish. Inlets shall be so located and spaced as to secure satisfactory
dispersion of inflowing water throughout the pool and to permit
draining, cleaning and disinfecting of the bottom and the sides.
A. Any private swimming pool, wading pool, tank or plunge installed or
placed two hundred (200) feet or less from any property line of the lot
or plot upon which the same is situated shall be enclosed by a
substantial fence no less than six (6) feet in height, so constructed as to
prevent, within reason, any person from gaining access beneath or
through said fence and which shall have a similarly substantial gate of
the same height as the fence with facilities for locking said gate when
the pool is unguarded or unattended. [Amended 10-8-1975 by Ord.
No. 1975:275]
B. No provision contained within this section, however, shall be applicable
where a private swimming pool now existing or hereinafter constructed
is located on a plot not less than two hundred (200) feet from the front
property line and where there is present on the side and rear property
lines walls or fencing, the height of which shall conform with provisions
relating to fences under the relevant section of the Zoning Ordinance174
of the Borough of Closter and which shall be constructed to prevent
within reason any person from gaining access beneath or through said
fencing.
C. Any fence required to be constructed pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the provisions of Chapter 103, Fences, of the Code of the
Borough of Closter and shall require the issuance of a fence permit
pursuant to § 103-1 of the Code of the Borough of Closter. [Added
10-12-1977 by Ord. No. 1977:315]
174. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 176-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 176-6
176:625
§ 176-6. Lighting restriction.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with any
private swimming pool, wading pool, tank or plunge in such manner as to
be a nuisance or an annoyance to neighboring properties.
§ 176-7. Abatement of nuisances.
Any nuisance which may exist or develop in or in consequence of or in
connection with any private swimming pool, wading pool, tank or plunge
shall be abated and/or removed by the owners.
§ 176-8. Closings by Board of Health.
Whenever any private swimming pool, wading pool, tank or plunge, by
reason of mechanical defects or lack of supervision, is, in the opinion of the
Board of Health, polluted and detrimental to health, it shall be summarily
closed.
§ 176-9. Inspections.
§ 176-10. Accessory buildings.
Any accessory buildings such as locker rooms, bathhouses, cabanas, shower
rooms, toilets, runways or any other physical facility or equipment incident
to the operation of any of the above described shall be in conformance with
the rules and regulations of both the Board of Health175 and the Building
Code176 of this borough.
§ 176-11. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to private swimming pools,
wading pools, tanks or plunges of a permanent nature.
§ 176-12. Construction without permit prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to construct or establish a private swimming pool,
wading pool, tank or plunge, as herein defined, without having obtained a
permit therefor in the manner hereinabove prescribed.
A. Owners or persons in possession of private swimming pools, wading
pools, tanks or plunges shall allow the Sanitary Inspector and the
Building Inspector access to inspect said pool and the appurtenances at
any time that may be required by the Board of Health or the Building
Committee of the Borough Council.
B. The Board of Health may cause any pool, tank or plunge subject to this
chapter to be inspected for compliance with the Plumbing Code of the
Borough of Closter.
175. Editor's Note: See the Revised Health Code, which is in a separate volume.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 176-6 CLOSTER CODE § 176-13
176:626
§ 176-13. Violation and penalties.177
Any person or persons who permit, take part or assist in any violation of
this chapter shall, upon conviction for each and every violation thereof, be
subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II,
Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
Chapter 178
TELEVISION AND MOVIE FILMING
§ 178-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film, videotape
or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational purposes
intended for viewing on television or in theaters or for institutional use.
PUBLIC LAND — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk or square,
public park or playground or other public place within the borough which is
within the jurisdiction and control of the borough.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE — Residence Area A or Residence Area B of Chapter
200 of the Code of the Borough of Closter.
§ 178-2. Permits.
A. No person shall film or permit filming within the Borough of Closter
without first obtaining a permit therefor, which permit shall set forth
the location of such filming and the date or dates when filming shall
take place.
B. Permits shall be obtained in the office of the Borough Clerk during
normal business hours. Applications for such permits shall be in a form
approved by the Borough Clerk and shall be accompanied by a permit
fee as hereinafter set forth. Incidental use of a public sidewalk or street
which does not result in a closing of the street or sidewalk to public use
shall not be considered filming on public land.
C. One (1) permit shall be required for each location.
D. One (1) permit shall be sufficient to authorize outdoor filming on one (1)
day and indoor filming on one (1) day within a period of not more than
(10) days beginning on the date of issuance of the permit, provided that
each such date on which filming is to take place shall be specified in the
permit and further provided that the maximum number of days on
which filming may be authorized in any calendar year for premises
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 176-13 TELEVISION AND MOVIE FILMING § 178-2
178:627
§ 178-3. Rules and regulations.
located in any residential zone shall not exceed four (4) days without a
waiver pursuant to § 178-3I of this chapter.
E. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Borough
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, who shall certify that filming
did not in fact take place on the dates specified, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this chapter. No additional fee shall be paid for this
permit.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming at a particular location in a
residential zone within the Borough of Closter which would permit
filming at said location on more than four (4) days during any one (1)
calendar year unless a waiver pursuant to § 178-3I of this chapter is
granted.
B. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands within the
Borough of Closter unless the applicant for such permit:
(1) Provides proof of insurance coverages as follows: general public
liability in the amount of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.) combined single limit; automobile liability covering
owned and nonowned automobiles in the amount of not less than
one million dollars ($1,000,000.) combined single limit; and
workers compensation and employers liability as required by New
Jersey law. The Borough of Closter shall be named as an additional
insured for the entire time granted by the permit.
(2) Agrees in writing to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the
Borough of Closter from any and all claims, actions at law, liability
or damages resulting from the use of public lands or employees of
the Borough of Closter. The agreement shall be on a form supplied
by the Borough Clerk and shall be acknowledged by the insurance
company or companies.
C. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Closter
Police Department with respect thereto.
D. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit to the extent possible
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
§ 178-2 CLOSTER CODE § 178-3
178:628
E. The holder of a permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize the
creation and spread of debris and rubbish during filming and shall be
responsible for removing all equipment, debris and other rubbish from
the filming location upon the completion of filming or the expiration of
the permit, whichever comes first.
F. In residential zones, filming shall be permitted only Monday through
Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or sundown,
whichever is earlier.
G. The Borough Clerk may refuse to issue a permit whenever she
determines, on the basis of objective facts, after a review of the
application and a report thereon by the Police Department and by other
borough agencies involved with the proposed filming site, that filming
at the location and/or time set forth in the application would violate any
law or ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the public's use
of public lands, unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of
adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health or welfare.
H. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Clerk denying or
revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to Subsection I
may appeal to the Mayor and Council. A written notice of appeal setting
forth the reasons for the appeal shall be filed with the Borough Clerk.
An appeal from the decision of the Borough Clerk shall be filed within
ten (10) days of the Borough Clerk's decision. The Mayor and Council
shall set the matter down for a hearing within thirty (30) days of the day
on which the notice of appeal was filed. The decision of the Mayor and
Council shall be in the form of a resolution. A resolution supporting the
decision of the Borough Clerk or granting relief pursuant to Subsection
I shall be approved by the Mayor and Council at the first regularly
scheduled public meeting of the Mayor and Council after the hearing on
the appeal unless the appellant agrees, in writing, to a later date for the
decision. If such a resolution is not adopted within the time required,
the decision of the Borough Clerk shall be deemed to be reversed, and a
permit shall be issued in conformity with the application or the relief
pursuant to Subsection I shall be deemed denied.
I. The Mayor and Council may authorize a waiver of any of the
requirements or limitations or this chapter and may authorize filming
other than during the hours herein described or may extend the
duration of a permit beyond ten (10) days or may permit filming at a
particular location in a residential zone on more than four (4) days
during any one (1) calendar year or may waive any other limitation or
requirement of this chapter whenever it determines that strict
compliance with such limitation will pose an unreasonable burden upon
the applicant and that such a permit may be issued without
endangering the public's health, safety and welfare.
J. The applicant shall notify the Fire Official twenty-four (24) hours before
filming takes place and permit the Fire Official or his designee to
§ 178-3 TELEVISION AND MOVIE FILMING § 178-3
178:629
§ 178-4. Fees.
The fees, which shall be paid to the Borough Clerk in advance of the filming
and issuance of the permit, are as set forth in Ch. A301, Fees and Deposits.
§ 178-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter or rules and regulations contained herein
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or
imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both.
§ 178-6. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the filming of news stories
by authorized press personnel within the borough, the Borough of Closter
Police Department, Fire Department or Ambulance Corp., nor shall it apply
to filming for training provided by such borough agencies.
§ 178-7. Administrator's responsibilities. [Added 10-12-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994:683]
As to any responsibility or assignment designated to the Borough Clerk by
this Chapter 178, the Mayor and Council may, by resolution, designate the
Borough Administrator in the alternative.
Chapter 179
TOWING AND STORAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous substance costs recovery — See
Ch. 114.
Trailers and camp cars — See Ch. 180.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 183.
inspect the site and the equipment to be used. The applicant shall
comply with all firesafety instructions issued by the Fire Official or his
designee.
K. The holder of a permit for filming on public lands shall hire, at said
person's sole cost and expense, a Closter police officer who will be
present at all times at the site during the filming.
L. Automobiles, trucks and all other vehicles owned, leased or used by the
holder of a permit for either residential or public land filming shall not
be parked on more than one (1) side of the street.
§ 178-3 CLOSTER CODE § 179-1
179:630
§ 179-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISABLED VEHICLE — A vehicle which has been abandoned, impounded
or rendered inoperable as a result of a mechanical failure or involvement
in an accident. A vehicle, the location of which constitutes a hazard to the
motoring public, shall be deemed disabled for the purposes of this chapter.
EMERGENCY DUTY CALL LIST — An annual list kept by the Borough of
Closter containing the names of towing operators who have been approved
pursuant to this chapter.
OWNER — A person, firm or corporation who owns and/or operates a
vehicle on the roads and highways within the Borough of Closter, which
vehicle by reason or being abandoned or disabled on the public roadways of
the Borough of Closter requires towing services.
TOWING OPERATOR — A person, firm or corporation engaged in the
business of providing wrecking and storage services for vehicles towed.
WRECKER — A vehicle driven by mechanical power and employed for the
purpose of towing, transporting, conveying or removing any and all kinds of
vehicles or parts of vehicles which are unable to be operated under this own
power.
§ 179-2. Application for placement on emergency duty list.
A. Towing operators who seek to provide wrecking, towing, storage and
emergency road service within the Borough of Closter to motor vehicle
owners at the request of the Police Department shall submit an
application to be approved by the Chief of Police upon forms prepared
and provided by the Chief of Police. If chosen, in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this chapter, the towing operator will be placed
on the annual emergency duty call list to be maintained at the Police
Department. The emergency duty call list shall expire on December 31
of each year. Any towing operator on the prior year's list will have to file
a new application to be approved for placement on the new emergency
duty call list.
B. The application shall include as a minimum the following information:
(1) The name of the firm.
(2) Owner(s) of the firm.
(3) The address of the primary place of business.
(4) The corporate mailing address.
(5) Telephone numbers of the firm and owner(s) of the firm.
(6) A listing of all vehicles to be used.
§ 179-1 TOWING AND STORAGE § 179-2
179:631
§ 179-3. Requirements of approval.
The Chief of Police shall approve an application when he finds that the
following requirements have been met by the applicant:
§ 179-4. Emergency duty calls; towing operator list.
Emergency duty calls to approved towing operators will be based upon
the establishment of a revolving towing operator list for services to be
performed within the Borough of Closter. The Chief of Police is hereby
authorized to establish a lottery system to assign towing operators on the
revolving towing operator emergency duty call list to respond to disabled
vehicles within the Borough of Closter. The lottery will take place within
the final week of October and shall be conducted in public on notice to all
(7) Proof of heavy duty wrecker availability.
(8) Proof of insurance.
(9) Certificate of occupancy from the municipality where operation is
located.
(10) The responsible party for records maintenance.
(11) A listing of all drivers.
(12) Payment of a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in Chapter
A301, Fees and Deposits.
A. The insurance policies required herein have been obtained by the
towing operator and approved by the municipality's risk manager.
B. The towing operator's wrecker(s) have been properly licensed and
conform to state motor vehicle laws. All wreckers must display New
Jersey commercial license plates.
C. The towing operators company name, address and telephone number
are permanently displayed on both sides of the wrecker.
D. A cost list setting forth the maximum fees charged for towing, storage
and road service within the Borough of Closter is conspicuously
displayed on or in the wrecker used by the towing operator.
E. The towing operator shall clearly demonstrate the ability to respond
within 20 minutes from receipt of the emergency duty call.
F. The requirements of this chapter and all other laws, statutes and
ordinances have been satisfied.
G. The application fee as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, has
been paid.
H. All other requirements appended to the application for approval have
been satisfied.
§ 179-2 CLOSTER CODE § 179-4
179:632
towing operators who submitted applications. The list will become effective
on the first day of January. The Chief of Police will maintain a revolving
list or licensed towers to provide service where needed and shall instruct
all officers to utilize said list. The first tower chosen from the lottery shall
be placed at the top of the list with each subsequent tower chosen to
occupy a subsequent sequential spot on the list. The first towing operator
on the list shall provide towing services for two months, not necessarily
in consecutive order. Thereafter, the second towing operator shall provide
towing services for two months, not necessarily in consecutive order, and
the list shall revolve in that manner until 12 months have expired and a new
list is prepared.
§ 179-5. Charges for towing and related services.
The towing operator's charges for towing and related services provided
pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed the maximum charges set forth
on the fee schedule for removal and storage of vehicles set forth herein.
The towing operator shall provide a copy of the cost list to the owner of the
vehicle towed.
§ 179-6. Cleanup incidental to towing services.
The towing operator shall, at the time of removing any motor vehicle in
response to a police request, remove from the public or private roads or
highways all vehicle debris or material in the area surrounding the vehicle,
in accordance with the instructions of the senior police officer on the scene.
Such cleanup shall be performed by the towing operator without charge
to the Borough of Closter or the vehicle owner. Failure to provide these
services satisfactorily may be cause for suspension or removal from the
approved towing operator list as provided by this chapter. This does not
include hazardous materials.
§ 179-7. Service performed on behalf of vehicle owners.
The towing operator shall, if called by the Borough of Closter, charge
vehicle owners for service which it renders. In no instance shall the towing
operator look to the Borough of Closter for payment of services performed
pursuant to this chapter. This chapter shall not reduce or diminish the rights
of the towing operator with regard to the owner under applicable statutes.
§ 179-8. Powers and duties of Chief of Police.
The Chief shall have the right at all times to inspect all wreckers and
storage facilities providing services. Should the Chief at any time determine
that the equipment or storage facilities being used do not comply with
the requirements of this chapter, he shall have the power and authority to
direct the immediate correction or repair of the same within a specified
period of time. The Chief of Police is also hereby authorized and empowered
to establish and publish from time to time such additional rules and
§ 179-4 TOWING AND STORAGE § 179-8
179:633
regulations, not inconsistent herewith, as may be reasonable and necessary
in carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 179-9. Suspension and removal from call list; appeals.
§ 179-10. Violations and penalties.
§ 179-11. Indemnification.
The towing operator hereby agrees to defend at the towing operator's
expense and to hold harmless and indemnify the Borough of Closter, its
elected officials, boards, officers and employees from any and all
obligations, expenses and/or damages arising out of any claims which may
hereafter be asserted against the Borough of Closter by anyone for loss or
damages to personal property, for personal injury or for any other damages
in connection with the rendering of services pursuant to this chapter.
§ 179-12. Storage of towed vehicles.
All vehicles towed at the request of the Police Department must be removed
to a place within the borough or a mile radius outside the borough unless
the owner or operator of the vehicle specifically requests that it be towed to
a place outside the borough limits or to a location approved by the Chief of
Police of the Borough of Closter. The towing firm must provide a safe area
A. The Chief of Police shall have the power to suspend a towing operator
from the emergency duty call list for a period of 30 days for failing to
comply with any section of this chapter. A subsequent violation by the
towing operator will result in the towing operator's permanent removal
from the emergency duty call list. The Chief of Police shall investigate
all complaints made by property owners for losses to their vehicles,
complaints for excessive charges and incomplete cleanup, pursuant to
this chapter.
B. An appeal of a removal by the Chief of Police may be filed with the
Borough Administrator within 10 calendar days of the Chief's decision.
Upon the filing of an appeal, a hearing shall be held by the Closter
Borough Council within 30 calendar days after the receipt of the
appeal. The Closter Borough Council shall render its determination
within 20 calendar days of the conclusion of the final hearing date, and
its determination as rendered shall be final and conclusive.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000; and each
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same
is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct
offense.
B. In addition to the fine provided above, a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be cause for suspension and removal
from the emergency duty call list.
§ 179-8 CLOSTER CODE § 179-12
179:634
for the storage of towed vehicles. The area used for the storage of towed
vehicles shall be illuminated. The fencing and illumination measures are to
provide adequate security for the towed and stored vehicles and to prevent
unsightliness.
§ 179-13. Fee schedule for removal and storage of vehicles.
Fees for towing and storage of private passenger vehicles, damaged in
an accident or recovered after being stolen, may not exceed the fees
established by the New Jersey Department of Insurance pursuant to N.J.S.A.
17:33B-47. Those towing and storage fees, which are set forth in N.J.A.C.
11:3-38.1 to N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.6 are incorporated herein by reference.
A. Pursuant to law, the fee schedules are reviewed by the New Jersey
Commissioner of Insurance on an annual basis and may be revised if
necessary. In the event that the fee schedules are revised by the
Commissioner of Insurance, the revised fees shall be the maximum fees
that may be charged by official towers, and this chapter shall be
amended accordingly.
B. If the official tower is called to the scene by the Police Department of
the Borough of Closter in accordance with this chapter, fees for towing
and storage of private passenger vehicles, other than those damaged in
an accident or recovered after being stolen, shall be by Schedule of
Fees as adopted by resolution of the Mayor and Council on January 1 of
the current year.
C. Fees for all other types of vehicles other than private passenger
vehicles, pursuant to Subsections A and B of this section, shall be
determined in accordance with this section.
(1) The following maximum fee schedule for towing services shall be as
set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
(2) The fee schedule for storage services shall be as set forth in
Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
(3) The fees set forth for nonpassenger vehicles in this section are
maximum charges that shall apply for basic towing services. The
official towers, however, shall be allowed for winching and
wrecking services over and above the basic towing services
additional fees per hour for light-duty wrecker, per hour for
medium wrecker and per hour for heavy-duty wrecker, as set forth
in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits. There shall be no additional
charges for any other services, including but not limited to waiting
time, clean-up costs and additional labor when only basic towing
services, as defined, are provided, except for speedy dry which is at
a rate per bag as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits.
§ 179-12 TOWING AND STORAGE § 179-14
179:635
§ 179-14. Insurance requirements.
No towing operator shall be called by the Police Department unless the
towing operator has submitted as part of the application a certified copy of
the required insurance policies or a certificate or certificates of insurance,
in a form approved by the borough's risk management consultant,
evidencing that there is in effect insurance policies with the following
coverage:
A. Garage liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less than
$300,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property damage) per
occurrence, including premises operations and products/completed
operations.
B. Automobile liability insurance. Limit of liability shall not be less than
$300,000 combined single limit (bodily injury and property damage) per
occurrence.
C. Garage keepers insurance. Physical damage insurance policies shall be
provided for vehicles in tow, possession of or storage on property
owned or controlled by the contractor. Limit of said coverage shall be
not less than $100,000.
D. Excess umbrella insurance. Limit of liability shall be not less than
$500,000 providing protection in excess of the $300,000 garage and
auto liability coverage. Note: This requirement may be waived if the
limits of liability in Subsections A and B above are not less than
$750,000 combined single limit. [Amended 12-21-1998 by Ord. No.
1998:785]
E. On all liability policies, the municipality shall be added as an additional
insured, and certified copies of insurance policies and insurance
certificates shall indicate such coverage as primary coverage
notwithstanding any insurance carried by the municipality. [Amended
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:785]
F. Workers' compensation insurance. New Jersey statutory coverage,
including employers liability coverage. [Amended 4-22-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998:758]
G. The contractor shall indemnify the municipality and the public against
any loss due to injuries, accidents or damages of any character
whatsoever where any such damage is the result of act or omission of
the contractor, his agents or employees in or due to the execution of the
work called for under the contract.
H. The applicant shall provide the municipality with certified copies of
insurance policies or certificates of insurance, evidencing the
coverages required above. Such certified copies of insurance policies or
certificates shall provide that the municipality shall be given at least 30
days' prior written notice of any cancellation of, intention not to renew
or material change in such coverage by certified mail, return receipt.
§ 179-14 CLOSTER CODE § 179-14
179:636
Chapter 180
TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS
§ 180-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER or CAMP CAR — Any vehicle used or intended to be used as
a conveyance upon public streets or highways and duly licensed as such;
and shall include self-propelled and non-self-propelled vehicles so designed
and constructed and reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in
such manner as to permit the occupancy thereof as a temporary dwelling
or sleeping place for one (1) or more persons, and having no foundation
other than wheels, jacks or skirtings, so arranged as to be integral with or
portable by said trailer or camp car.
§ 180-2. Parking on street prohibited; exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer or camp car on any
street in the Borough of Closter or on any premises within the limits of the
Borough of Closter except for the purpose of repairs or storage. Any such
Certified copies of insurance policies or certificates must be provided
before commencing work in connection with the contract. Failure to
submit this shall subject the contractor to immediate disqualification.
The municipality shall also have the right to review those insurance
policies of the contractor upon request if it accepts certificates of
insurance.
I. The providing of any insurance required herein does not relieve the
contractor of any of the responsibilities or obligations assumed by the
contractor for which the contractor may be liable by law or otherwise.
J. If any policies contain deductibles or copayment, it shall be the
responsibility of the contractor to pay such sums at the same time a
claim is settled by the contractor's insurance company.
K. If any policies contain limits of liability with an aggregate limit, the
contractor or the contractor's insurance company shall provide the
municipality quarterly during the policy period, a statement evidencing
the limits of liability required under this contract to be in force.
L. Failure to provide and continue in force such insurance as required
above shall be deemed a material breach of the contract and shall cause
an immediate termination thereof.
M. All policies shall be written in a company licensed in the State of New
Jersey, Best's rated A-VII (A minus seven). They shall be written on an
ISO (Insurance Service Office) form or better. [Amended 4-22-1998
by Ord. No. 1998:758]
§ 179-14 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 180-2
180:637
trailer or camp car undergoing repairs or being stored shall not, during
such period of repairs or storage, be used by any person or persons as a
dwelling or sleeping place.
§ 180-3. Violations and penalties.178
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
Chapter 181
TREE PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 16.
Land use procedures — See Ch. 35.
Department of Public Works — See Ch. 52.
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 59.
Soil movement — See Ch. 167.
Stormwater control — See Ch. 170A.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 173.
§ 181-1. Findings and purpose. [Amended 6-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011:1094]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Closter finds that the preservation,
protection and planting of trees aid in the stabilization of soil by the
prevention of erosion and sedimentation; reduce stormwater runoff and the
potential damage it may create; aid in the removal of pollutants from the air
and assist in the generation of oxygen; provide a buffer and screen against
noise and pollution; help to decrease the amount and rate of stormwater
runoff and to replenish groundwater supplies; act to moderate extremes
of temperature and to provide shade; aid in the control of drainage and
restoration of denuded soil subsequent to construction or grading; provide a
haven for birds and other wildlife and otherwise enhance the environment;
protect and increase property values; conserve and enhance the Borough's
physical and aesthetic appearance; and generally protect the public health
and safety as well as the general welfare. Therefore, it is the intent of the
Borough of Closter to maintain as much tree cover as possible through this
chapter. Moreover, the Borough intends through the implementation of this
chapter to achieve an outcome that balances the protection of trees with
respect for individual property rights.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 180-2 CLOSTER CODE § 181-2
180:638
§ 181-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — As defined in Chapter 200, Zoning, of the
Borough Code.
BUFFER AREA — The area along the side yard or rear yard of any lot within
three feet of the property line.
CALIPER — The diameter of the tree measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above
the ground, also known as "diameter breast height (DBH)."
CLEAR-CUTTING — For the purposes of this chapter, "clear-cut" and/or
"clear-cutting" means the removal of 50% or more of the trees on the
site/lot. Trees over six inches caliper (DBH) to be considered; dead and
hazardous trees are not included.
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL - TREES — Person(s) with recognized
expertise (i.e., who are certified tree specialists or persons who have
equivalent level of education and/or experience) in the identification and
classification of trees who is/are appointed by the Mayor and Council to
this position at the annual reorganization meeting each year. In no case
shall this person be involved in or associated with the business of the
removal of trees in the Borough of Closter during his or her term of
appointment.[Added 6-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1094]
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter of the trunk measured
at a point 4 1/2 feet from the ground. If the tree is growing on a slope, the
measurement shall be taken from the uphill side of the slope. If the tree has
a branch or an abnormal swelling at 4.5 feet, the measurement should be
taken at a point below the intrusion where the trunk returns to normal size.
Any diameter measurement that is not taken at 4.5 feet should include the
actual height where it was measured.
DRIPLINE — An imaginary line on the ground beneath a tree, the location
determined by extending a vertical line from the outermost branches of a
tree to the ground.
LANDMARK TREE — Any tree designated and identified as such by the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter pursuant to the standards set
forth herein. (See § 181-10 entitled "Designation and protection of landmark
trees" in this chapter.)
PERSON — The owner of a parcel of real estate or any other individual,
group, lessor, company, firm, corporation, partnership, association, society
or other legal entity.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The main building constructed for occupancy or
use on the property.
QUALIFIED TREE SPECIALIST — Person(s) with recognized expertise (i.e.,
who are certified tree specialists or persons who have an equivalent level
of education and/or experience) in the identification and classification of
trees who is (are) appointed by the Mayor and Council to this position at
the annual reorganization meeting each year. In no case shall this person
§ 181-2 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 181-2
180:639
be involved in or associated with the business of the removal of trees in the
Borough of Closter during his or her term of appointment.
SPECIES — For the purposes of this chapter, the common name of the tree.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials forming a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of a parcel of land.
TREE — Any living, woody perennial and its root system.
TREE REMOVAL — Shall include, but not be limited to, damage inflicted
to the root system by machinery, storage of materials and soil compaction,
change of natural grade above or below the root system or around the
trunk; damage inflicted on the tree permitting fungus, pests or other
infestation; excessive pruning or thinning leading to a failure to thrive;
paving over the root system with any impervious materials within such
proximity as to be fatal or injurious to the tree; or application of any toxic
substance.
§ 181-3. Permit required. [Amended 6-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011:1094]
A permit is required for the removal of any tree with a DBH greater
than six inches. This permit is in addition to any other approvals required
pursuant to Municipal Land Use Law,179 if the tree removal is taking place
in conjunction with construction.
§ 181-4. Application procedure.
A. No person shall cut down or remove any tree of a caliper of six inches or
greater measured at a height of 4 1/2 feet DBH above the ground or
engage in any site clearing without a tree removal permit.
B. No person shall remove any tree of a caliper of six inches or greater
DBH for the construction or contemplated construction of any building,
building addition, driveway, recreation area, patio or anything else for
which a construction or zoning permit is required unless a tree removal
permit has been obtained from the Borough.
C. No person shall remove any tree designated as a "landmark tree"
pursuant to the standards set forth herein without the prior approval of
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter.
D. Prior to the removal of any tree of a caliper of six inches or greater DBH
that is located within the buffer area as defined herein, the property
owner or any other person must first obtain a tree removal permit from
the Borough and satisfy the tree mitigation requirements contained
herein.
179. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 181-2 CLOSTER CODE § 181-4
180:640
A. An application must be filed with the construction offices. If any
applicant is also seeking a major soil moving permit, minor subdivision
approval, major subdivision approval or site plan approval, he/she shall
file, together with any and all applications and plans as may be required
by the land use ordinances of the Borough of Closter, an application for
tree removal permit of regulated trees as set forth in Subsection B
below. The application shall be reviewed pursuant to § 181-6. The Code
Enforcement Official - Trees shall provide to the Zoning Board or
Planning Board (whichever Board is hearing the application) his/her
recommendation with regard to the application, including mitigation
requirements. In the event the Code Enforcement Official - Trees does
not provide said recommendations within 31 days from receipt of the
completed tree removal application, the Board shall proceed with its
decision without said recommendations. The Zoning Board and
Planning Board hereby reserve the right to consult with the
Environmental Commission, Closter DPW, the Code Enforcement
Official - Trees, Borough Engineer, or any professional as provided by
MLUA, for guidance in considering land use, development, tree
removal, soil movement or excavation procedures in connection with
said application. [Amended 6-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1094]
B. Application for a tree removal permit for site clearing or other tree
removal purposes pursuant to an approved development application
shall be made by submission of the following to the Construction
Official:
(1) An original and two copies of an application on forms provided by
the Borough containing the following information: name and
address of the applicant; the street address and tax lot and block of
the property in question; the number of trees to be removed; and
such other information as may be required.
(2) An original and two copies of a tree removal plan consisting of a
map drawn to scale showing the location of all trees on the
property of a caliper of six inches or greater and the location of all
trees to be removed, the species of such trees, and their caliper.
The tree removal plan must be prepared, signed and sealed by a
licensed professional engineer or land surveyor and must show the
location of all existing and proposed structures on the property,
together with the distance, up to 15 feet, that trees proposed to be
removed and located from such structures and from property lines.
(3) An original and two copies of a tree mitigation plan, if mitigation is
required pursuant to § 181-6, consisting of a map drawn to scale
showing the location of all trees to be planted, the species of such
trees and their caliper or size as required.
(4) An original and two copies of a separate list of the trees to be
removed identifying each tree in coordination with tree removal
plan by species and caliper and stating the condition of each tree as
§ 181-4 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 181-4
180:641
"dead," "poor," or "good" and further explaining why removal is felt
justified under the standards of this chapter.
(5) The applicant shall place a one-inch-wide red ribbon around the
trunk of each tree to be removed at a height of 4 1/2 feet DBH
above the ground so that the proposed tree removal may be
inspected in the field.
C. Application for a tree removal permit for building construction
purposes pursuant to § 181-3B hereinabove shall be made by
submission of the following:
(1) An application on forms provided by the Borough containing the
following information: name and address of the applicant; the
street address and tax lot and block of the property in question; the
number of trees to be removed; and such other information as may
be required.
(2) A plan consisting of a map drawn to scale showing the location of
all trees on the property of a caliper of six inches or greater and the
location of all trees to be removed, the species and caliper of such
trees, and the reason for removing each tree. The plan must show
the location building, building addition, foundation, driveway,
recreation area or any site condition that warrants the proposed
tree removal.
(3) The applicant shall place a one-inch wide-ribbon around the trunk
of each tree to be removed at a height of 4 1/2 feet DBH above the
ground so that the proposed tree removal may be inspected in the
field.
D. Application for a tree removal permit for purposes pursuant to § 181-3D
hereinabove shall be made by submission of the following:
(1) An application on forms provided by the Borough containing the
following information: name and address of the applicant; the
street address and tax lot and block of the property in question; the
number of trees to be removed; and such other information as may
be required.
(2) A plan consisting of a map drawn to scale showing the location of
all trees on the property of a caliper of six inches or greater and the
location of all trees to be removed, the species and caliper of such
trees, and the reason for removing each tree. The plan must show
the location building, building addition, foundation, driveway,
recreation area or any site condition that warrants the proposed
tree removal.
(3) The applicant shall place a one-inch-wide red ribbon around the
trunk of each tree to be removed at a height of 4 1/2 feet DBH
above the ground so that the proposed tree removal may be
inspected in the field.
§ 181-4 CLOSTER CODE § 181-5
180:642
§ 181-5. Fees for permit. [Amended 6-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011:1094]
§ 181-6. Standards for application review.
The following standards for review of applications shall apply:
A. The fee for a tree removal permit shall be as set forth in Chapter A301,
Fees and Deposits. Fees are required for more than two trees of six
inches DBH or greater removed within a twenty-four-month period. The
twenty-four-month period begins from the date the permit is issued.
B. Notwithstanding the fee schedule, no permit fee shall be required for
the removal of a dead or hazardous tree, provided that the applicant
and/or property owner satisfies all of the other requirements of this
chapter.
A. Permitted removal. No tree shall be permitted to be removed unless the
tree is:
(1) Located within the building footprint of a proposed principal
building. No mitigation is required.
(2) Located between the curblines of a proposed roadway approved
pursuant to the Land Use Procedures or Subdivision of Land and
Site Plan Review Ordinances of the Borough of Closter.180 No
mitigation is required.
(3) Located within the proposed roadway right-of-way but outside the
curbline of a proposed roadway approved pursuant to the Land Use
Procedures or Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review
Ordinances of the Borough of Closter. However, see § 181-6D(7); an
applicant must plant trees or pay mitigation in lieu of planting.
(4) Dead or poses a safety hazard. See § 181-6D(3), which explains the
circumstance under which mitigation is not required for removal of
such trees.
(5) Located within 15 feet of any building. Mitigation is required.
(6) Located within the area of the proposed driveway, walkway, utility
line, accessory building, or any other structure. Mitigation is
required.
(7) Specifically permitted to be removed in a site plan approved
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.181 Mitigation is required.
B. Conflict with other laws. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the
contrary, no tree removal shall be permitted where prohibited by the
180. Editor's Note: See Ch. 35, Land Use Procedures, and Ch. 173, Subdivision of Land and Site
Plan Review, respectively.
181. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 181-5 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 181-6
180:643
Zoning Ordinance182 or any other municipal, state, or federal statute,
ordinance or regulation.
C. Hardship appeal. In the event that an applicant believes the standards
set forth in Subsections A and B above constitute a hardship which
prohibits a reasonable use of all or substantially all of the property in
question, an applicant may seek relief from the Mayor and Borough
Council. In the event that such relief is sought, the applicant shall
submit a letter to the Mayor and Council stating the factual basis and
reasons for the appeal. The Mayor and Borough Council, upon
submission of the letter to the Borough Clerk, shall schedule a public
hearing in connection with the requested relief. At the hearing, the
applicant may present witnesses under oath, and any other interested
parties may do the same. All witnesses shall be subject to crossexamination.
The decision of the Mayor and Borough Council shall be
binding upon the municipal official in charge of enforcement and
administration of this section.
D. Mitigation. The Code Enforcement Official - Trees shall determine and
approve the mitigation plan. Mitigation for tree removal shall be
required as follows: [Amended 6-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1094]
(1) Mitigation shall consist of planting trees with a minimum caliper
(DBH) of 2 1/2 inches or a sum of money equal to the approximate
cost of such planting [see § 181-6D(4)(c)] or a combination of both.
Mitigation shall be decided upon prior to removal of any trees, and
the trees proposed to be planted are to be done in consultation with
the Borough's Code Enforcement Official - Trees. In reviewing the
mitigation plans submitted by the applicant, the Code Enforcement
Official - Trees is to approve trees that will be allowed to grow to
their natural height at maturity rather than being kept artificially
small.
(2) Mitigation shall be required in the event of tree removal pursuant
to § 181-6A(3), (5), (6) and (7).
(3) In the event of tree removal pursuant to § 181-6A(4), no mitigation
shall be required if the tree has been planted for a least five years;
there has been no damage to the tree by construction or otherwise
by any person; and there has been no soil moving within 15 feet of
such tree within five years; otherwise, mitigation shall be required
pursuant to § 181-6D.
(4) For each tree for which mitigation is required, the following shall
apply:
(a) For each tree removed pursuant to the standards of this
section, the applicant shall plant on the property in question:
182. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 181-6 CLOSTER CODE § 181-6
180:644
Caliper of Tree
Removed*
(inches) Number Required for Mitigation
Less than 6 No mitigation required
6 to no more than
15
1 for each removed
15 to less than 25 2 for each removed
25 and greater 3 for each removed
NOTE:
* No mitigation is required for the first two trees; limit: two
trees in a twenty-four-month period. The twenty-four-month
time period begins from the date the tree removal permit is
issued.
(b) The caliper of trees with multiple trunks shall be calculated by
multiplying the caliper of the larger trunk by 1.5 times.
(c) In the event the applicant asserts the planting of trees on the
property in question would be inappropriate and the official in
charge of enforcement and administration of this section
agrees, the applicant may, in lieu of planting trees, provide to
the municipality a sum of money equal to the approximate cost
of such tree planting. The total amount shall be determined by
the Code Enforcement Official - Trees, based on the market
value and planting costs of the trees to be planted. Funds
collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the
Borough's Shade Tree Fund for use by the Borough's Shade
Tree Commission to plant and maintain trees elsewhere in the
Borough.
(5) In the event that tree removal occurs in an area other than
permitted in Subsection A this section, mitigation shall be required
at a rate two times the number of trees required pursuant to
Subsection D(4)(a) hereinabove.
(6) In the event that it is unknown how many trees were removed from
any given site and removal took place without a tree removal
permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the number of trees
requiring mitigation shall be computed by assuming trees over six
inches in caliper existed 30 feet on center and plotting the
maximum number of those trees as circles of a fifteen-foot radius
without having the circles overlap or extend beyond the property
lines or driplines of existing trees.
(7) In connection with tree removal pursuant to Subsection A(3) of this
section, it shall be required that the applicant plant trees on center
a minimum distance of 30 feet as street trees between the curbline
§ 181-6 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 181-6
180:645
§ 181-7. Protection of existing trees.
and the edge of the right-of-way in a location determined by the
municipal official administering this section or beyond if agreed to
by the homeowner.
(8) Mitigation in any instance is not to be considered a penalty, rather
an implementation of the purposes of this section. Mitigation shall
not be a substitute for, but shall be in addition to, any penalty
imposed for violation of the provisions of this section.
(9) Upon the approval of the Mayor and Council, the mitigation
requirements pursuant to this paragraph may be satisfied by the
applicant by donating the tree to be removed to the Borough of
Closter to be planted elsewhere in the Borough of Closter at the
expense of the applicant. The qualified tree specialist shall inspect
any such trees and submit a recommendation to the Mayor and
Council as to whether to accept such donation.
A. In connection with any construction, subsequent to tree clearing but
prior to the issuance of a building permit or start of construction, snow
fencing, or other protective barrier acceptable to the municipal official
charged with the enforcement and administration of this section, shall
be placed around trees that are not to be removed. The protection
barriers shall be placed at a distance of at least 10 feet from the trunk
of any tree or the tree dripline, whichever distance shall be greater, and
shall remain in place until all construction activity on the property has
terminated. No equipment, chemicals, soil deposits or construction
materials shall be placed within any area so protected by barriers. Any
landscaping activities subsequent to the removal of the barriers shall be
accomplished with light machinery or hand labor.
B. No person shall:
(1) Cut down or remove any tree except as permitted by this chapter or
allow or cause such cutting or removal.
(2) Cause or allow any willful damage, injury or disfigurement of any
tree growing within the property in question. For purposes of this
chapter, the actions of any person shall be deemed willful if the
damage, injury or disfigurement of any tree is caused as the result,
but not limited to the following: cutting, gashing or slitting on any
tree; the pouring of any liquid or other material on any tree or on
the nearby ground; the construction or placement of any nonporous
material on the ground around any tree so as to cut off air, light or
water from the roots; or placement or removal of any soil within 10
feet of any tree.
(3) Store or pile building materials or debris or place construction
equipment within 10 feet of any tree or within the protected zone
10 feet beyond the dripline, whichever is greater. The Code
§ 181-6 CLOSTER CODE § 181-7
180:646
§ 181-8. Performance bond. [Amended 6-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011:1094183]
Enforcement Official - Trees or other member of the Construction
Office may use his or her discretion in determining violations
pursuant to this subsection. [Amended 6-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011:1094]
C. In the event that any tree to be saved in connection with construction as
set forth above or any tree planted in mitigation shall die within two
years after planting, it shall be replaced by the applicant or the
property owners within six months.
A. As a precondition to the issuance of a permit where mitigation is
required, the applicant shall post a cash bond with the Borough
Treasurer to assure mitigation in an amount equal to the amount
determined by the Code Enforcement Official - Trees as set forth in
§ 181-6D(4) for each tree to be planted. At the end of the third fiscal
year following the fiscal year in which the bond was posted and upon
the satisfactory completion of the required mitigation, the Borough
shall return the cash bond to the applicant. The cash bond shall be
retained by the Borough for this period to assure survival of the tree or
trees planted by the applicant in satisfaction of the mitigation
requirements. Said bond shall be returned upon the recommendation of
the Code Enforcement Official - Trees and the approval of the Mayor
and Council.
B. The applicant shall contact the Code Enforcement Official - Trees within
seven business days of the completion of the planting of the trees
required for mitigation to schedule a date and time for an inspection in
order for the Borough to determine whether the required mitigation has
been completed satisfactorily.
C. Notwithstanding the above, the applicant and/or property owner shall
forfeit the cash bond amount if the applicant and/or property owner
fails to complete the planting of the trees within the time of completion
set forth in § 181-8. Prior to the forfeiture of any cash bond monies, the
Code Enforcement Official - Trees shall cause a written notice to be
served upon the applicant and/or property owner who posted the cash
bond. Service of the notice shall be made in person or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Upon service of any notice pursuant to this
subsection, the applicant and/or property owner shall have 10 days, or
such further time as the Mayor and Council shall agree, in writing, to
plant the trees that have not been planted, or the applicant and/or
property owner shall forfeit any cash bond amounts posted by the
applicant and/or property owner. Any monies forfeited by the applicant
and/or property owner shall be deposited in the Borough's Shade Tree
183. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 181-7 as this
§ 181-8, the redesignation of former § 181-8 as § 181-9, and the redesignation of former
§ 181-9 as § 181-7.
§ 181-7 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 181-8
180:647
§ 181-9. Time of completion.
The tree(s) required to be planted by the applicant and/or property owner
pursuant to Section § 181-6D(4) shall be planted within six months after
the completion of the project for which the permit was issued, the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy, or the issuance of a certificate of approval,
whichever shall be sooner. The applicant may submit a written request to
the Construction Office for an extension of time of up to 60 days. Additional
extensions may be granted, upon the written request of the applicant, at
the discretion of the Construction Office. Extension requests shall not be
unreasonably denied. However, in no event shall the time for completion be
extended beyond a total of six additional months.
§ 181-10. Designation and protection of landmark trees.
Fund for use by the Shade Tree Commission to plant trees elsewhere in
the municipality.
D. As an additional precondition to the issuance of a permit, the applicant
shall post a cash bond in the equivalent of $1,500 for each street tree
present on the property that is not otherwise covered by mitigation. At
the end of the third calendar year from the date of the issuance of the
final certificate of occupancy (i.e., the bond can be held for up to two
years and 11 months) and upon certification by the Code Enforcement
Official - Trees that the trees continue to be in good health, the Borough
shall return the cash bond to the applicant. The cash bond shall be
retained by the Borough for this period to assure the survival of the
tree(s) and recover the cost of removal and replacement of the trees for
taxpayers should the tree(s) not survive.
A. Upon the written recommendation of the Environmental Commission
and with the written approval of the property owner, the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter shall determine whether any tree
qualifies as a landmark tree. A tree may qualify as a landmark tree if it
meets one or more of the following criteria:
(1) The tree species is rare.
(2) The tree is of an abnormal height or has an abnormal trunk
diameter or dripline for a tree of its species.
(3) The location, shade value, fragrance, erosion control, aesthetic
features, or scenic enhancement of such tree is of special
importance to the Borough of Closter.
(4) The tree is a rare ornamental or flowering tree.
B. All trees designated as landmark trees by the Mayor and Council shall
be memorialized by resolution and shall be shown on an official
Borough Map with appropriate code marks signifying each tree's
designation, number, species, age, size and other distinguishing
characteristics for ready reference and periodic monitoring. The
§ 181-8 CLOSTER CODE § 181-10
180:648
§ 181-11. Responsibility for administration and enforcement.
[Amended 6-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011:1094]
The provisions set forth in this chapter shall be administered and enforced
by the Code Enforcement Official - Trees, the Construction Official, and the
Code Enforcement Officer, or his/her designee.
§ 181-12. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the municipal official charged with
the administration and enforcement of this chapter shall have the right
within 10 days of the issuance of any decision by such official to appeal
to the Mayor and Borough Council, which shall take action as it deems
appropriate in the matter. In the event of such an appeal, the procedures
set forth with reference to applications based on hardship contained in
§ 181-6C shall apply.
§ 181-13. Exemptions.
The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter;
Borough Administrator or his designee shall ensure that each landmark
tree is shown on the Borough Map.
C. All trees designated as landmark trees by the Mayor and Council shall
be memorialized by resolution and shall be shown on an official
landmark tree inventory retained by the Borough Administrator.
D. If the owner or owners of the property on which a landmark tree is
located consents thereto, the Borough may identify such tree as a
landmark tree by the placement of a suitable marker thereon.
E. If, and when, any landmark tree is removed, the Borough Administrator
shall arrange for the necessary changes to be made to the official
landmark tree inventory records and Borough Map.
F. No person shall cut down or remove any landmark tree, whether such
tree is located on public or private property, without first obtaining the
approval of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter and a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
G. For each landmark tree removed pursuant to Subsection F hereinabove,
mitigation shall be required and the applicant shall plant a tree as
defined in this chapter on the property in question at a replacement
rate of two trees for each landmark tree removed. In the event the
applicant asserts the planting of trees on the property in question
would be inappropriate and the Mayor and Council agrees, the
applicant may, in lieu of planting trees, provide to the Borough a sum of
$500 for each tree required to be planted to be deposited in the
Borough's Shade Tree Fund for use by the Shade Tree Commission to
plant trees elsewhere in the Borough.
§ 181-10 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 181-13
180:649
§ 181-14. Violations and penalties.
§ 181-15. Repealer.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this chapter. All
ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to
the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 181-16. When effective.
This chapter shall become effective immediately upon final passage and
publication, as required by law.
A. Trees located on the business-related portions of the properties of
commercial nurseries.
B. Pruning within the right-of-way by utility companies for maintenance of
utility wires or pipelines. The utility company shall notify the Borough
Administrator prior to commencing such work at least two weeks prior
to the commencement of such work.
C. Trees that are deemed to be removed by the governing body of the
Borough of Closter or that are on or over a public right-of-way.
D. Parklands or other public lands owned by the Borough of Closter.
E. Any projects that have received building permits or board approvals
prior to the enactment of this chapter.
A. Any person, applicant, developer or owner who violates any provision of
this chapter shall be liable for a fine not to exceed $1,500 or
imprisonment for a term not in excess of 90 days, or both. Each tree is a
separate violation. [Amended 9-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1173]
B. In addition to the penalties outlined in the above subsection, the
Borough may require a person who removes or otherwise destroys a
tree in violation of this chapter to pay a replacement assessment to the
municipality. The replacement assessment shall be the value of the tree
as determined by the Borough's Code Enforcement Official - Trees. In
lieu of an appraisal, the Borough may use the formula based upon the
number of square inches contained in a cross section of the trunk of the
tree multiplied by a predetermined value per square inch, not to exceed
$27 per square inch. The square-inch cross section shall be calculated
from the diameter at 4 ½ feet above ground level, and if there is a
multiple-stem tree, then each trunk shall be measured and the largest
trunk shall be used to determine the fine for the tree. The Borough shall
modify the value of the tree based on its species, variety, location and
condition at the time of removal or destruction. [Amended 6-22-2011
by Ord. No. 2011:1094]
§ 181-13 CLOSTER CODE § 181-16
180:650
Chapter 183
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 171.
§ 181-16 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 181-16
180:651

Part 1
[Adopted 8-11-197O1ffB-yStOrrede.t NPoa.r k1i9n7g1 R:2e2g2u (laPtairotn 2s Of Ch. 104 Of The
1967 Code)]
ARTICLE I
Parking Yards and Parking Places
§ 183-1. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following words or expressions shall have the
meanings indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles propelled otherwise than by muscular
power.
OWNER OF A MOTOR VEHICLE — A person who holds the legal title of a
motor vehicle.
PARKING — The standing or waiting of a motor vehicle not actually engaged
in receiving or discharging passengers or merchandise, unless in obedience
to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals.
PARKING YARD and PARKING PLACE — Any place which is open to the
public or to which the public is invited, whether maintained or operated
separately or in conjunction with any business or enterprise.
PEDESTRIAN — A person afoot.
§ 183-2. Operator's license required.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in any parking yard or parking place
unless he or she has been duly licensed to drive a motor vehicle on the
public highways of New Jersey by the State of New Jersey or, if such driver
is a nonresident, unless he or she has been duly licensed by his or her
resident state, territory, federal district of the United States or country to
operate a motor vehicle on the public highways thereof.
§ 183-3. Vehicle registration required.
A. No person shall drive a motor vehicle in any parking yard or parking
place unless said vehicle has been duly registered by the State of New
Jersey or, if the owner is a nonresident, by the resident state, territory,
federal district of the United States or country of said nonresident
owner. The driver of such motor vehicle in such place shall have in his
or her possession the certificate of registration of such motor vehicle as
herein required. Such motor vehicle shall also have displayed thereon
license plates as required by the laws of New Jersey or, in the case of
nonresident owners, in accordance with the laws of the place where
such resident resides or registered his or her motor vehicle.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any conveyance, including
but not limited to dirt bikes, trail bikes, minibikes, motor scooters,
mopeds, go-peds, go-carts, motorized skateboards, snowmobiles, off-
§ 183-1 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-3
180:653
§ 183-4. Refusal or failure to exhibit license and registration or
insurance card.
§ 183-5. Speed limitation.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a parking yard or parking place
at a speed in excess of 10 miles per hour.
road vehicles, or other similar-type vehicles (except that this section
does not prohibit the operation of motorized vehicles typically utilized
by children, age five or under, nor does this section prohibit the use
of motorized vehicles utilized for the purposes of disabled persons or
the use of ride-on lawnmowers or similar machinery utilized for similar
purposes) on any public or quasipublic property. It shall be unlawful
for any person to operate any conveyance as defined herein on private
property without the express prior consent of the owner and occupant
of said property. [Added 11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:877;
amended 5-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:900]
C. It shall he unlawful for any person to operate any conveyance, as
defined in Subsection B above, in such manner as to create loud,
unnecessary or unusual noise so as to disturb or interfere with the
peace and quiet of other persons or to operate any such conveyance in a
careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be likely to
endanger the safety of any person or property. [Added 11-13-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002:877]
D. It shall be reputably presumed that any person under the age of 18
years who operates a conveyance as defined in Subsection B above in
violation of the terms of this chapter and who resides within or is in the
custody of his or her parent(s), guardian(s) or other person(s) having
custody of said minor is operating said conveyance with the sufferance
and permission of the said parent(s), guardian(s) or other person(s)
having custody. [Added 11-13-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:877]
A. The driver of any motor vehicle in any parking yard or parking place
shall, upon the request of any police officer, exhibit his or her driver's
license, as required by § 183-2, and his or her refusal or failure to
exhibit the same shall be presumptive evidence that he or she is not the
holder of such a license valid for the day the request was made.
B. Such driver shall also, upon the request of any police officer, exhibit the
registration certificate for the vehicle operated by him or her, as
required by § 183-3 of this Part 1, and his or her refusal or failure to
exhibit the same shall be presumptive evidence that such vehicle is not
registered as required by said § 183-3.
C. Such driver shall also, upon the request of any police officer, exhibit the
insurance card for the vehicle operated by him or her. [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
§ 183-3 CLOSTER CODE § 183-6
180:654
§ 183-6. Careless driving.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a parking yard or parking place
carelessly or without due caution and circumspection or in a manner so as
to endanger or be likely to endanger a person or property.
§ 183-7. Vehicles entering and exiting.
No person while operating a motor vehicle shall enter a parking yard or
parking place except where the entrance for vehicles is indicated by a sign
or signs. No person while operating a motor vehicle shall leave or exit from
a parking yard or parking place except where an exit for motor vehicles is
indicated by a sign or signs.
§ 183-8. Pavement markings.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in a parking yard or parking place
except on the designated roadways or lanes thereof and in the parking
stalls as indicated by lines on the pavement or signs. When driving on
said designated roads, the driver of a motor vehicle shall drive only in the
direction indicated by the signs or arrow markings on the roadway.
§ 183-9. Pedestrians entering and exiting.
Pedestrians shall enter parking yards or parking places only where entry for
motor vehicles is indicated by signs and shall exit only where exit for motor
vehicles is indicated by signs.
§ 183-10. Deliveries.
No person delivering goods, chattels, merchandise or articles of any kind to
any place of business in the Borough of Closter which has a parking yard
or parking place for use by the public shall make such deliveries at any
place or location except at and through the rear entrance to said place of
business.
§ 183-11. Lights and lighting equipment.
The operator of any motor vehicle which is in motion in any parking yard
or parking place shall have the same lights and lighting equipment in
operation as would be required by the laws of New Jersey at that time if said
motor vehicle was then being operated on a public highway of this state.
§ 183-12. Parking on posted lands. [Amended 10-28-1987 by Ord.
No. 1987:551]
A. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing
any vehicle in parking yards and parking places which are open to the
public or to which the public is invited, whether maintained or operated
separately or in conjunction with any business or enterprise, in the
§ 183-6 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-12
180:655
§ 183-13. Parking vehicles in prohibited areas; use of marked
spaces; idling of commercial vehicles.
Borough of Closter after notice has been posted as hereinafter provided
by the owner, occupant, lessee or licensee prohibiting such parking.
B. Written request. Upon the filing of a written request by any person or
by the Board of Directors of any corporation owning lands in the
Borough of Closter on which there is located a parking area open to or
used by the customers, tenants or employees for purposes of off-street
parking by permission of the owner and not as a matter of public right,
the provisions of this Part 1 shall be made applicable thereto. The
written request shall contain the name and post office address of the
person or corporation who is the owner of said parking area and shall
designate with reasonable accuracy the parking area to be affected by
the parking restriction.
C. Suitable signs.
(1) All parking areas to which the provisions of this Part 1 are made
applicable shall be identified by suitable signs bearing the words
"Private Parking Area/No Parking; Violators Will Be Towed at
Owner's Expense," together with any qualifications or restrictions
of such parking. The restrictions may include but not be limited to
the following:
(a) Parking time limits.
(b) Parking restricted to customers, tenants and employees only.
(2) Said signs shall be conspicuously displayed and posted on said
lands by the owner thereof on all parking areas where this Part 1 is
effective and shall also bear the designation of this chapter number.
Signs shall be posted by the owner or occupant, lessee or licensee,
at his or her own cost and expense. Said signs shall be approved by
the Chief of Police of the Borough of Closter before they are put
into use.
D. Violators. Any person violating the parking restrictions pursuant to this
Part 1 shall be subject to having his or her vehicle towed. A vehicle
which has been towed shall not be claimed except upon payment to the
authorized tower of towing and storage costs in connection with the
towing. [Amended 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
E. Unlawful to damage, deface, etc. It shall be unlawful to deface, tamper
with or damage any sign posted pursuant to this Part 1.
F. Nonapplicability. Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to
the parking or standing of any vehicle upon lands or premises lying
within the bounds of any public street or highway.
§ 183-12 CLOSTER CODE § 183-13
180:656
§ 183-14. Buying or selling of merchandise in parking areas.
No person shall use any portion of a parking yard or parking place as a place
for the buying or selling of any thing or merchandise or for any purpose
other than the parking of a motor vehicle while shopping, and then only
where parking is permitted as indicated by signs, pavement markings or
notices.
§ 183-15. Removal of vehicles from prohibited areas. [Amended
3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
In the event that any person shall park or leave standing a motor vehicle
whether attended or unattended, on any roadway or in a parking yard or
in a parking place or in any other place therein where such parking or
standing of motor vehicles is prohibited by signs or other notice, such motor
vehicle shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal of
such motor vehicle. Summons to be issued by property owner. The owner
or lessee of such vehicle shall pay the reasonable cost of the removal and
storage which may result from such removal before regaining possession of
said motor vehicle.
§ 183-16. Abandoned vehicles. [Amended 3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Any motor vehicle which has been parked or left in a parking yard or
parking place for more than 72 consecutive hours shall be deemed to have
been abandoned, and any police officer may provide for the removal and
storage of such motor vehicle. Summons to be issued by property owner.
The owner or lessee of such motor vehicle shall pay the reasonable costs
of the removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of such vehicle.
A. No person shall park or leave standing a motor vehicle, whether
attended or unattended, on any of the roadways in a parking yard or
parking place or in any place therein where parking is prohibited by
notice given by a sign or otherwise.
B. If parking spaces are provided, no person shall park or leave standing a
motor vehicle, whether attended or unattended, except in a marked
parking space. Such vehicle shall be parked properly within the lines of
the parking space. [Added 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:715]
C. No person shall leave or park a commercial motor vehicle over 10,000
pounds' gross weight on any street or in any parking yard within the
Borough of Closter with the motor running or idling for more than 30
minutes. [Added 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:715]
§ 183-13 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-17
180:657
§ 183-17. Length and width restrictions of vehicles.
No motor vehicle shall be parked in a parking yard or parking place which
has an overall length of more than 20 feet or an overall width of more than
7 1/2 feet. Such overall length and width shall include the length and width
of any load carried by such motor vehicle.
§ 183-18. Parking yards and places: signs, pavement markings and
notices.
Within two months after the effective date of this Part 1, the owner of every
parking yard or parking place in the Borough of Closter shall, at his or her
own cost and expense, in said parking yard or parking place:
A. Provide, maintain and properly illuminate signs indicating the location
of the entrance roadways and the exit roadways at the points where
such roadways meet the public highway. Said entrance and exit signs
shall be sufficiently elevated and of sufficient size and the lettering
thereof shall be sufficiently large so that they may be seen and read
from all parts of said parking yards or parking places.
B. Paint arrows with white paint and maintain the same on the pavement
of the entrance and exit roadways within 10 feet of their point of
intersection with the public highway, indicating the direction that motor
vehicle traffic is allowed to proceed.
C. Provide, maintain and properly illuminate at all entrance roadways,
where the same meet or intersect with the public highway, a sign
stating that the speed limit is 10 miles per hour in said parking yard or
parking place.
D. Provide, maintain and properly illuminate signs indicating and giving
notice of the areas in which motor vehicles may be parked. In such
places parallel white lines with sufficient space between shall be
painted on the pavement, and cars shall be parked between such white
lines. The Borough, in its sole discretion, may use parallel yellow lines,
instead of parallel white lines, to designate areas with certain parking
restrictions. [Amended 12-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1182]
E. Provide, maintain and properly illuminate signs prohibiting the parking
of motor vehicles on the roadways; paint and maintain the painting of
directional arrows at intervals of 40 feet on said roadways indicating
the only direction that motor vehicles shall be driven on such roadways;
and paint and maintain the painting of directional arrows on the
pavement of roadways where two roadways intersect.
F. Place, maintain and properly illuminate, at the intersections of the
roadways, signs indicating the direction of travel for motor vehicles
permitted on each of said intersecting roadways.
G. Place, maintain and properly illuminate signs informing the public
where parking is prohibited.
§ 183-17 CLOSTER CODE § 183-18
180:658
§ 183-19. Chief of Police to approve signs, pavement markings, etc.
The signs, pavement markings and notices required to be placed by the
owner by § 183-18 of this Part 1 and the traffic plan for the parking yard
or parking place shall be approved by the Chief of Police of the Borough
of Closter before they are put to use. Said signs, pavement markings and
notices herein mentioned shall be approved by said Police Chief if they
reasonably inform the public of any prohibited acts and of the traffic flow
pattern. In the trial on a complaint charging a violation of this Part 1, the
evidence of the placement or existence of any sign, pavement marking or
notice of the kind mentioned in this Part 1 in any parking yard or parking
place at the time of the alleged violation shall give rise to the presumption
that the approval required from the Chief of Police by this section was given
by him or her.
§ 183-20. Regulation of conduct.
No person shall, in any parking yard or parking place:
§ 183-21. Violations; presumption of ownership of vehicle.
In any trial on a complaint for a violation of this Part 1, proof of the
ownership of any motor vehicle involved in the complaint may be
established by offering into evidence a certificate or other official
communication from the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New
Jersey or other state, district, territory, country or place where the vehicle
was registered according to the license plates thereon, setting forth the
name and address of the owner of said motor vehicle on the date of the
alleged violation, whereupon the same shall be received in evidence without
H. Place, maintain and properly illuminate such other signs and notices as
are mentioned or provided for in this Part 1 or which may be reasonably
necessary to inform the public of parking prohibitions and direction of
travel requirements.
A. Throw, drop, discard or place any can, bottle, receptacle, container,
paper, refuse, rubbish or other article or articles on said premises
except in receptacles or baskets, if any, provided for such purpose by
the owner or lessee of said premises.
B. Obstruct the free and unimpeded passage of pedestrians or motor
vehicles.
C. Make, permit or cause to be made any loud, unnecessary or unusual
noise which either unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers
the comfort, repose, health, peace, rest, safety or welfare of other
persons.
D. Play or operate any radio or other instrument or device with louder
volume than is reasonably necessary for convenient hearing by the
person so playing or operating the aforementioned articles.
§ 183-18 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-21
180:659
further authentication or proof and a presumption shall arise that the owner
of said motor vehicle as shown in such certificate or official communication
was the owner of and was operating said vehicle on the date and at the time
it was involved in the alleged violation of this Part 1.
§ 183-22. Violations and penalties.184
Any person violating any provision of this Part 1 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 183-21 CLOSTER CODE § 183-22
180:660
Part 2
[Adopted 2-13-1974 As OTrrda.ffi Nco .R 1e9g7u4la:2ti4o8n s(Part 1 Of Ch. 104 Of The
1967 Code)]
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 183-23. Short title.
This Part 2 may be known and cited as the "Traffic Ordinance."
§ 183-24. Words and phrases defined.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this Part 2, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used
herein.
§ 183-23 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-24
180:661

ARTICLE III
Prohibited Parking, Stopping or Standing; Time Limit Parking
§ 183-25. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this Part 2 imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive
provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 or any other New Jersey statute or
as hereinafter provided.
§ 183-26. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
[Amended 2-10-1993 by Ord. No. 1993:644]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule I (§ 183-44), attached to and made part of this
chapter.
§ 183-27. Parking prohibited certain hours on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
(§ 183-45) on any day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described in said Schedule II, attached to and
made a part of this Part 2.
§ 183-28. Stopping or standing prohibited certain hours on certain
streets.
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule III (§ 183-46), attached to and make
a part of this Part 2.
§ 183-29. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV between the hours listed on said Schedule IV (§ 183-47) of any
day, except Sundays and public holidays, upon any of the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IV, attached to and made a part of this Part 2.
§ 183-30. Angle parking on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle on the streets or parts of streets described
in Schedule V (§ 183-48), attached to and made a part of this Part 2, and
designated hereby as having angle parking, except as indicated by such
sign or markings, and all vehicles shall park entirely within such markings.
Vehicles will be parked at the angles designated.
§ 183-25 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-30
180:663

ARTICLE IV
Use of Streets Limited to Certain Class Vehicles
§ 183-31. Trucks over four tons excluded.
Trucks over four tons' gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule VI (§ 183-49) except for the pickup
and delivery of materials on such streets, said Schedule VI being attached
to and made a part of this Part 2.
§ 183-32. Trucks over ten tons excluded. [Added 3-8-1978 by Ord.
No. 1978:325]
A. Trucks over 10 tons gross weight are hereby excluded from the streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 183-50) except for the
pickup or delivery of goods or services on such streets or while engaged
in local commerce, said Schedule VII being attached hereto and made a
part of this Part 2.
B. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "engaged in local
commerce" shall mean the transportation of goods and services to or
from locations within the Borough of Closter or to locations within a
radius of 7.5 miles of the Borough of Closter, Bergen County, New
Jersey.
§ 183-31 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-32
180:665

ARTICLE V
One-Way Streets
§ 183-33. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 183-51),
attached to and made a part of this Part 2, are hereby designated as oneway
streets in the direction indicated.
§ 183-33 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-33
180:667

ARTICLE VI
Through Streets; Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 183-34. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule IX (§ 183-52), attached to and made a part of
this Part 2, are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 183-35. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X (§ 183-53), attached to and made a part of this Part 2, are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 183-36. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule XI (§ 183-54), attached to and made a part of this Part 2, are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 183-34 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-36
180:669

ARTICLE VII
Loading Zones
§ 183-37. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 183-55), attached to and made a
part of this Part 2, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 183-37 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-37
180:671

ARTICLE VIII
Bus Stops
§ 183-38. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIII (§ 183-56), attached to and made a
part of this Part 2, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 183-38 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-38
180:673

ARTICLE IX
Turn Prohibitions; Lane Use Regulations
§ 183-39. Left turns prohibited.
No person shall make a left turn at any of the locations described in
Schedule XIV (§ 183-57), attached to and made a part of this Part 2.
§ 183-40. Right turns prohibited. [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord. No.
1984:488; amended 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
No person shall turn a vehicle to make a right turn when facing a steady
red signal (stop indication) at any of the locations designated in Schedule
XV (§ 183-58) whenever an official sign is present prohibiting such a turn on
the red signal.
§ 183-41. U-turns prohibited. [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord. No.
1984:488]
No person shall make a U-turn at any of the locations described in Schedule
XVI (§ 183-59), attached hereto and made a part of this Part 2.
§ 183-42. Lane use reservations.
No person shall proceed on certain streets except as indicated in Schedule
XVII (§ 183-60), attached to and made a part of this Part 2.
§ 183-39 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-42
180:675

ARTICLE X
Violations and Penalties
§ 183-43. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this Part 2 or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 183-43 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-43
180:677

ARTICLE XI
Schedules
§ 183-44. Schedule I: No Parking at Any Time. [Amended 3-24-1976
by Ord. No. 1976:278; 12-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:466; 12-12-1984
by Ord. No. 1984:488; 2-8-1989 by Ord. No. 1989:568; 5-23-1990 by
Ord. No. 1990:594; 2-10-1993 by Ord. No. 1993:644]
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-26, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Anderson Avenue West From Hickory Lane north to
water tower
Anderson Avenue West From Ruckman Road to a point
300 feet south
Anderson Avenue West From Ruckman Road north to
Bowers Lane
Ann Arbor Place Both From Princeton Street to
Harvard Street
Ann Arbor Place East From Colgate Street to Princeton
Street
Arnold Avenue [Amended
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
East From Wainwright Avenue to
Alpine Drive
Arthur Court North Entire length and circle from
Henmar Drive
Bergenline Avenue North From Forest Street east to
Bergenline Field Parking Lot
Bergenline Avenue North From Union Street to
Schraalenburg Road
Birch Street North From Haring Street to end
Blanch Avenue Both From Herbert Avenue to West
Street
Blanch Avenue North From 200 feet west of Piermont
Road to a point 800 feet west of
Piermont Road
Blanch Avenue North From West Street to 500 feet east
of Herbert Avenue
Bogert Street [Added
6-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:715]
East From the intersection of
Demarest Avenue to a point 565
feet southerly thereof
Bradley Place West From Alpine Drive to Hickory
Lane
§ 183-44 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-44
180:679
Name of Street Side Location
Brook Street Both From Lindemann Avenue north to
end
Brook Street West From Demarest Avenue south to
end
Carr Place West From Cedar Lane to Old Hook
Road
Cedar Lane North From 400 feet west of Cedar
Court to Popular Street
Cedar Lane North From Harrington Avenue to 200
feet east of Cedar Court
Cedar Lane South From Popular Street to
Schraalenburg Road
Center Street West Entire length
Charles Place Both Entire length
Charles Street Both From Division Street east to end
Clark Street North From County Road to Jane Street
Closter Dock Road Both From the Alpine-Closter
corporate line to Fourth Street
Closter Dock Road Both From First Street to a point 50
feet west of Perry Street
Closter Dock Road North Between West Street and Cedar
Lane
Closter Dock Road North From Williams Street to West
Street
Closter Dock Road West From Naugle Place to Harrington
Avenue
Colgate Street Both From dead end to Ann Arbor
Place
County Road West From Closter Dock Road south to
Borough line
Dana Place West From High Street to end
Demarest Avenue North From Closter Dock Road to
Legion Place
Demarest Avenue North From Union Street to
Schraalenburg Road
Demarest Avenue [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
South From Bogert Street to Durie
Avenue
§ 183-44 CLOSTER CODE § 183-44
180:680
Name of Street Side Location
Demarest Avenue South From Brook Street to a point 200
feet east of the easterly curbline
of Brook Street
Demarest Avenue [Repealed 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-841]
Demarest Avenue [Repealed 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-841]
Demarest Avenue South From east of Schraalenburg Road
a distance of 120 feet
Division Street West From Demarest Avenue to High
Street
Durie Avenue [Repealed 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:715]
Durie Avenue East From the southerly curbline of
Closter Dock Road to a point 110
feet southerly thereof
Durie Avenue [Added 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:715; repealed
7-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:990]
Durie Avenue [Added
6-12-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:715; amended
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841; 7-25-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007:990]
East From Demarest Avenue to High
Street
Durie Avenue [Repealed 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:715]
Durie Avenue [Added
7-25-2007 by Ord. No.
2007:990]
West From the northerly curbline at
Demarest Avenue to a point 228
feet northerly thereof
Durie Avenue West From the northerly curbline of
High Street to a point 150 feet
northerly thereof
Endres Street Both Entire length
Fairview Avenue North Entire length from Harrington
Avenue to Cedar Lane
Fifth Street East From Closter Dock Road to
Chestnut Street
First Street East From High Street to Maple Street
Forest Street West Entire length between High
Street and Demarest Avenue and
Bergenline Avenue to dead end
Fourth Street [Amended
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
East From Closter Dock Road to
Maple Avenue
§ 183-44 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-44
180:681
Name of Street Side Location
Grove Street North From Columbus Avenue to
Knickerbocker Road
Halsey Lane West From Walker Avenue to Alpine
Drive
Haring Street West From Demarest Avenue to Durie
Avenue
Haring Street West From High Street to Demarest
Avenue
Harrington Avenue North From West Street to a point 100
feet westerly thereof
Harrington Avenue [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841; amended
3-25-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:861]
North No commercial vehicles in excess
of 4,000 pounds (GVM) will be
permitted to park on the north
side of Harrington Avenue, from
Closter Dock Road, to West
Street
Harvard Street Both From Ann Arbor Place to
Millpond Road
Harvard Street North From Piermont Road to Ann
Arbor Place
Harvey Street North From Storig Avenue to
Knickerbocker Road
Herbert Avenue [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
East From Homans Avenue to Blanch
Avenue
Herbert Avenue Repealed 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
Herbert Avenue [Added 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:715; repealed
3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
Herbert Avenue [Added 6-12-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:715; repealed
3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
Herbert Avenue [Amended
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
West From the northerly curbline of
Closter Dock Road to a point
1,225 feet northerly thereof
Hickory Lane North From Piermont Road to 200 feet
west of McCain Court
High Street North From Durie Avenue to a point
125 feet westerly thereof
High Street North From Closter Dock Road to Perry
Street
High Street South From Durie Avenue to a point
100 feet easterly thereof
§ 183-44 CLOSTER CODE § 183-44
180:682
Name of Street Side Location
High Street South From Center Street to Durie
Avenue
High Street South From Erie Lackawanna Railroad
to Piermont Road
Homans Avenue Both From Herbert Avenue to
Piermont Road
Homans Avenue [Added
10-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:749]
North From Piermont Road 300 feet
east
Irving Avenue South From dirt extension west to Boy
Scout Hut Lot entrance
Jane Street East From Closter Dock Road to Clark
Street
Julia Street West From Demarest Avenue to end
King Place East From Alpine Drive 300 feet south
Kinkaid Avenue East From Alpine Drive to Wainwright
Avenue
Legion Place West From High Street to Demarest
Avenue
Leonard Street South From Piermont Road to end
Lewis Street Both Entire length
Lindemann Avenue North From Columbus Avenue to Brook
Street
Lindemann Avenue North From Columbus Avenue to Taillon
Terrace
Locust Street West From Morrison Street to High
Street
MacArthur Avenue West From Arnold Avenue to Homans
Avenue
Madison Avenue West From High Street to Closter Dock
Road
Maple Street North From Piermont Road west to end
Millpond Road West From Colgate Street to Harvard
Street
Naugle Street North From Railroad Avenue to
Williams Street
New Street West From Harvey Street to Cedar
Lane
Oakland Street West From Closter Dock Road to
Homans Avenue
§ 183-44 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-44
180:683
Name of Street Side Location
Oak Street South From Knickerbocker Road to
barricade
Old Hook Road Both From westerly corporate line
between the Borough of
Harrington Park and the Borough
of Closter to Poplar Street
Olive Street West From High Street to end
Parkside Lane East From Willow Road north to end
Parsells Lane Both From Anderson Avenue west to
end
Patton Crescent Both Entire circle
Patton Lane North From Alpine Drive to Halsey Lane
Perry Street West From Closter Dock Road to High
Street
Piermont Road Both From Alpine Drive to Homans
Avenue
Piermont Road Both From McKinley Avenue to Irving
Avenue
Piermont Road [Added
7-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2004:921]
East From Wilson Place to a point 500
feet north of Ruckman Road
Piermont Road [Added
7-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2004:921]
West From Heaton Court to a point
500 feet north of Ruckman Road
Pine Street West From High Street to end
Poplar Street West From High Street to Demarest
Avenue
Railroad Avenue [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Both From Naugle Street to VanSciver
Street
Railroad Avenue
[Amended 3-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:841]
West From Closter Dock Road to
Naugle Street, excluding a
portion 205 feet North of Closter
Dock Road extending 50 feet
North thereof
Railroad Avenue West From Erie Lackawanna Railroad
crossing to John Street
Ranch Lane North Entire length and circle from
Henmar Drive
Reuten Drive Both Entire length
Roosevelt Street East From Irving Avenue to end
§ 183-44 CLOSTER CODE § 183-44
180:684
Name of Street Side Location
Ruckman Road [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
North From a point 605 feet west of the
curbline of Reuten Drive to a
point 775 feet. And a point of
1,010 feet to Endres Street
Rutgers Street Both From Piermont Road to end
Schraalenburg Road East From High Street to Cedar Lane
Schraalenburg Road West From a point 300 feet north of
Old Hook Road to a point 300
feet south of Old Hook Road
Second Street West From Maple Street north to end
Station Court [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
East From Demarest Avenue to a point
100 feet north
Storig Avenue West From Cedar Lane to High Street
Taillon Terrace West From Lindemann Avenue to end
Taillon Terrace West From Demarest Avenue to
Eckerson Avenue
Union Street East From Demarest Avenue to
Schraalenburg Road
Union Street West From Demarest Avenue south to
its terminus
VanSciver Street
[Amended 3-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:841]
Both From West Street to Railroad
Avenue
VerValen Street Both From Closter Dock Road to
Piermont Road
Wainright Avenue North From Alpine Drive to Alpine
Drive
Wainwright Court West From Wainright Avenue 200 feet
north
Walnut Street West From High Street north to end
Wellington Avenue North From West Street to end
Westevelt Avenue East From Closter Dock Road to
County Road
Westminster Avenue North From West Street to end
West Street West From Blanch Avenue to
Harrington Avenue
Whitney Street West From Demarest Avenue to
Eckerson Avenue
§ 183-44 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-44
180:685
Name of Street Side Location
Yale Place East From Princeton Street south 300
feet
§ 183-45. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours. [Amended
12-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1984:488]
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 183-27, no person shall park a
vehicle between hours specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Homans Avenue [Added
12-23-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002:887]
South 8:00 a.m. to
3:30 p.m.,
school days
only
From Piermont
Road to a point
670 feet east
King Place [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
From Trautwein
Crescent to
Brodil Court
Trautwein Crescent
[Added 12-21-1998 by
Ord. No. 1998:783]
South 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Inside circle
West Street West Any time,
except 7:00
a.m. to 1:00
p.m., Sunday
From High
Street to
Harrington
Avenue
B. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended, on any street or Borough right-of-way between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday, and between 3:00
a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday. [Amended 6-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006:971]
C. No parking on any road which is snow covered. [Added 3-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:841]
D. No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or
unattended in the North parking lot (located in Block 1301 on the
Borough’s Tax Map) in designated areas between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
to 6:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. on
Sunday. [Added 12-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013:1152]
E. Up to 20 spaces in the Borough Hall parking lot (located at Block 1309,
Lot 3, on the Borough's Tax Map) shall be designated by the posting of
signs as parking for Borough employees and for visitors to the Borough
Hall on Borough Business during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday (Borough holidays excluded). The Chief of
Police, with the advice and consent of the Mayor and Counsel, shall
determine the parking spaces which shall be so designated. It shall be
§ 183-44 CLOSTER CODE § 183-45
180:686
§ 183-46. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing. [Amended
3-24-1976 by Ord. No. 1976:278; 12-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:466;
12-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1984:488]
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-28, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle at the times indicated upon any of the following streets or parts of
streets:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Closter Dock Road Both Any time From First Street
to Fourth Street
Closter Square Both Any time Between Piermont
Road and Closter
Dock Road
Demarest Avenue Both Any time From a point 150
feet east of Durie
Avenue to a point
150 feet west of
Durie Avenue
Homans Avenue [Added
10-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:749]
North Any time From a point 540
feet west of
Laurance Court to
a point 745 feet
west of Laurance
Court
Homans Avenue [Added
10-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:749]
North Any time From the easterly
curbline of
Trautwein
Crescent (easterly
leg) to points 120
feet easterly
thereof
Homans Avenue [Added
10-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:749]
South Any time From the easterly
curbline of
Trautwein
Crescent (easterly
leg) to points 50
feet westerly
thereof
illegal for persons who are not Borough employees or who are not
visiting on Borough business to park in these designated spaces during
aforementioned days and times. [Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No.
2016:1210; amended 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1217]
§ 183-45 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-46
180:687
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Homans Avenue [Added
10-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:749]
South Any time From the easterly
curbline of
Trautwein
Crescent (easterly
leg) to points 310
feet easterly
thereof
Homans Avenue [Repealed 10-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:749]
Oakland Street Both Any time Between Homans
Avenue and
Ruckman Road
Perry Street West Any time From Closter
Dock Road to
High Street
Piermont Road Both Any time From the
Demarest-Closter
corporate line to
Homans Avenue
Piermont Road [Added
7-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2004:921]
West Any time 500 feet north of
the northerly
curbline of
Ruckman Road
Ruchman Road [Added
7-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2004:921]
Both Any time 110 feet east of
the easterly
curbline of
Piermont Road
Ruckman Road [Added
7-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2004:921]
Both Any time 120 feet west of
the westerly
curbline of
Piermont Road
Ruckman Road Both Any time Between Oakland
Street and
Homans Avenue
Trautwein Crescent Both Any time From Homans
Avenue to points
100 feet northerly
thereof
§ 183-47. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking. [Amended 12-12-1984
by Ord. No. 1984:488]
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-29, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following streets or
parts of streets:
§ 183-46 CLOSTER CODE § 183-47
180:688
Name of Street Sides Time
Limit
Hours Location
Carlson Street Both 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Herbert
Avenue to
Rose Court
Chestnut Street Both 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From
Piermont Road
to Fifth Street
Closter Dock Road Both 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Perry
Street to
Harrington
Avenue
Closter Dock Road East 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From
Harrington
Avenue to
Naugle Place
Durie Avenue Both 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Closter
Dock Road to
High Street
Durie Avenue
[Amended
7-25-2007 by
Ord. No.
2007:990]
West 2 hrs. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From High
Street to
Demarest
Avenue
Harrington Avenue North 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
90 feet from
the westerly
curbline of
Closter Dock
Road to a
point 400 feet
east of the
easterly
curbline of
West Street
Harrington Avenue South 1/2 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m. on
school days
From the
westerly
curbline of
Mattocks
Place,
opposite to a
point 500 feet
westerly
thereof
§ 183-47 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-47
180:689
Name of Street Sides Time
Limit
Hours Location
Harrington Avenue South 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
400 feet east
of the easterly
curbline of
West Street
easterly to
Closter Dock
Road
Herbert Avenue
[Amended
2-10-1993 by
Ord. No.
1993:644]
East 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Closter
Dock Road to
Homans
Avenue
Herbert Avenue West 2 hrs. 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 p.m.
From a point
25 feet from
the southerly
curbline of
Blanch Avenue
to a point
1,800 feet
southerly
thereof
Herbert Avenue
[Added
6-12-1996 by
Ord. No.
1996:715]
West 1/2 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From a point
700 feet north
of the
northernmost
curb at Closter
Dock and
Herbert
Avenue to a
point 1,000
feet north
thereof
Homans Avenue
[Added
10-8-1997 by
Ord. No.
1997:749;
amended
3-28-2001 by
Ord. No.
2001:841]
North 1/2 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m. on
school days
From a point
745 feet west
of Lawrence
Court to a
point 120 feet
east of
Trautwein
Crescent, the
easterly leg
§ 183-47 CLOSTER CODE § 183-47
180:690
Name of Street Sides Time
Limit
Hours Location
Homans Avenue North 1/2 hr. 8:00 am. to
3:00 p.m. on
school days
Between both
intersections
of Trautwein
Crescent
Homans Avenue [Amended 2-10-1993 by Ord. No. 993:644; repealed
10-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:749]
Homans Avenue South 1/2 hr. 8:00 am. to
3:00 p.m. on
school days
From a point
500 feet east
of Piermont
Road to a
point 872 feet
east of
Piermont Road
North Parking Lot
[Added
12-11-2013 by
Ord. No.
2013:1152]
-- 2 hrs. 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Designated
areas
Oakland Street
[Added
2-10-1993 by
Ord. No.
1993:644]
East 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Closter
Dock Road to
Homans
Avenue in the
appropriately
marked spaces
Railroad Avenue
[Added
2-10-1993 by
Ord. No.
1993:644]
East 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Closter
Dock Road to
a point 60 feet
north of the
northernmost
curbline of
Closter Dock
Road in the
appropriately
marked spaces
Railroad Avenue
[Added
3-28-2001 by
Ord. No.
2001:841;
amended
3-25-2002 by
Ord. No.
2002:861]
West 20 mins. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
For 50 feet
from a point
219 feet from
Closter Dock
Road
§ 183-47 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-47
180:691
Name of Street Sides Time
Limit
Hours Location
Trautwein
Crescent [Added
12-21-1998 by
Ord. No.
1998:783]
North 1 hr. 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
school days
Outside circle
§ 183-48. Schedule V: Angle Parking.
§ 183-49. Schedule VI: Trucks Over Four Tons Excluded.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-31, trucks over four tons' gross
weight are hereby excluded from the following described streets or parts of
streets, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on such streets:
Name of Street Location
Alpine Drive From Piermont Road to Anderson
Avenue
Blanch Avenue [Added 3-28-2001
by Ord. No. 2001:841]
East of West Street
Cedar Lane From Harrington Road to
Schraalenburg Road
Closter Dock Road [Added
3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:861]
From Harrington Avenue to Naugle
Street
Columbus Avenue [Added
4-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1985:495]
Between Durie Avenue and
Demarest Avenue
Demarest Avenue From Durie Avenue to
Schraalenburg Road
Hickory Lane From Piermont Road to Anderson
Avenue
Homans Avenue From Piermont Road to Anderson
Avenue
A. In accordance with provisions of § 183-30, vehicles will park in the
following locations at a sixty-degree angle indicated by markings and
signs. Vehicles will be parked at the angle so indicated.
Name of Street Side Location
Closter Dock Road [Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1985:495;
repealed 4-14-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:788]
Ruckman Road East Beginning at a point 300 feet
east of Homans Avenue and
extending 300 feet easterly
thereof
§ 183-47 CLOSTER CODE § 183-49
180:692
Name of Street Location
Naugle Street [Added 3-28-2001
by Ord. No. 2001:841]
West of Railroad Avenue
West Street [Added 3-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:841]
South of VanSciver Street
§ 183-50. Schedule VII: Trucks Over Ten Tons Excluded. [Added
3-8-1978 by Ord. No. 1978:325]
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-32, trucks over 10 tons gross
weight are hereby excluded from the following described streets or parts of
streets, except for pickup or delivery of goods or services on such streets or
while engaged in local commerce:
Name of Street Location
Blanche Avenue From Piermont Road to the Norwood border and
from the Norwood border to West Street
Closter Dock Road From Harrington Avenue to Anderson Avenue
Demarest Avenue From Durie Avenue to Closter Dock Road
Durie Avenue From the Haworth border to Closter Dock Road
Harrington Avenue From the Harrington Park border to the
intersection of Closter Dock Road and Durie
Avenue
Herbert Avenue From Closter Dock Road to Blanche Avenue
High Street From Schraalenburg Road to Piermont Road
Homans Avenue From Herbert Avenue to Piermont Road
Knickerbocker Road From Harrington Avenue to Oak Street
Piermont Road From the Demarest border to the Norwood border
Ruckman Road From Anderson Avenue to Homans Avenue
Schraalenburg Road From the Harrington Park border to the Haworth
border
West Street From High Street to Blanche Avenue
§ 183-51. Schedule VIII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-33, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
Limits
Closter Square West From Piermont Road to
Closter Dock Road
Division Street North Entire length
§ 183-49 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-51
180:693
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
Limits
Grove Street [Added
2-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:644]
West Entire length
Haring Street [Added
4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
North From Demarest Avenue to
High Street
High Street East Between Forest Street
and Poplar Street
John Street East Entire length
Locust Street [Added
4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
South Entire length
Naugle Street West From Railroad Avenue to
Closter Dock Road on
Sundays between 7:00
a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
Pine Street [Added
4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
South From High Street to
Demarest Avenue
Railroad Avenue North From Closter Dock Road
north to a point 350 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of Closter Dock
Road
Trautwein Crescent
[Added 12-21-1998 by
Ord. No. 1998:783]
North From Homans Avenue to
King Place, between 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and
2:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m.,
school days
West Street [Amended
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
North From High Street to
Harrington Avenue on
Sundays between 10:00
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
§ 183-52. Schedule IX: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-34, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations:
§ 183-51 CLOSTER CODE § 183-52
180:694
Name of Street Location
Alpine Drive [Amended
4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495; 3-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:841]
Between Anderson Avenue and Piermont
Road
Bergenline Avenue Between Schraalenburg Road and Poplar
Street
Cedar Lane Between Harrington Avenue and
Knickerbocker Road
Cedar Lane Between Knickerbocker Road and
Schraalenburg Road
Columbus Avenue Between Demarest Avenue and Durie Avenue
Columbus Avenue Between Durie Avenue and Demarest
Borough boundary line
Demarest Avenue Between Knickerbocker Road and Durie
Avenue
Demarest Avenue Between Schraalenburg Road and
Knickerbocker Road
Eckerson Avenue Between Columbus Avenue and Brook Street
Eckerson Avenue Between Knickerbocker Road and Columbus
Avenue
Herbert Avenue Between Blanch Avenue and Closter Dock
Road
Hickory Lane Between Piermont Road and Anderson
Avenue
High Street Between Schraalenburg Road and Poplar
Street
Homans Avenue Between Herbert Avenue and Piermont Road
Homans Avenue Between Piermont Road and Anderson
Avenue
John Street Between West Street and Railroad Avenue
Lake Street [Added
4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Between Closter Dock Road and the
corporate line between the Borough of
Demarest and the Borough of Closter
Primrose Lane [Added
4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Between Herbert Avenue and Mead Drive
Ruckman Road Between Anderson Avenue and Piermont
Road
Ruckman Road Between Piermont Road and Homans Avenue
§ 183-52 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-52
180:695
Name of Street Location
Storig Avenue [Added
4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Between High Street and Cedar Lane
Wainwright Avenue Between the 2 intersections of Alpine Drive
West Street Between Blanch Avenue and Harrington
Avenue
§ 183-53. Schedule X: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-35, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Ann Arbor Place and Princeton
Street [Added 4-10-1985 by Ord.
No. 1985:495]
Ann Arbor Place
Bergenline Avenue and Haring
Street
Bergenline Avenue
Bergenline Avenue and Pine Street Pine Street
Brodil Court and King Place [Added
4-10-1985 by Ord. No. 1985:495]
Brodil Court
Church Court and Sherman Avenue
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Church Court
Closter Dock Road and Naugle Place Southeast corner facing Closter
Dock Road
Collins Avenue and Bradley Avenue
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Collins Avenue
Collins Avenue and Walker Avenue
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Collins Avenue
Endres Street and Ruckman Road [Added 2-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:644; repealed 11-22-1993 by Ord. No. 1993:658]
Ethel Court and Crescent Street
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Ethel Court
Halsey Lane and Walker Avenue
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Halsey Lane
Herbert Avenue and Blanch Avenue
[Added 3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Blanch Avenue, northeast corner
§ 183-52 CLOSTER CODE § 183-53
180:696
Intersection Stop Sign On
Herbert Avenue and Blanch Avenue [Added 2-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:644; repealed 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
John Street and Railroad Avenue John Street
King Place and Trautwein Crescent
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
King Place
Maple Avenue and Vivian Lane
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Vivian Lane
Naugle Place and Railroad Avenue Northwest corner facing Railroad
Avenue
Sherman Avenue and Taylor Drive
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Taylor Drive
Smith Court and Crescent Street
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Smith Court
Valley Road and Durie Avenue
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495]
Durie Avenue on the southwest
corner
West Street and Blanch Avenue
[Added 2-10-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:644]
West Street, southeast corner
Williams Street and Closter Dock
Road
Williams Street
§ 183-54. Schedule XI: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-36, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
having sides 36 inches in length shall be installed as follows:
Intersection Yield Sign On
Birch Street and Haring Street
[Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495; amended 2-10-1993 by
Ord. No. 1993:644]
Birch Street
Blanch Avenue and Herbert Avenue [Added 4-10-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:495; repealed 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
Blanch Avenue and West Street [Repealed 10-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:749]
§ 183-53 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-55
180:697
§ 183-55. Schedule XII: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-37, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Name of Street Side Location
Closter Dock Road North Beginning at a point 205 feet west
of the westerly curbline of Railroad
Avenue and extending 50 feet
westerly thereof
Railroad Avenue East Beginning at a point 125 feet north
of the northerly curbline of Closter
Dock Road and extending 50 feet
northerly thereof
§ 183-56. Schedule XIII: Bus Stops. [Amended 3-24-1976 by Ord.
No. 1976:278; 12-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:466; 12-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984:488; 3-26-1986 by Ord. No. 1986:524; 11-8-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999:813]
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-38, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops.
A. Along Closter Dock Road, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Herbert Avenue, far side, beginning at the prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Herbert Avenue and extending 100 feet
therefrom.
(2) High Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline and
extending 120 feet northerly thereof.
(3) Demarest Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline
and extending 120 feet northerly thereof.
(4) High Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of High
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(5) Demarest Avenue, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of
Demarest Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
(6) County Road, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of County
Road and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
(7) Lake Street, far side, beginning at the easterly curbline of Lake
Street and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
B. Along Closter Dock Road, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) Walnut Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of
Walnut Street and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
§ 183-55 CLOSTER CODE § 183-56
180:698
(2) High Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline and
extending 120 feet southerly thereof.
(3) High Street, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of High
Street and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(4) Piermont Road, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline and
extending westerly 100 feet thereof.
(5) Herbert Avenue, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of
Herbert Avenue and extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
C. Along Harrington Avenue, eastbound, on the southerly side thereof at:
(1) Robinhood Avenue, near side, beginning 200 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Robinhood Avenue and extending 135 feet
westerly therefrom.
(2) Cedar Lane, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Cedar
Lane and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(3) West Street, near side, beginning at the westerly curbline of West
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
D. Along Harrington Avenue, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
(1) Closter Dock Road, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of
Closter Dock Road and extending 45 feet westerly therefrom.
[Amended 9-24-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:904]
(2) West Street, near side, beginning at the easterly curbline of West
Street and extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
(3) Cedar Lane, far side, beginning at the westerly curbline of Cedar
Lane and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
(4) Robinhood Avenue, near side, beginning at the prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Robinhood Avenue and extending 105 feet
easterly therefrom.
E. Along Knickerbocker Road, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Durie Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of
Durie Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Bergenline Avenue, near side, beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Bergenline Avenue and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom.
(3) Demarest Avenue, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Demarest Avenue and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
(4) High Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of High
Street and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 183-56 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-56
180:699
(5) Cedar Lane, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Cedar
Lane and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(6) Jays Court, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Jays
Court and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
(7) Harrington Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline
of Harrington Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
F. Along Knickerbocker Road, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Harrington Avenue, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of
Harrington Avenue and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(2) Cedar Lane, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline and
extending 120 feet northerly thereof.
(3) Jays Court, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Jays
Court and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(4) Cedar Lane, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of Cedar
Lane and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
(5) High Street, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of High
Street and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(6) Demarest Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Demarest Avenue and extending 105 northerly therefrom.
(7) Bergenline Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline
of Bergenline Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
(8) Durie Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline of
Durie Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
G. Along Piermont Road, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
(1) Closter Dock Road, far side, beginning at a point 20 feet south of
the southerly curbline and extending 80 feet southerly thereof.
(2) Closter Dock Road, far side, beginning at the southerly curbline of
Closter Dock Road and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
H. Along Schraalenburg Road, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
(1) Durie Avenue, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline and
extending 155 feet southerly thereof.
(2) Bergenline Avenue. near side, beginning at the southerly curbline
and extending 155 feet southerly thereof.
(3) High Street, near side, beginning at the southerly curbline and
extending 120 feet southerly thereof.
§ 183-56 CLOSTER CODE § 183-56
180:700
§ 183-57. Schedule XIV: No Left Turns. [Amended 12-12-1984 by
Ord. No. 1984:488]
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-39, no person shall make a left
turn at any of the following locations:
(4) Cedar Lane, far side, beginning at the northerly curbline and
extending 90 feet northerly thereof.
I. Along Schraalenburg Road, southbound, on the westerly side thereof
at:
(1) High Street, far side, beginning at a point opposite the southerly
curbline and extending southerly 90 feet thereof.
(2) Bergenline Avenue, far side, beginning at a point opposite the
southerly curbline and extending 140 feet southerly thereof.
(3) Durie Avenue, near side, beginning at the northerly curbline and
extending 140 feet northerly thereof.
J. Along VerValen Street, westbound, on the northerly side thereof.
(1) Between Piermont Road and Closter Dock Road (midblock),
beginning 780 feet west of the westerly curbline and extending 135
feet westerly thereof.
A. West on VerValen Street to south on Closter Dock Road.
B. South on Schraalenburg Road to east on High Street.
C. South on Schraalenburg Road to east on Union Street.
D. South on Poplar Street to east on High Street.
E. East on Old Hook Road to north on Carr Place.
F. East on Harrington Avenue to north on Old Closter Dock Road.
G. West on High Street to south on Poplar Street.
H. South on Closter Square to east on Closter Dock Road.
I. East on VerValen Street to north onto the exit driveway of Closter Plaza.
J. South on Ruckman Road to east on Homans Avenue.
K. South on Piermont Road to east on Hickory Lane. [Added 11-8-1995
by Ord. No. 1995:706]
L. Tenakill School to west on Harrington Avenue between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. school days. [Added 3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
§ 183-56 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-57
180:701
§ 183-58. Schedule XV: No Right Turns. [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984:488]
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-40, no person shall make a right
turn at any of the following locations:
M. Tenakill School to east on High Street between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. school days. [Added 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
N. Hillside School, upper driveway, to west on Homans Avenue between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. school days. [Added 3-28-2001
by Ord. No. 2001:841]
O. Trucks over four tons: West on VanSciver to south on West Street.
[Added 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
P. North on Herbert Avenue into any driveway from a point 700 feet north
of Closter Dock Road and continuing northbound 525 feet. [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
Q. Westbound on Ruckman Road into the driveway on the southerly side of
Ruckman Road located approximately 75 feet west of Piermont Road.
[Added 7-14-2004 by Ord. No. 2004:921]
A. West on Demarest Avenue to north on Union Street.
B. West on VerValen Street to north onto the exit driveway of Closter
Plaza.
C. Hillside School lower circle to east on Homans Avenue between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. school days. [Added 3-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:841]
D. Trucks over four tons: North on West Street to east on Blanch Avenue.
[Added 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
E. Trucks over four tons: South on Railroad Avenue to west on Naugle
Street. [Added 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
F. East on Demarest Avenue to south on Durie Avenue. [Added
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
G. North or south on Knickerbocker Road to east or west on High Street.
[Added 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
H. East or west on High Street to north or south on Knickerbocker Road.
[Added 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
I. North or south on Knickerbocker Road to east or west on Durie Avenue.
[Added 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
J. West on Dune Avenue to north on Knickerbocker Road. [Added
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
§ 183-57 CLOSTER CODE § 183-58
180:702
§ 183-59. Schedule XVI: No U-Turns. [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord. No.
1984:488]
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-41, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
§ 183-60. Schedule XVII: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 183-42, lane use reservations shall be
as follows:
K. East or west on High Street to north or south on Durie Avenue. [Added
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
L. North or south on Durie Avenue to east or west on High Street. [Added
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
M. North or south on Piermont Road to east or west on Homans Avenue.
[Added 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
N. East on Homans Avenue to south on Piermont Road. [Added
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
O. North on Schraalenburgh Road to east on Durie Avenue. [Added
12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
P. East or west on Durie Avenue to north or south on Schraalenburgh
Road. [Added 12-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:887]
A. Closter Dock Road between Harrington Avenue and Railroad Avenue
except westbound at the intersection of Harrington Avenue.
B. Homans Avenue, from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days, between
Piermont Road and Meadow Lane. [Added 10-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:749]
C. Trautwein Crescent, from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days, the
entire length. [Added 10-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:749]
D. Herbert Avenue between Closter Dock Road and Blanch Avenue.
[Added 3-28-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:841]
A. At the intersection of Closter Dock Road, VerValen Street and Lewis
Street:
(1) Any person operating a vehicle proceeding southbound on Lewis
Street must turn right or left only and shall not cross the
intersection to proceed southbound along Closter Dock Road.
(2) Any person operating a vehicle proceeding northbound in the left
lane along Closter Dock Road must turn left.
B. On Piermont Road at Closter Dock Road: [Added 12-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1983:466]
§ 183-58 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-60
180:703
(1) Northbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
(2) Southbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
C. On Piermont Road at High Street: [Added 3-24-1976 by Ord. No.
1976:278; amended 12-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:466]
(1) Northbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
D. On Piermont Road at VerValen Street: [Added 3-24-1976 by Ord. No.
1976:278; amended 12-14-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:466;
12-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1984:488]
(1) Northbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
(2) Southbound, the right lane is reserved for right turns only.
E. On Closter Dock Road at Piermont Road: [Added 12-14-1983 by Ord.
No. 1983:466; amended 12-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1984:488]
(1) Westbound, the right lane is reserved for right turns only.
F. On Piermont Road at Homans Avenue: [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984:488]
(1) Northbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
G. On Homans Avenue at Piermont Road: [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984:488; amended 1-2-1997 by Ord. No. 1996:737]
(1) Eastbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
(2) Westbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
H. On Closter Dock Road at Perry Street: [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984:488]
(1) Westbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
I. On Closter Dock Road at Durie Avenue: [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984:488]
(1) Westbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
J. On Schraalenburg Road at Durie Avenue: [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 1984:488]
(1) Southbound, the right lane is reserved for right turns only.
K. On Schraalenburg Road at Old Hook Road: [Amended 12-12-1984 by
Ord. No. 1984:488]
(1) Northbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only.
(2) Southbound, the right lane is reserved for right turns only.
§ 183-60 CLOSTER CODE § 183-60
180:704
L. On Old Hook Road at Schraalenburg Road: [Added 12-12-1984 by
Ord. No. 1984:488]
(1) Eastbound, the right lane is reserved for right turns only.
(2) Eastbound, the left lane is reserved for left turns only. [Added
10-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:749]
M. On Durie Avenue at High Street: [Added 12-12-1984 by Ord. No.
1984:488]
(1) Southbound, the right lane is reserved for right turns only.
N. On Piermont Road at Ruckman Road: [Added 7-14-2004 by Ord. No.
2004:921]
(1) The right southbound lane on the north approach of Piermont Road
at Ruckman Road is reserved for right turns only.
§ 183-60 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-60
180:705

ARTICLE XII
Speed Limits
[Added 2-25-1976 by Ord. No. 1976:277]
§ 183-61. Speed limits established. [Amended 2-8-1989 by Ord. No.
1989:568]
The following speed limits are established and maintained along the
following streets:
Street Location
Speed Limit
(mph)
Demarest Avenue From Schraalenburg
Road to Closter Dock
Road
30
Harrington Avenue
[Added 10-28-1998
by Ord. No.
1998:781]
Between the school
safety signals
25 (when school safety
signals are flashing)
High Street [Added
10-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998:781]
Between the school
safety signals
25 (when school safety
signals are flashing)
Ruckman Road [Added
8-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2017:1229]
From Homans Avenue
to Piermont Road
35
West Street Closter Dock Road to
Blanche Avenue
30
West Street High Street to Closter
Dock Road
25
§ 183-61 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-61
180:707

ARTICLE XIII
No-Passing Zones
[Added 12-12-1984 by Ord. No. 1984:488]
§ 183-62. No-passing zones established. [Amended 2-8-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989:568]
No-passing zones are hereby established and maintained along the
following streets:
Street Direction of
Travel
Location
Cedar Lane [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841
Both Between Harrington
Avenue and
Schraalenburgh Road
Demerest Avenue [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841
Both Between Durie Avenue and
Schraalenburgh Road
Herbert Avenue [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Both Between Closter Dock
Road and Blanch Avenue
High Street Both Between Schraalenburg
Road and Old Hook Road/
Poplar Street as
authorized by the New
Jersey Department of
Transportation, dated
March 26, 1981, and in
accordance with the
sketch for the same dated
January 13, 1981, and
bearing number NPZ-2987
Homans Avenue [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Both Between Herbert Avenue
and Anderson Avenue
Lewis Street [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Both Between Closter Dock
Road and Homans Avenue
Oakland Street [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Both Between Closter Dock
Road and Homans Avenue
Ruckman Road [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Both Between Homans Avenue
and Anderson Avenue
§ 183-62 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-62
180:709
Street Direction of
Travel
Location
Storig Avenue [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Both Between Cedar Lane and
High Street
Vervalen Street [Added
3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
Both Between Closter Dock
Road and Piermont Road
West Street Both Between Blanche Avenue
and Closter Dock Road
§ 183-63. Mid-block crosswalks established. [Added 2-8-1989 by
Ord. No. 1989:568]
Mid-block crosswalks are hereby established and maintained at the
following locations:
Street Location
Harrington Avenue [Added
10-28-1998 by Ord. No.
1998:775]
From a location 386 feet west of
Mattocks Place in a westerly
direction for a distance of 10 feet
Harrington Avenue [Added
10-28-1998 by Ord. No.
1998:775]
From a location 206 feet west of
Mattocks Place in a westerly
direction for a distance of 10 feet
High Street From a location 420 feet west of the
westerly curbline of West Street in a
westerly direction for a distance of
10 feet
Homans Avenue From a point 92 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Trautwein
Crescent (easterly leg) in an easterly
direction for a distance of 10 feet
Ruckman Road [Added 10-28-1998
by Ord. No. 1998:775]
From a location 735 feet east of
Reuten Drive in an easterly direction
for a distance of 10 feet
West Street From a point 110 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Blanche
Avenue in a southerly direction for a
distance of 10 feet
§ 183-62 CLOSTER CODE § 183-63
180:710
Part 3
[Adopted 10-25P-1a9rk7i8ngA sOOn rPdu. bNloic. l1y 9O7w8n:3e4d1 L (aCnhd.s 63 Of The 1967
Code)]
ARTICLE XIV
General Provisions
§ 183-64. Purpose.
This Part 3 is deemed necessary for the general welfare of residents living
in areas adjacent to certain publicly owned lands in the Borough of Closter,
whether such lands are owned by the municipality, the Board of Education
or any other political subdivision.
§ 183-65. Definitions.
As used in this Part 3, the following words shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLES — All vehicles propelled by any means other than
muscular power.
OWNER — A person to whom the legal title of a motor vehicle is registered
in this or any other state.
PARKING — The standing or waiting of a motor vehicle, whether or not
attended.
PARKING AREA OR YARD — Any parking area or publicly held land which is
open to the public and which is maintained by a political subdivision of the
state for certain public purposes.
§ 183-66. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
It shall be unlawful to park a motor vehicle on any publicly owned or leased
land after the hour of 10:30 p.m., prevailing time, and before the hour of
6:00 a.m., prevailing time; provided, however, that the Mayor and Council
may designate, by resolution, which publicly held lands shall be governed
by the terms of this Part 3.
§ 183-67. Removal of illegally parked vehicles.
Any motor vehicle found to be illegally parked on publicly held land during
the proscribed times may be removed from the parking area by towing
or other method at the expense of the registered owner, who shall be
responsible for payment of the cost of removal and storage of such vehicle.
§ 183-68. Posting of signs.
Appropriate signs stating the proscribed hours of parking and that illegally
parked vehicles may be removed at the owner's expense shall be displayed
in the parking areas of such publicly owned lands that the Mayor and
Council shall decide.
§ 183-64 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-69
180:711
§ 183-69. Placing of barricades during restricted hours.
The Police Department is authorized to place barricades at the entrances of
all parking areas covered by this Part 3 during the hours that parking shall
be forbidden thereupon.
§ 183-70. Exceptions.
Whenever an event sanctioned by properly constituted authority shall be
scheduled and held on publicly owned lands, the proscribed time provisions
of this Part 3 may be suspended by such authority for a period of two hours
after the conclusion of such event.
§ 183-71. Presumption of ownership of vehicle.
In any trial on a complaint for a violation of this Part 3, proof of the
ownership of any motor vehicle involved in the complaint may be
established by offering into evidence a certificate or other official
communication from the Division of Motor Vehicles of the State of New
Jersey or other state, district, territory, country or place where the vehicle
was registered according to the license plates thereon, setting forth the
name and address of the owner of said motor vehicle on the date of the
alleged violation, whereupon the same shall be received in evidence without
further authentication or proof, and a presumption shall arise that the
owner of said motor vehicle, as shown in such certificate or official
communication, was the owner of said vehicle on the date and at the time
such vehicle was illegally parked.
§ 183-72. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
Any person violating any provision of this Part 3 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 183-69 CLOSTER CODE § 183-72
180:712
Part 4
[Adopted 2-13-1985 AsHOarnd.d Nicoa.p 1p9e8d5 P:4a9rk3i n(Pgart 5 Of Ch. 104 Of The
1967 Code)]
ARTICLE XV
Designation of Handicapped Parking Spaces
§ 183-73. Purposes. [Amended 11-24-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:908]
The purposes of this Part 4 are to establish certain areas on public and
private lands that shall be designated for the parking of motor vehicles by
persons to whom handicapped person identification cards have been issued,
to prohibit the parking in such designated areas by persons to whom a
handicapped person identification card has not been issued and to establish
penalties for the violation of this Part 4.
§ 183-74. Statutory authority.
This Part 4 is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A. Title 39, which confers
upon the Borough of Closter the right to establish handicapped parking
spaces in order to preserve and safeguard the public health, safety, morals
and welfare.
§ 183-75. Posting of signs. [Amended 3-28-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:841]
The designation of signs indicating "handicapped parking spaces" shall be
done in conformance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways by the Police Department.
§ 183-76. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-24-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003:908]
A. No person shall park a vehicle in a designated handicapped parking
space without a handicapped person identification card.
B. Persons in violation of this Part 4 shall be subject to a fine as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197. [Amended 3-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1220]
§ 183-73 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-76
180:713

Part 5
[Adopted 7-24-1985 AFsirPea Lrta nOefs O Arndd. NFoir.e 1 Z9o8n5e:5s13 (Part 4 Of Ch. 104
Of The 1967 Code)]
ARTICLE XVI
Designation of Fire Lanes and Fire Zones
§ 183-77. Designation by Fire Official.
The Fire Official may require and designate public or private fire zones
and/or lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective use of
fire apparatus and equipment and to ensure the safe and timely egress of
occupants and ingress of fire-suppression forces.
§ 183-78. Obstructions prohibited.
Designated fire zones and lanes shall be maintained free from obstructions
and vehicles at all times. Designated fire zones and lanes shall be utilized
by the Fire Department only.
§ 183-79. Marking of fire lanes.
Fire lanes shall be marked as ordered by the Fire Official. However,
minimum marking shall be as follows:
§ 183-80. Marking of fire zones.
Fire zones shall be marked as ordered by the Fire Official. However,
minimum markings shall be as follows:
A. Fire lanes shall be bordered on both sides by a minimum six-inch yellow
stripe painted on the ground surface.
B. Signs approved by the Fire Official shall be attached to the structures
or buildings bordering the fire lane in locations approved by the Fire
Official or on posts located no more than 50 feet apart. Said signs shall
be maintained by the owner of the property in good condition.
C. The words "Fire Lane" shall be painted on the ground surface and shall
be in yellow letters, minimum height of 18 inches. "Fire Lane" shall be
painted every 50 feet and/or at locations approved by the Fire Official.
A. Fire zones shall be marked around their entire perimeter with a yellow
line, which shall have minimum width of four inches. Diagonal yellow
lines four inches in width shall be marked off every three feet.
B. Signs approved by the Fire Official shall be attached to the structures
or buildings in locations approved by the Fire Official or on posts
located as required by the Fire Official.
§ 183-77 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-80
180:715
§ 183-81. Signs.
Fire zone/lane signs shall be weatherproofed with a white reflective
background and bright red letters, which shall have a minimum height of
two inches. The sign shall read "Fire Zone, No Stopping or Standing" or
"Fire Lane, No Stopping or Standing." "No stopping or standing" is hereby
defined for the purposes of this Part 5 as follows: no parking, stopping,
loading, unloading or otherwise obstructing.
§ 183-82. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
4-21-1986 by Ord. No. 1986:525]
C. The words "Fire Zone" shall be painted on the ground surface and shall
be in yellow letters which shall have a minimum height of 18 inches.
"Fire Zone" shall be painted at locations approved by the Fire Official.
A. The Fire Official and inspectors approved by the Fire Official shall have
power concurrent with that of the Police Department to issue
summonses for offenses or violations of this Part 5.
B. Any person violating the provisions of this Part 5 or failing to comply
with any order made thereunder shall, for each violation, be assessed a
fine and court costs in accordance with the following schedule:
[Amended 3-25-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:861]
(1) First offense: a minimum fine of $50, plus $25 for court costs.
(2) Second offense: a minimum fine of $75, plus $25 court costs.
(3) Third offense: a minimum fine of $100, plus $25 court costs.
C. Violations of this Part 5 will be heard in the Closter Municipal Court
which may permit guilty pleas without requiring court appearances in
accordance with procedures of the Court.
§ 183-80 CLOSTER CODE § 183-82
180:716
Part 6
[Adopted 6-9P-a1r9k9in9gB AyuOthrdo.r iNtyo. 1999:795]
ARTICLE XVII
Purpose and Establishment
§ 183-83. Purpose.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter, New Jersey, deem it
necessary to the public interest, health, safety, comfort, convenience,
protection of property values and the general welfare of the Borough of
Closter to provide a mechanism whereby developers of property which are
subject to minimum off-street parking obligations but, due to the unique
character of the subject property or other factors, are granted site plan
approval or variances providing for less than the otherwise mandated
number of parking spaces may be required to contribute to a fund dedicated
to the acquisition, construction and maintenance of municipal parking
areas.
§ 183-84. Closter Parking Reserve. [Amended 10-12-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011:1107]
A. There is created within the Borough of Closter a Closter Parking
Reserve, which shall be set aside and be available for the acquisition,
creation and maintenance of municipally owned, controlled or
maintained parking areas.
B. The Closter Parking Reserve shall be overseen and managed by the
Borough Administrator, a member of the Council and the Borough
Zoning Officer.
C. The Closter Parking Reserve shall be established and funded from
monies to be paid by applicants for the development of real property
that are required by either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the Borough of Closter to pay to the Borough a sum to be
determined by the Borough Engineer on or about January 1 of each
year, for the difference between the number of parking spaces approved
for the development and the minimum number of parking spaces
otherwise required by the Zoning Ordinances of the Borough of
Closter.185
D. Where the number of off-street parking spaces required by the zoning
ordinances of the Borough of Closter is more than the number of offstreet
parking spaces proposed by any applicant, the Planning Board of
the Borough of Closter and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
Borough of Closter are authorized to impose, as a condition of any
approval of such application, that the applicant pay to the Borough of
Closter the sum provided for each such space that is less than the
185. Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Zoning.
§ 183-83 TRAILERS AND CAMP CARS § 183-84
180:717
§ 183-85. Severability.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this Part 6 or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this Part 6.
§ 183-86. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed
to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 183-87. When effective.
This Part 6 shall take effect immediately upon final passage and publication
as required by law.
minimum number required by the Zoning Ordinance. [Amended
1-2-2018 by Ord. No. 2017:1236]
§ 183-84 CLOSTER CODE § 183-87
180:718
Chapter 185
VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Newsracks — See Ch. 132. Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 185-1. License or permit required. [Amended 12-27-1972 by Ord.
No. 1972:241]
No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter own, operate or maintain any
food or merchandise vending appliance or any coin-operated device for the
sale or distribution of food or merchandise without first obtaining a license
or permit therefor.
§ 185-2. Outdoor dispensing prohibited.
No licenses or permits shall be issued for any such appliance, machine or
device which is located outdoors or outside of any building or which delivers
goods or merchandise outdoors or outside of a building.
§ 185-3. Fees; issuance of license. [Amended 10-13-1971 by Ord.
No. 1971:226; 12-27-1972 by Ord. No. 1972:241; 1-26-1977 by Ord.
No. 1977:296186]
An annual license fee as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, shall
be paid for each vending machine dispensing unit dispensing food, and an
annual license fee as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, shall
be paid for each vending machine dispensing nonedible merchandise. The
respective license fees shall be paid for each dispensing unit, regardless of
whether a number of units are mounted or combined together on a stand
containing multiple dispensing units. A separate license fee shall be paid for
each such unit. All licenses or permits shall be issued by the Borough Clerk
and shall be valid for a period of one (1) calendar year.
§ 185-4. Existing milk vending machines excluded.
No provision hereof shall be construed to apply to milk vending machines
presently lawfully existing within the borough.
§ 185-5. Violations and penalties.187
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as set forth
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 183-87 VENDING MACHINES § 185-5
185:719
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
Chapter 189
WATER
§ 185-5 CLOSTER CODE § 185-5
189:720
ARTICLE I
Lawn Sprinklers
[Adopted 11-22-1967 by Ord. No. 1967:179 as Art. I of Ch. 53 of the
1967 Code)]
§ 189-1. Regulation of water; purpose.
The use of water for the sprinkling of lawns within the Borough of Closter
shall hereafter be regulated so as to provide adequate water pressure for
fire-fighting purposes at all hydrants within the Borough of Closter.
§ 189-2. Determination of inadequate water pressures.
The inadequacy of water pressure at any fire hydrant within the Borough of
Closter shall be determined by the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Borough
of Closter.
§ 189-3. Time periods when pressure is inadequate.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention, in making its determination, shall also
ascertain the periods of time during which the lack of water pressure exists
at any particular fire hydrant or hydrants within the Borough of Closter. The
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall transmit this information to the Mayor for
his or her guidance in making the order restricting the sprinkling of lawns.
§ 189-4. Declaration of emergency.
Upon the determination of the Bureau of Fire Prevention that inadequacy
of water pressure exists at any fire hydrant within the Borough of Closter
and upon request made by said Bureau to the Mayor, he or she shall
declare an emergency to exist within such area and shall forthwith order
the discontinuance of the use of water for the sprinkling of lawns in such
portions of the Borough of Closter as shall be necessary to relieve such
emergency and to provide adequate water pressure in all fire hydrants for
adequate fire protection.
§ 189-5. Restricted periods.
In making his or her order restricting the sprinkling of lawns, the Mayor
shall set forth the hours or periods of time during which the restriction
against the sprinkling of lawns shall apply.
§ 189-6. Appeals.
If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, an appeal in writing to the governing body may be taken. A
hearing thereon shall be had on notice to the members of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, who shall be afforded an opportunity to present any evidence in
support of their determination. After such hearing, the governing body may
affirm or reverse the action of the Bureau of Fire Prevention by a recorded
vote of a majority of the total members thereof.
§ 189-1 WATER § 189-7
189:721
§ 189-7. Violations and penalties.188
Any individual or individuals violating any of the provisions of this chapter
or any order made in accordance herewith shall, upon conviction thereof,
be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article
II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 189-7 CLOSTER CODE § 189-7
189:722
Chapter 200
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land use procedures — See Ch. 35.
Official Map — See Ch. 38.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 89.
Driveways — See Ch. 92.
Fences — See Ch. 103.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 108.
Subdivision of land and site plan review — See
Ch. 173.
Fees and deposits — See Ch. A301.
§ 189-7 WATER § 189-7
189:723

ARTICLE I
Purposes and Approval
§ 200-1. Purposes.
A. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter, New Jersey, deem it
necessary to the public interest, health, comfort, convenience,
protection of property values and preservation of the public peace,
safety, morals, order and the general welfare of the Borough of Closter
to regulate and restrict the height, number of stories and size of
buildings and other structures, the proportion of lot that may be
occupied, the size of yards, courts or other open spaces, the density of
the population and the location and use and extent of the use of
buildings and structures for trade, industry, residence or other
purposes and to divide the Borough into such districts as are deemed
necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
B. The following regulations governing the various districts herein created
are hereby approved and shall hereafter regulate the location, size and
use of buildings within the Borough of Closter, New Jersey.
§ 200-1 WATER § 200-1
189:725

ARTICLE II
Use Districts
[Amended 12-23-1970 by Ord. No. 1970:213-A; 7-12-1972 by Ord.
No. 1972:231; 2-10-1988 by Ord. No. 1988:557]
§ 200-2. Designations. [Amended 10-14-2015 by Ord. No.
2015:1197; 12-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018:1251; 12-20-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018:1247]
The Borough shall be divided into nine districts, which shall be
differentiated according to use, area to be covered by buildings and height
of buildings, and which shall be known and designated as follows:
District No. 1, Residence Area A
District No. 2, Residence Area B
District No. 3, Business Area
District No. 4, Commercial Area
District No. 4A, Office Area A
District No. 4B, Office Area B
District No. 5, Industrial Area
District No. 6, AH (Affordable Housing) District
District No. 7, Conservation Zone (added by Ordinance No. 2014:1169)
District No. 8, Residential Quadruplex (RQ)
District 3A (All properties presently located in the Business District No. 3,
from the western border of the Business district, to the west side of both
Lewis Street and Perry Street.)
§ 200-3. Adoption of Zoning Map. [Amended 3-9-1988 by Ord. No.
1988:558; 12-17-2002 by 2001:857; 5-14-2003 by Ord. No.
2003:896]
NOTE: 2013 Zoning Map was adopted by Ordinance No. 2014:1168;
These districts shall be located and designated on a map known as the
"Zoning Map, Borough of Closter, Bergen County, New Jersey," dated
December 2013 and filed in the office of the Clerk of the Borough of Closter,
and which map is declared to be part of this chapter.189
189. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map, as amended, is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 200-2 WATER § 200-3
189:727

ARTICLE III
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 200-4. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meanings hereafter indicated. Words used in the present tense shall
include the future. Words used in the singular include the plural number
and in the plural include the singular. The word "person" shall include
a partnership or a corporation. The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
The word "building" includes the word "structure." The word "shall" is
mandatory and not discretionary. The word "occupied" or "used" shall be
considered as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged or
designed to be used or occupied."
§ 200-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A self-contained residential dwelling unit with
a kitchen, sanitary facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance,
which is created within an existing single-family dwelling or by addition
to an existing single-family dwelling. The dwelling unit, including the
accessory apartment, shall meet all required bulk regulations and setbacks
for the zone district in which it is located.[Added 12-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018:1246]
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A single building, the use of which is customarily
incidental to that of the main or principal building and which is located in
the same lot as is occupied by the principal building. Such building(s) shall
not occupy an area greater than 30% of the ground area occupied by the
principal building. There shall only be two accessory buildings or structures
permitted on the lot or combined lots upon which the principal building is
located.[Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372; 1-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998:757; 9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:848]
ACCESSORY RETAIL SALES — A use occupying not more than 10% of the
total floor area of the building's floor area but not exceeding 1,500 square
feet, and not more than 10% of the floor area of any space for which there is
a certificate of occupancy, and engaged in the selling to the general public
of goods or merchandise manufactured, fabricated, converted, altered,
finished, assembled or warehoused in that building.[Added 4-8-1992 by
Ord. No. 1992:619]
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental to the principal use of
a building, such as the office of a professional person, customary home
occupations or a garage.
ALTERING — To make a change in, to modify, to vary in some degree or to
change some of the elements, ingredients or details without substituting an
entirely new sign or components or destroying the identity of the sign being
changed.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
§ 200-4 WATER § 200-5
189:729
AREA OF SIGN — The area enclosed by the perimeter of the sign, including
its background, if any, but excluding the structure of the sign, its supports
and ornamentation, if any. For wall signs having no background, an
imaginary rectangle shall be calculated surrounding each letter or symbol.
The summed area of each said rectangle shall be considered the total "area
of the sign." For parallel double-faced ground signs, erected as a single or
joined units, the maximum area permitted shall be calculated on one (the
largest) side only.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
AWNING — A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall
of a building constructed of either cloth or metal on a supporting
framework.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly above and partly
below grade and having at least 1/2 its entire height above grade.[Added
8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:740]
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets or by streets and streams or by
streets and Borough boundary lines.
BOCA CODE — Refers to the Building Officials and Code Administrators
International Basic Building Code of 1993 and/or any subsequent
amendments.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal,
process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind.[Amended 4-21-1980
by Ord. No. 1980:372; 10-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2000:906]
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance between the average elevation
(calculated by taking the four corner elevations and the four midpoint
elevations and dividing them by eight) of the existing grade or the finished
grade, whichever is lower, around the foundation of the building to an
elevation of the highest point of the roof surface, inclusive of any parapet,
fixtures or screening carried on or above the roof surface if the roof is flat
or, in the case of sloping roofs, to a point 1/2 the distance between the plates
and the top of the uppermost point of the roof; except that this specified
height shall not apply to church steeples, chimneys and flagpoles. Upon
application, the municipal agency shall permit a deviation from the height
limitations specified where reasonably necessary to accommodate heating,
air-conditioning and water-supply apparatus carried on the surface of the
roof, upon a finding that not more than 25% of the roof area is devoted
to such appurtenances and provision is made for architectural screening in
harmony with the architecture of the building so that such equipment is
not visible from the surrounding properties or streets.[Added 4-21-1980
by Ord. No. 1980:372; amended 8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:740;
10-8-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:906]
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel to a street line and, if
for an existing building, drawn through the point of a building nearest to
the street line or, if for a proposed building, drawn through the point of the
proposed building nearest to the street located in accordance with Borough
of Closter Code § 200-70.[Added 2-23-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:443]
§ 200-5 CLOSTER CODE § 200-5
189:730
CELLAR — That portion of a building which is partly above and partly
below grade and having at least 1/2 its entire height below grade.[Added
8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:740]
CENTER LINE OF STREET — A line midway between and parallel to the
property lines or as established by filed maps.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS — Any group, association, corporation or
entity organized for any lawful purpose other than for pecuniary profit,
including, without being limited to, any one or more of the following
purposes: benevolent; eleemosynary; educational; cemetery; civic;
patriotic; political; religious; social; fraternal; literary; cultural; athletic;
scientific; agricultural; horticultural; animal husbandry; volunteer fire
company; ambulance, first aid or rescue; professional, commercial,
industrial or trade association; and labor union and cooperative purposes.
[Added 9-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-633190]
CORNER LOT — A lot which has a frontage contiguous to more than one
street or other public open space through which there is a permanent
access to the lot.[Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
COURT — An unoccupied open space other than a yard. An "outer court" is
one which extends to the street or to the front or rear yard. An "inner court"
is any other court.
CURB LEVEL — The permanently established grade of the street in front of
the midpoint of the lot. Where a lot level is higher than the curb level, the
average elevation of the former along the building line may be taken as a
base for measuring the height of a building, side yard or court. Where a lot
fronts on two or more streets of different levels, the curb level of the higher
street may be taken as the base for measuring the height of a building or
open spaces to a distance of 100 feet back from the street with the higher
curb level.
DISTRICT — One of any zones or use districts as designated in this
chapter.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall
also include the painting of wall signs.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No.
1998:778]
FAMILY — Includes any number of individuals living and cooking together
as a single housekeeping unit.
FLAG LOT — A lot that does not have a continuous width from the street
to the building setback line at least equal to the minimum street frontage
required. For purposes of this definition, the portion of the lot abutting an
improved street shall not be declared to be a private road or private street
so as to defeat the intent and purpose of this chapter.[Added 4-29-1987 by
Ord. No. 1987:538]
190. Editor's Note: The former definition of "Construction Official," added 10-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998:778, which immediately followed this definition, was deleted 9-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001:848.
§ 200-5 WATER § 200-5
189:731
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal habitable areas of every
floor(s) of a residential building measured from the exterior face of the
exterior walls. Floor area shall include basements and attics where 60% or
more of the ceiling height is a minimum of seven feet, enclosed porches,
mezzanines, lofts, breezeways, roofed balconies, garages and roofed
carports and other accessory structures. Floor area shall not include cellars
or open porches.[Added 7-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:671; amended
8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:740; 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:953]
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the floor area of all residential buildings
and accessory structures compared to the total area of the lot(s).[Added
8-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:740; amended 12-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005:953]
FRONT YARD — A required open, unoccupied space within and extending
the full width of the lot between the front property line and the main
front wall of the building or projection of more than 18 inches therefrom.
On corner lots, a front yard shall be provided on each adjoining street
frontage.[Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
GROUND SIGN — A sign supported directly on the ground by a footing,
base and pedestal or by pole(s) or upright(s) set in or on a footing and/or
base.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
GROUP GATHERING USES — A nonprofit or quasi-public use or
institutional use, including but not limited to a church, place of worship,
public school or other educational institution, public library, museum, art
gallery, community center building and clubhouse of an incorporated
fraternal, educational or philanthropic organization.[Added 7-13-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994:671]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material that prevents absorption of
stormwater into the ground.[Added 9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:848]
HOTEL — A building used for the shelter of transient guests with at least
five sleeping rooms and whose average restaurant service to other than
overnight guests does not exceed 25% of the gross restaurant receipts.
LOT — A parcel of land occupied or which may be occupied by a building
and accessory buildings and including the open spaces required by this
chapter.
LOT DEPTH — The distance measured from the street frontage to the rear
lot line. Where the lot is irregular, the lot depth shall be the distance from
the street frontage to a line 25 feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel
to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.[Added 7-13-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994:671]
LOW-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing and occupied or reserved for occupancy by
households with a gross household income equal to 50% or less of the
median gross household income for households of the same size within
the housing region in which the housing is located, and is subject to
affordability controls.[Added 2-10-1988 by Ord. No. 1988:557]
§ 200-5 CLOSTER CODE § 200-5
189:732
MAINTENANCE; MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS — Replacement without
substantial change of any parts or supports of any signs and repainting
without change of text, design or size of any sign, without removal of the
sign from the wall or structure supporting it.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 1998:778]
MANSARD — A sloped roof or roof-like facade, architecturally comparable
to a building wall.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income for the PSMA in which Bergen
County is located, using the most recent calculations of the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development for each appropriate
household.[Added 2-10-1988 by Ord. No. 1988:557]
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Housing affordable according to New
Jersey Council on Affordable Housing and occupied or reserved for
occupancy by households with a gross household income equal to or more
than 50% but less than 80% of the median gross household income for
households of the same size within the housing region in which the housing
is located, and is subject to affordability controls.[Added 2-10-1988 by
Ord. No. 1988:557]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A structure containing more than two
dwellings.[Added 3-9-1988 by Ord. No. 1988:558]
NONCONFORMING SIGN — [Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
OFF-STREET LOADING — No off-street loading or unloading shall be
permitted in the front or side yard of any lot. No access to loading areas
shall be permitted on corner lots from the front yard in which the main
entrance to the principal structure is located. In such case, access to
loading and unloading areas shall be permitted only in the front yard in
which the main entrance to the principal structure is not located and at a
point located to the rear of any principal structure.[Added 4-21-1980 by
Ord. No. 1980:372]
OPEN SPACE — A landscaped open area not occupied by any structures or
impervious surfaces.[Added 7-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:671]
OWNER — A person recorded as such on official public records. For the
purposes of Article XXIII, Signs, the owner of the property on which a sign
is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign, unless facts to the
contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the
Construction Official.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
PARAPET — The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.[Added
10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
A sign legally erected but not presently complying with a subsequently
enacted sign ordinance.
A.
A sign not conforming to the current Sign Ordinance191 but for which a
special permit or variance was previously granted.
B.
191. Editor's Note: See Art. XXIII, Signs, of this chapter.
§ 200-5 WATER § 200-5
189:733
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No.
1998:778]
PMSA — Primary metropolitan statistical area.[Added 3-9-1988 by Ord.
No. 1988:558]
PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE — A "principal use" is the primary or
predominate use of any lot. A "principal structure" is one devoted to the
principal use.[Added 4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
PRIVATE GARAGE — A compartment or structure appurtenant to the
principal building on the same lot, designed to house not more than four
motor vehicles for purpose of storage only. All vehicles stored in such
garage must be the property of the owner or lessee of the premises, except
that space for the storage of not more than one noncommercial vehicle may
be rented.
PUBLIC GARAGE — A structure used for the housing for rental of two or
more motor vehicles or for the repair of motor vehicles or for the sale and
hire of motor vehicles.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line opposite to the street line. In the case of
a corner lot, the "rear lot line" may be elected by the owner as either of
the two interior lot lines. On any plans filed with the Building Inspector, the
owner shall designate the rear lot line.
REAR YARD — An open space, except for permitted accessory buildings, on
the same lot with the main building and situate between the rear wall of the
building or projection therefrom in excess of 18 inches extended to the side
lines of the lot and the rear line of the lot. In the case of corner lots, the
"rear yard" shall be opposite the lot line contiguous to an arterial street. In
the event that the streets being contiguous to the lot lines of a parcel are of
the same classification, then in such event the "rear yard" shall be opposite
the main entrance of the structure facing either of such streets.[Amended
4-21-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:372]
RELETTERING — To change the lettering or descriptive symbols on a
sign without changing any of the structural parts or components of the
sign.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
RESIDENTIAL QUADRUPLEX — A multifamily building type that contains
no more than four separate residential units that are architecturally
presented as a large single-family house consistent with residential uses
located to the east and north of the zone. There are no specific requirements
relating to vertical or horizontal separations of the units within the building
(i.e., units may overlap in either or both the vertical or horizontal
plane).[Added 12-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018:1251]
ROOFLINE — The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is
higher, excluding any minor decorative details or projections.[Added
10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
SENIOR CITIZEN — A head of a household who is 62 years of age or
older.[Added 2-10-1988 by Ord. No. 1988:557]
§ 200-5 CLOSTER CODE § 200-5
189:734
SIDE YARD — An open, unobstructed space on the same lot with a building,
situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending
through from the front yard or from the street to the rear yard.
SIGN — Any device, structure, fixture or placard, made of combustible
or incombustible materials, using electronic, stationary, lighted, painted
or printed symbols and/or written copy for the purpose of informing or
directing members of the public or advertising, promoting or identifying
any institution, establishment, product, goods, services or person.[Added
10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
SOFFIT — An overhang or projection from the roofline.[Added 9-12-2001
by Ord. No. 2001:848]
STORY — That part of a building between a floor and the floor above or,
in its absence, the ceiling or roof above. A story extending less than three
feet above the curb level shall not be counted in determining the number
of stories. A story, the floor of which is below the curb level and which
extends to more than three feet above the curb level, shall be counted as
that fraction of a story that the section above the curb level bears to the
height of the entire story. Any story under a pitched roof, at the top of a
building, the floor of which is not more than two feet below the plate, shall
be counted as a half story when not more than 60% of the floor area is used
for rooms; otherwise, it shall be counted as that fraction of a story which its
floor area in rooms bears to the entire floor area of that floor.
STREET — Includes any highway, road or avenue dedicated to public use.
STREET, ACCESS — The lowest order of residential streets. An access
street provides frontage for access to lots and carries traffic having
destination or origin on the street itself. It is designed to carry the least
amount of traffic at the lowest speed. All, or the maximum number of
housing units, shall front on this class of street.[Added 7-13-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994:671]
STREET, COLLECTOR — The highest order of residential streets. A
collector street conducts and distributes traffic between lower-order
residential streets and higher-order streets (e.g., county roads) and carries
the largest volume of traffic at higher speeds. Its function is to promote free
traffic flow. Collectors should not be used as shortcuts by nonneighborhood
traffic.[Added 7-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:671]
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street with a single common ingress and egress
and with a turnaround at the end.[Added 7-13-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:671]
STREET, DEAD-END — A street with a single common ingress and
egress.[Added 7-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:671]
STREET FRONTAGE — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-ofway.[
Added 4-29-1987 by Ord. No. 1987:538]
STREET, LOCAL — A street designed to provide vehicles access to abutting
property and to discourage through traffic. A "local street" includes access
streets, culs-de-sac, loop streets, subcollector streets and dead-end streets.
§ 200-5 WATER § 200-5
189:735
A "local street" does not include collector streets or county roads.[Added
7-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:671]
STREET, SUBCOLLECTOR — The middle order of residential streets. A
subcollector street provides frontage for access to lots and carries traffic of
adjoining residential access streets. It is designed to carry somewhat higher
traffic volumes with traffic limited to motorists having origin or destination
within the immediate neighborhood. It is not intended to interconnect
adjoining neighborhoods or subdivisions and should not carry regional
through traffic.[Added 7-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:671]
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the size or heights of a
building or a change in its position on the lot.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign not intended for use for more than 60 days.
This shall include any sign, banner, pennant, flag, valance or advertising
display constructed of cloth, canvas, cardboard, wallboard or other light
materials, with or without frames.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No.
1998:778]
UNLAWFUL SIGN — Any sign not meeting the requirements of this chapter
and which has not received legal nonconforming status.[Added
10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
WALL SIGN — A sign attached on the exterior surface of a structure,
parallel to and not extending more than 12 inches from the wall of said
structure nor projecting beyond the ends of the top of the wall to which it
is attached and at least eight feet above the sidewalk or ground beneath it.
This definition includes individual letter, painted and cabinet-mounted signs
and signs on a mansard.[Added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778]
WINDOW SIGNS — A sign installed only by painted lettering, without a
contrasting background, inside a window or glazed door and intended to be
viewed from the outside. Said lettering may not occupy more than 15% of
the glazed area of any such window or door panel.[Added 10-28-1998 by
Ord. No. 1998:778]
ZONING OFFICER — The principal enforcement and administrative agent
of the Borough of Closter under this chapter.[Added 9-12-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001:848]
§ 200-5 CLOSTER CODE § 200-5
189:736
ARTICLE IV
District No. 1, Residence Area A
§ 200-6. Uses.
In Residence Area A, no buildings or premises shall be used and no building
or part of a building shall be erected, constructed or altered which shall be
arranged, intended or designed to be used for any purpose other than the
following uses:
§ 200-6.1. Conditional uses. [Added 7-13-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:670]
A. A single, detached house used as a residence by not more than one
family and accessory buildings necessary thereto. There shall not be
more than one private garage as an accessory building.
B. A church or place of worship, including a parish house, Sunday school
building and church school.
C. Public schools or other educational institutions, including playgrounds
and accessory buildings.
D. Public libraries, museums, art galleries or community center buildings.
E. Public parks or private gardens. [Amended 5-25-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:669]
F. Farms, nurseries or greenhouses, provided that said uses must reserve
on site not less than one acre of open space. [Amended 5-25-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994:669; 6-8-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:675]
G. Reservoir or water supply reservation.
H. Clubhouse of an incorporated fraternal, educational or philanthropic
organization, where the organization is not conducted for pecuniary
profit.
A. In Residence Area A, the following uses may be granted as conditional
uses by the Planning Board:
(1) A church or place of worship, including a parish house and
religious school.
B. The conditional uses set forth in Subsection A must meet the following
requirements, which shall take precedence over any permitted use
regulations for the zoning district in which the use is located:
(1) The requirements set forth on Schedule B, Limiting Schedule For
Group Gathering Uses — No. 1 Residence Area A and No. 2
Residence Area B, adopted by Ordinance No. 1994:671.192
192. Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-6 WATER § 200-6.1
189:737
(2) Any conditional use must access a collector street or county road,
and the pavement width must be not less than 36 feet along the
frontage of the conditional use property and for a distance of not
less than 300 feet in one direction therefrom, unless good cause is
established by objectors before the Planning Board. The direction
of the thirty-six-foot pavement width shall be determined by the
Planning Board based upon the direction which will have the
greatest traffic to and from the conditional use site upon issuance
of a certificate of occupancy. For purposes of this section, and
notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the property
line contiguous to the collector street or county road shall be the
front property line, and the portion of the property between the
front property line and the building setback line shall be the front
yard and the only front yard. If the property accesses more than
one collector street or county road, the front of the property shall
be where the main entrance is located as determined by the
Planning Board. Streets must be adequate to handle increased
traffic generated by the development. Improvements to streets, if
necessary to support increased traffic, will be borne by the
applicant.
(3) No use shall be permitted except uses specifically incorporated by
the Planning Board approval. No portion of the property lying
within the required setbacks set forth in Schedule B193 shall be
used for any purpose excepting those permitted by Footnotes 1 and
2 of Limiting Schedule B. No portion of any off-street parking area
shall be used for any purpose but off-street parking. No outdoor
activities (e.g., parties and fairs) shall be conducted without
approval by the Mayor and Council, and no structure, including
tents, canopies, awnings or recreational facilities, permanent or
temporary, shall be constructed, erected or brought in the lot that
has not been part of the approved site plan, unless specifically
approved by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and Council shall
consider the impact of the outdoor activities or structures on the
surrounding neighborhood and its relationship to the originally
approved use. The Planning Board shall not have jurisdiction to
review, approve or reject the outdoor activities or structures
referenced herein. This prohibition shall not be deemed to prohibit
any use or activity required by religious belief or tenet to be
conducted outdoors.
(4) No portion of the premises may be used, leased or borrowed by any
person not an owner, director, religious leader, officer, trustee or
member or immediate family member of the owner, director,
religious leader, officer, trustee or member of the conditionally
permitted user of the property. By way of example only, a house of
worship may have a wedding reception for a member of the
congregation (or a member of the family of the congregation
193. Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-6.1 CLOSTER CODE § 200-6.1
189:738
§ 200-7. Walks and driveways.
There may be contained in said district walks or driveways, but not as an
access to a business, commercial or industrial use.
§ 200-8. Space requirements.
No residence hereafter erected shall contain less than 900 square feet of
floor area, exclusive of porches and garages, where all living spaces are
located on one floor and less than 1,200 square feet where living spaces are
divided on two floors. In computing the square foot area of the second floor,
75% of said floor area shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet
six inches. Finished living spaces in basements or attics shall not constitute
any part of the required area.
member) but may not cater a wedding for a person unaffiliated with
the conditionally permitted user. For purposes of this Subsection
B(4), "immediate family member" shall mean a spouse, parent or
child.
(5) There shall be no outdoor lighting or spot lighting shining directly
or indirectly on abutting property.
(6) The buffer required by Limiting Schedule B shall be sufficient to
create a visual block from surrounding homes and streets within
two years of completion of the development.
(7) The Planning Board may approve a proposed development if the
use does not substantially impair the present or future use and
enjoyment of surrounding properties and does not substantially
impair the character of the surrounding area.
(8) The Planning Board shall consider the impact of any additional
noise, traffic, odors, air pollution and similar factors on the
surrounding properties and area, relative acceptability of the lot in
terms of transportation and circulation patterns, the environmental
factors, the visual and aesthetic impacts, the adequacy of existing
and proposed utility and drainage systems, the public interest in
the existence of such use and the relative availability of other
suitable sites for such use, the sufficiency of related uses and
services, the adequacy of proposed barriers and safety devices and
other such factors as may be relevant to the proposed use and the
area in question.
(9) The Planning Board may impose any other conditions necessary to
maintain the character of the neighborhood and to protect the
rights and privacy of neighbors.
§ 200-6.1 WATER § 200-8
189:739

ARTICLE V
District No. 2, Residence Area B
§ 200-9. Uses.
In Residence Area B, no building or premises shall be used and no building
or part of a building shall be erected, constructed or altered which shall be
arranged, intended or designed to be used for any purpose other than the
following uses:
A. Any use permitted in Residence Area A.
B. Single detached homes used for not more than two families per
structure and a double house used as a two-family residence; provided,
however, that the same shall be permissible only in the conversion of a
residential structure existing upon the effective date of this chapter and
only where said structure and land upon which it is existing complies
with the provisions of this chapter and with the provisions of all other
municipal ordinances and codes.
C. Affordable accessory apartment. [Added 12-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2018:1246]
(1) Accessory apartments are permitted accessory uses, provided the
units are affordable to low- and moderate-income households, for
those properties that are located in the District No. 2, Residence
Area B and:
(a) Are located in the Closter Historic District pursuant to the
April 6, 2011 Closter Historic Preservation Plan; or
(b) Have frontage on a Bergen County Road (listed below):
Knickerbocker Ave., Schraalenburgh Road, Harrington Ave.,
County Road, Old Closter Dock Road, High Street, Durie Ave.,
Demarest Ave., Piermont Road and Old Hook Road.
(2) Accessory apartments shall comply with all applicable statutes and
regulations of the State of New Jersey in addition to all building
codes.
(3) Accessory apartments shall be subject to Uniform Housing
Affordability Control (U.H.A.C.) requirements, including marketing
and rental prices, but are exempt from the bedroom mix
requirements. Accessory apartments shall be affordable to low- or
moderate-income households as per U.H.A.C. requirements.
(4) At the time of initial occupancy of the unit and for at least 10 years
thereafter, the accessory apartment shall be rented only to a
household that is either a low- or moderate-income household.
There shall be a recorded deed or declaration of covenants and
restrictions running with the land for 10 years that is applied to the
property upon which the accessory apartment is located. This deed
§ 200-9 WATER § 200-9
189:741
§ 200-9.1. Conditional uses. [Added 7-13-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:670]
In Residence Area B, the conditional uses established by § 200-6.1 may
be granted as conditionally permitted uses by the Planning Board upon
meeting the same requirements set forth in § 200-6.1B.
restriction shall limit its subsequent rental or sale of the unit and
the accessory apartment. A copy of the recorded deed shall be
provided to the zoning officer of the Borough of Closter prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(5) At the conclusion of the ten-year time period, the deed restriction
may be extended. If the deed restriction is not extended, the
homeowner shall apply for the requisite municipal approvals to
maintain the accessory apartment.
(6) The Borough shall provide $20,000 per unit to subsidize the
creation of each accessory apartment unit.
(7) The appropriate utility authority must certify that there is water
and sewer infrastructure with sufficient capacity to serve the
proposed accessory apartment.
(8) There is no bedroom distribution requirement for accessory
apartments.
(9) The maximum permitted square footage for an accessory
apartment shall be 1,200 square feet.
(10) Property owners wishing to apply to create an accessory apartment
shall submit to the Construction Code Official and the Zoning
Officer the following:
(a) A floor plan(s) showing the location, size and relationship of
both the accessory apartment and the primary dwelling within
the building. Said plan shall be prepared by a professional
licensed in the State of New Jersey, such as a licensed
architect, surveyor, engineer or planner.
(b) Elevations showing the modifications of any exterior building
facade to which changes are proposed.
(c) A plan showing the location of the existing dwelling and other
existing buildings; all property lines; proposed addition, if any,
along with the minimum building setback lines; the required
parking spaces for both dwelling units; and any man-made
conditions which might affect construction. The plan should
confirm that the dwelling unit with the accessory apartment
meets all required bulk regulations and setbacks for the zone
district in which it is located.
§ 200-9 CLOSTER CODE § 200-10
189:742
§ 200-10. Space requirements.
No single-family residence area hereafter erected shall contain less than
900 square feet for floor area, exclusive of porches and garages, where all
living spaces are located on one floor and less than 1,200 square feet where
living spaces are divided on two floors. In computing the square feet area
of the second floor, 75% of said floor area shall have a ceiling height of not
less than seven feet six inches. Finished living spaces in basements or attics
shall not constitute any part of the required area.
§ 200-10 WATER § 200-10
189:743

ARTICLE VI
District No. 3, Business Area
§ 200-11. Uses. [Amended 5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:669;
9-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:726; 10-11-2000 by Ord. No. 2000:837]
In the Business Zone, no building or premises shall be used and no building
or part of a building shall be erected, constructed or altered which shall be
arranged, intended or designed to be used for any purpose other than the
following uses:
§ 200-12. Conditional uses. [Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003:893]
In the Business Area District, until such time that the Borough of Closter
has addressed its 1987-1999 housing obligation, the following use may be
granted as a conditional USC by the Planning Board. Accessory apartment,
A. Any use permitted in Residence Area A and Residence Area B.
B. Offices of a lawyer, accountant, medical doctor or similar professional
offices, bank, corporation, mortgage loan association, real estate or
insurance agent or broker.
C. Shops or stores for retail merchandise, provided that there is no
fabricating, manufacturing, converting, altering or assembling of
articles except as incidental to the particular retail trade to be
conducted. By way of illustration the following retail uses are
permitted: Appliance stores, art galleries, antique shops, bakeries, book
and stationary stores, butchers, candy and confectionery stores,
computer, telephone and other electronic equipment sales and rentals,
delicatessens, department stores, drug stores, dry cleaning and laundry
establishments, electrical repairs and sales stores, florists and garden
supply shops, food and grocery stores, furniture stores, hardware
stores, hobby and crafts stores, office equipment stores, package liquor
stores, painting, plumbing and wallpaper stores, pet shops,
photographic equipment and supply stores, shoe repair shops,
supermarkets, travel agencies, undertaker and funeral parlor,
videotapes and equipment sales, rentals and repairs, wearing apparel
shops.
D. Movie theaters, restaurants, taverns or bars, ice cream and soft drink
parlors.
E. Service establishments, including barber shops, manicure shops,
beauty parlors, hairdressers, health and fitness spas, tailor, milliner and
dressmakers.
F. Outdoor cafes either on private property or within the public sidewalk
right-of-way as accessory uses to an eating establishment, provided that
the same meets the licensing requirements of Chapter 141, Outdoor
Cafes.
§ 200-11 WATER § 200-12
189:745
defined as a self-contained residential dwelling unit with a kitchen, sanitary
facilities, sleeping quarters and a private entrance, which is created for
occupancy by a low- or a moderate-income household, as defined by the
Council on Affordable Housing; and subject to the following conditions:
A. The apartment is located above the first floor within an existing
permitted principal or accessory building
B. The building containing the apartment conforms to the height
limitations and yard requirements established within the zoning
district;
C. The apartment shall be in full compliance with all applicable health and
construction codes;
D. Each apartment shall have a minimum of two rooms (excluding
bathrooms);
E. Each apartment shall have a separate door with direct access to the
outside or to a hall with direct access to the outside;
F. The potable water supply and sewage disposal system for the accessory
apartment shall be adequate;
G. The household occupying the unit must meet the income limitations
established by the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH) for the
Bergen-Passaic-Hudson-Sussex Housing Region;
H. Affordability controls of at least 10 years shall be imposed on the
accessory apartment via a deed restriction acceptable to the Borough's
attorney;
I. Rents of accessory apartments shall be affordable to low- or moderateincome
households as per COAH regulations and shall include a utility
allowance. If more than one apartment is proposed for any property, at
least 50% of all apartments shall be affordable to low-income
households; and
J. The owner of the accessory apartment(s) shall submit an affidavit of
continuing use every two years.
§ 200-12 CLOSTER CODE § 200-12
189:746
ARTICLE VII
District No. 4, Commercial Area
§ 200-13. Uses.
In the Commercial Area, no building or premises shall be used and no
building or part of building shall be erected, constructed or altered which
shall be arranged, intended or designed to be used for any purpose other
than the following uses:
A. Any use permitted in Residence Area A, Residence Area B and the
Business Area.
B. Coal yard, lumber or building material yard, contractor's yard,
warehouse, express depot or supply house.
C. Storage tanks for petroleum, gasoline, fuel oil or other inflammable
products not in excess of 20,000 gallons in one tank for the purpose of
retail distribution, provided that all regulations of the National Board of
Fire Underwriters are strictly complied with.
D. Shops for plumber, pipe fitter, tinsmith or metal worker.
E. Woodworking shop.
F. Newspaper or job printing.
G. Beverage or milk bottling or distributing station.
H. Manufacture of clothing, garments, textiles, embroidery, artificial
flowers, curtains, awnings and window shades.
I. Stone or monument works.
J. Public garages, service stations, automobile salesrooms.
K. Livery stables and riding academies.
L. A church or place of worship, including a parish house and religious
school. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:669]
M. Public schools or other educational institutions, including playgrounds
and accessory buildings. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:669]
N. Public libraries, museums, art galleries or community center buildings.
[Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:669]
O. Clubhouse of an incorporated fraternal, educational or philanthropic
organization. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:669]
P. A limousine or livery service licensed pursuant to the Borough of
Closter Municipal Code.194 [Added 10-23-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:731]
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 129, Limousine or Livery Service.
§ 200-13 WATER § 200-14
189:747
§ 200-14. Machinery restrictions.
No internal-combustion machine shall be used in connection with any of
the above trades or industries or for any other purpose unless vibration
is eliminated and the machine or machines are equipped with effective
mufflers or silencers.
§ 200-15. Process and operation regulation.
No process of manufacture or operation in connection with any of the above
trades or industries shall be permitted that is noxious or offensive by reason
of the emission of odor, gas, dust, smoke or noise or that is dangerous to
public health or safety.
§ 200-14 CLOSTER CODE § 200-15
189:748
ARTICLE VIII
District No. 4A, Office Area A
[Added 12-23-1970 by Ord. No. 1970:213-A; amended 7-12-1972 by
Ord. No. 1972:231]
§ 200-16. Purpose.
The Office Area A District is established for the development of integrated
areas so located and designed as to constitute a harmonious and
appropriate part of the physical development of the Borough; to provide
protection to adjacent residential zones by virtue of serving as transitional
area between residential and other nonresidential developments or zones;
and to allocate space for small-scale professional and administrative office
uses utilizing open space and park-like surroundings, free from
encroachment from residential uses, commercial establishments, industries
or other office uses not able to conform to the hereinprovided restrictions.
§ 200-17. Permitted uses or structures.
A. In Office Area A Districts, no lot, plot, parcel or tract of land shall be
used and no building or other structure shall be used and no building or
other structure shall be built, altered or erected to be used for any
purpose other than that which shall be limited to professional or
administrative offices not engaged in retail or wholesale sales of goods
on the premises and not engaged in the repair or servicing of goods
thereon, excepting as set forth in Subsection B below. [Amended
5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:669]
B. There shall be permitted within this zone district the following uses:
(1) Professional or administrative office buildings.
(2) Educational or philanthropic organizations.
(3) Municipal uses.
(4) Private schools, limited to dancing, music, languages, arts and
crafts and business, except schools teaching or training in manual,
fabricating or manufacturing trades.
(5) Public utility office buildings.
(6) Libraries, museums and art galleries not involving retail sales.
(7) Off-street parking facilities as an accessory use.
(8) Laboratory or research facilities as incidental or accessory use to
professional office use of physicians, dentists and psychologists.
(9) A church or place of worship, including a parish house and
religious school. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:669]
§ 200-16 WATER § 200-17
189:749
§ 200-18. Prohibited uses.
Any uses other than those uses permitted by § 200-17 of this Article shall
be prohibited. Without in any way limiting the generality and prohibition of
this section, nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to permit
any of the following uses in any Office Area A District:
§ 200-19. Dimensional requirements.
Within the Office Area A Zone District, the following dimensional
requirements shall apply:
(10) Public schools or other educational institutions, including
playgrounds and accessory buildings. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994:669]
(11) Community center buildings. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:669]
(12) Clubhouse of an incorporated fraternal, educational or
philanthropic organization. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:669]
A. Residential uses.
B. On-premises retail or wholesale sales.
C. Storage or warehousing.
D. Billboards.
E. Automotive repair, service or sales.
F. Gasoline service stations.
G. Kennels or stables.
A. Minimum lot area: 45,000 square feet.
B. Lot width at front lot line: 150 feet.
C. Minimum building setback:
(1) Front yard: 75 feet.
(2) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(3) Side yard: 30 feet, except that where two or more property owners
propose to erect abutting office structures which are developed
and maintained as a unit, the Planning Board may waive the side
yard requirements between buildings, provided that the
uninterrupted length of any one building shall not exceed 200 feet
in length, and provided that the Planning Board will have
appropriate assurance that the office complex will provide
§ 200-17 CLOSTER CODE § 200-19
189:750
§ 200-20. Buffer strip.
§ 200-21. Required planting.
Buffer strips shall be required to be planted with evergreen trees so as to
form an effective screen. Such plantings shall not be less than five feet in
height above the ground when planted and spaced not less than 10 feet
apart.
§ 200-22. Open space.
Unoccupied, landscaped open space areas with a minimum width of 15 feet
shall be required from all property lines in the Office Area A District. Open
space areas shall be maintained at all times. Off-street parking, outdoor
storage or any use other than landscaping shall be prohibited in the open
space areas, except that entrance and exit drives not to exceed 30 feet in
width shall be permitted, subject to Planning Board site plan review and
approval. Open space areas may be included in buffer strips.
§ 200-23. Off-street parking.
There shall be provided off-street parking in accordance with the
requirements of the Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough of Closter.195 All offstreet
service entrances for loading or unloading shall be in the rear yard.
harmonious and unified exterior facades on all sides. In no case
shall there be less than a total of 60 feet of side yards nor less than
20 feet in any one side yard for any one structure.
D. Maximum total building coverage of lot: 20%.
E. Maximum building height: two stories or 30 feet.
A. A twenty-five-foot buffer strip, in addition to required setbacks, shall be
required for the separation of Office Area A District from any other
zoning district, except Office Area B District.
B. Construction of any kind, outdoor storage and parking of vehicles shall
be prohibited in all buffer strips.
C. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Landscaping.
(2) Fences or walls not to exceed five feet in height, provided that the
same shall have finish facing on both sides.
(3) Entrance and exit drives not to exceed 15 feet in width, subject to
Planning Board site plan review and approval, provided that such
entrance or exit drives shall be not less than 15 feet from the
nearest property line and that a minimum fifteen-foot-wide strip is
landscaped and planted in accordance with the requirements of the
following § 200-21, Required planting.
§ 200-19 WATER § 200-24
189:751
§ 200-24. Accessory buildings.
All accessory buildings shall be prohibited in the Office Area A Zone
District.
195. Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
§ 200-24 CLOSTER CODE § 200-24
189:752
ARTICLE IX
District No. 4B, Office Area B
[Added 12-23-1970 by Ord. No. 1970:213-A; amended 7-12-1972 by
Ord. No. 1972:231]
§ 200-25. Purpose.
The Office Area B District is established for the development of integrated
areas so located and designed as to constitute a harmonious and
appropriate part of the physical development of the Borough; provide
protection to adjacent residential zones by virtue of serving as transitional
areas between residential and other nonresidential developments or zones;
and allocate open space for large-scale professional business and
administrative office uses utilizing open space and park-like surroundings,
free from encroachment from residential uses, commercial establishments,
industries or other office uses not able to conform to the hereinprovided
restrictions.
§ 200-26. Permitted uses or structures.
A. In Office Area B District, no lot, plot, parcel or tract of land shall be
used and no building or other structure shall be used and no building or
other structure shall be built, altered or erected to be used for any
purpose other than that which shall be limited to business, professional
or administrative offices not engaged in retail or wholesale sales of
goods on the premises and not engaged in the repair or servicing of
goods thereon, excepting as set forth in Subsection B below. [Amended
5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:669]
B. There shall be permitted within this zone district the following uses:
(1) Professional, business or administrative office buildings.
(2) Banks and savings and loan institutions.
(3) Research or laboratory uses as incidental and accessory uses to
main office uses, such as medical X-ray laboratories, provided that
such accessory uses shall not exceed 20% of the office space floor
area.
(4) Municipal uses.
(5) Educational or philanthropic organizations.
(6) Private schools limited to dancing, music, languages, arts and
crafts and business, excepting schools teaching or training in
manual, fabricating or manufacturing trades.
(7) Public utility office buildings.
(8) Libraries, museums and art galleries not involving retail sales.
§ 200-25 WATER § 200-26
189:753
§ 200-27. Prohibited uses.
Any uses other than those uses permitted by § 200-26 of this Article shall
be prohibited. Without in any way limiting the generality and prohibition of
this section, nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to permit
any of the following uses in any Office Area B District:
§ 200-28. Dimensional requirements.
Within the Office Area B Zone District, the following dimensional
requirements shall apply:
(9) Blueprinting and offset printing establishments as an accessory
service use to offices.
(10)Off-street parking facilities as an accessory use.
(11) A church or place of worship, including a parish house and
religious school. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:669]
(12) Public schools or other educational institutions, including
playgrounds and accessory buildings. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord.
No. 1994:669]
(13) Community center buildings. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:669]
(14) Clubhouse of an incorporated fraternal, educational or
philanthropic organization. [Added 5-25-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:669]
A. Commercial newspaper printing, book-printing or bookbinding
establishments.
B. Research.
C. On-premises retail and wholesale sales.
D. Storage or warehousing.
E. Automotive repair, service and sales.
F. Gasoline service stations.
G. Billboards.
H. Kennels and stables.
A. Minimum lot area: 80,000 square feet.
B. Lot width at building line: 250 feet.
C. Minimum building setback:
(1) Front yard: 75 feet.
§ 200-26 CLOSTER CODE § 200-28
189:754
§ 200-29. Buffer strip.
§ 200-30. Required planting.
Buffers shall be required to be planted with evergreens so as to form an
effective screen. Such plantings shall not be less than five feet in height
above the ground when planted and spaced not less than 15 feet apart.
§ 200-31. Open space.
Unoccupied, landscaped open space areas with a minimum width of 15 feet
shall be required from all property lines in the Office Area B District. Open
space areas shall be maintained at all times. Off-street parking, outdoor
storage or any other use than landscaping shall be prohibited in the open
space areas, except that entrance and exit drives not to exceed 30 feet in
(2) Rear yard: 60 feet.
(3) Side yard: 40 feet, except that where two or more property owners
propose to erect abutting office structures which are developed
and maintained as a unit, the Planning Board may waive the side
yard requirements between buildings, provided that the
uninterrupted length of any one building shall not exceed 200 feet
in length, and provided that the Planning Board will have
appropriate assurance that the office complex will provide
harmonious and unified exterior facades on all sides. In no case
shall there be less than a total of 80 feet of side yards nor less than
30 feet in any one side yard for any one structure.
D. Maximum total building coverage of lot: 25%.
E. Maximum building height: two stories or 30 feet.
A. A twenty-five-foot buffer strip, in addition to required setbacks, shall be
required for the separation of Office Area B District from any other
zoning district, except Office Area A District.
B. Construction of any kind, outdoor storage and parking of vehicles shall
be prohibited in all buffer strips.
C. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(1) Landscaping.
(2) Fences or walls, not to exceed five feet in height, provided that the
same shall have finish facing on both sides.
(3) Entrance and exit drives not to exceed 15 feet in width, subject to
site plan review and approval, provided that such entrance or exit
drives shall be not less than 15 feet from the nearest property line
and that a minimum fifteen-foot-wide strip is landscaped and
planted in accordance with the requirements of the following
§ 200-30, Required planting.
§ 200-28 WATER § 200-31
189:755
width shall be permitted, subject to Planning Board site plan review and
approval. Open spaces may be included in the buffer strip.
§ 200-32. Off-street parking.
There shall be provided off-street parking in accordance with the
requirements of the Site Plan Ordinance of the Borough of Closter.196 All offstreet
service entrances for loading or unloading shall be in the rear yard.
§ 200-33. Accessory buildings.
All accessory buildings shall be prohibited in the Office Area B Zone
District.
196. Editor's Note: See Ch. 173, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review.
§ 200-31 CLOSTER CODE § 200-33
189:756
ARTICLE X
District No. 5, Industrial Area197
§ 200-34. Uses. [Amended 4-8-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:619]
In the Industrial Area, no building or premises shall be used or maintained
for any except the following uses and purposes, and no building shall
hereafter be erected, enlarged or altered if, as so erected or as a result
of such enlargement or alteration, such building or any part thereof is
arranged, designed or intended to be used for any except the following uses
and purposes:
§ 200-35. Conditional uses. [Added 4-8-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:619]
In the Industrial Area, the following uses may be granted as conditional uses
by the Planning Board:
A. Any process of manufacturing, fabricating, converting, altering,
finishing, assembling or warehousing, all of which shall be conducted
solely within the confines of a building; provided, however, that no
building or premises shall be used for any industry or purpose which is
or may reasonably be expected to be noxious, obnoxious or offensive by
reason of causing or emitting odor, smoke, vapor, gas, dust, refuse
matter, noise or vibration or that is dangerous or harmful to the
comfort, peace, health, general welfare or safety of the community or
that involves any explosion menace or any serious fire hazard.
B. Accessory retail sales shall be a permitted use within the zone district,
provided that the merchandise sold is manufactured, fabricated,
converted, altered, finished or assembled by the occupant of the
building wherein such accessory retail sales are conducted, and
provided that said use is conducted solely within the confines of the
building. In no case shall retail discount outlets be permitted. A
certificate of occupancy shall be required before use of any premises
for accessory retail sales, and no certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for accessory retail sales without prior Planning Board site plan
approval for said use.
C. A limousine or livery service licensed pursuant to the Borough of
Closter Municipal Code.198 [Added 10-23-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:731]
A. Any use permitted in District No. 4A, Office Area A, provided that the
use complies with all the dimensional requirements of § 200-19, the
buffer strip requirements of § 200-20, the required planting of § 200-21,
the open space requirement of § 200-22 and the off-street parking
requirements of § 200-23.
197. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 1981:408 provided that the provisions regarding Industrial Areas
be removed from the Limiting Schedule and that they be regulated by this Article.
198. Editor's Note: See Ch. 129, Limousine or Livery Service.
§ 200-34 WATER § 200-35
189:757
§ 200-36. Special uses.
No use permitted under Subsection B of § 200-34 and not permitted in
any other district shall be a matter of right under this chapter but shall
be granted only after due and proper application to the Planning Board
of the Borough of Closter and after approval of the use applied for by
said Board. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
by the Building Inspector or any other person authorized by law to issue
building permits or certificates of occupancy except after such approval
by the Planning Board. Before any building is erected, enlarged, altered
or converted to such use, a copy of the complete and final plans and
specifications for such erection, enlargement, alteration or conversion and a
detailed description of the process of manufacture, fabrication, conversion,
alteration, finish or assembly to be conducted on the premises shall be filed
and approved by the Planning Board of the Borough of Closter. The Planning
Board may deny or reject any proposed use, erection, enlargement,
alteration or conversion which may violate or tend to violate the Master
Plan of the Borough of Closter or which may violate or tend to violate
either the spirit or the letter of this chapter or the ordinance entitled
"An Ordinance to Limit and Restrict, to Specify Districts or Zones and to
Regulate Therein Buildings and Structures According to Their Construction
and the Nature of and Extent of Their Use in the Borough of Closter, New
Jersey."
§ 200-37. Operations and storage of materials. [Added 12-12-1979
by Ord. No. 1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:381;
6-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:408]
Operations and storage of goods and materials for approved uses must
be conducted solely within fully enclosed buildings other than permitted
accessory parking areas and landscape and buffer areas and sidewalks in
Zone District No. 5, Industrial Area.
§ 200-38. Minimum lot size. [Added 12-12-1979 by Ord. No.
1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:381; 6-24-1981 by
Ord. No. 1981:408]
The minimum size of any lot in Zone District No. 5, Industrial Area, shall be
30,000 square feet.
B. The uses permitted in District No. 4B, Office Area B, provided that the
use complies with the dimensional requirements of § 200-28, the buffer
strip requirement of § 200-29, the required planting of § 200-30, the
open space requirement of § 200-31 and the off-street parking
requirements of § 200-32.
C. Where a use is permitted in both District No. 4A, Office Area A, and
District No. 4B, Office Area B, the use must comply with the
requirements established for uses in District No. 4A, Office Area A.
§ 200-35 CLOSTER CODE § 200-39
189:758
§ 200-39. Minimum open space. [Added 12-12-1979 by Ord. No.
1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:381; 6-24-1981 by
Ord. No. 1981:408]
The minimum mandatory open space requirements in Zone District No. 5,
Industrial Area, shall be as follows:
§ 200-40. Minimum lot width and street frontage. [Added
12-12-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:381; 6-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:408]
The mandatory lot width and mandatory minimum street frontage
requirements for any lot in Zone District No. 5, Industrial Area, shall be 100
feet.
§ 200-41. Maximum building coverage. [Added 12-12-1979 by Ord.
No. 1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:381; 6-24-1981
by Ord. No. 1981:408]
The maximum total building coverage of any lot in Zone District No. 5,
Industrial Area, shall be 35%.
§ 200-42. Maximum coverage by impervious surfaces. [Added
12-12-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:381; 6-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:408]
The maximum coverage of any lot in Zone District No. 5, Industrial Area, by
impervious surfaces shall be limited to not more than 75% of the total area
of the lot.
§ 200-43. Maximum building height and number of stories. [Added
12-12-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:381; 6-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:408]
A. Front yard: to 50 feet from the property line. Parking shall be
prohibited in the front yard.
B. Rear yard: 50 feet.
C. Side yard: 25 feet for each side.
D. Buffer zone: five feet around the perimeter of the building.
A. The maximum height of any building in Zone District No. 5, Industrial
Area, shall be limited to 25 feet.
B. The maximum number of stories in any building in Zone District No. 5,
Industrial Area, shall be one story, except, however, that a building used
exclusively and solely for office purposes may be not more than two
stories. The maximum height limitation in Subsection A above shall
apply to all buildings in Zone District No. 5, Industrial Area.
§ 200-39 WATER § 200-44
189:759
§ 200-44. Required planting contiguous to residence districts.
[Added 12-12-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by
Ord. No. 1980:381; 6-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:408]
§ 200-45. Percentage of lot devoted to landscaping. [Added
12-12-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No.
1980:381; 6-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:408]
Each lot in Zone District No. 5, Industrial Area, shall have not less than 25%
of its area devoted to planted and landscape area. The planting, grading,
plant species and location of planted area shall be subject to the approval
of the Planning Board of site plan review. The location and size of required
buffer strips, however, shall be determined by the requirements of § 200-44.
§ 200-46. Applicability of subdivision provisions. [Added 12-12-1979
by Ord. No. 1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:381;
6-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:408]
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all provisions of the
Subdivision of Land Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Borough of Closter,
which constitutes Chapter 173 of the Code of the Borough of Closter, shall
apply to Zone District No. 5, Industrial Area.
§ 200-47. Loading docks. [Added 12-12-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:368;
amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:381; 6-24-1981 by Ord. No.
1981:408; 7-27-1983 by Ord. No. 1983:453]
The following shall apply to Zone District No. 4, Commercial Area, and Zone
District No. 5, Industrial Area:
A. There shall be a buffer strip not less than 75 feet wide on any lot in Zone
District 5, Industrial Area, on all portions of the perimeter of the lot that
are contiguous to Zone District No. 1, Residence Area A, or District No.
2, Residence Area B. This planted buffer strip shall be planted with
evergreens at least six feet in height throughout its entire length, and
said plantings shall be maintained. The planting shall be so located with
sufficient density as to screen from view any buildings located on the lot
from any contiguous residential zone (Zone District No. 1, Residence
Area A, or Zone District No. 2, Residence Area B). Such planting shall
be subject to the approval of the Planning Board on site plan review.
Any existing growth in such buffer strip shall be preserved, if such
existing growth supplements the desired screening effect. [Amended
11-13-2013 by Ord. No. 2013:1151]
B. There shall be no loading areas, loading, parking areas or parking
permitted in any buffer strip in Zone District No. 5, Industrial Area.
C. The number of square feet of lot area devoted to a planted buffer strip
shall be counted in determining whether or not sufficient planted area
is provided to meet the minimum planted area requirement set forth in
§ 200-45.
§ 200-44 CLOSTER CODE § 200-47
189:760
A. All loading berths shall be located along the rear wall of a building. All
loading berths shall be shielded by the erection of side walls directly
adjacent to the outer perimeter of the loading berths to a height of not
less than 10 feet and for the length of the loading berth as required by
the Borough of Closter Code § 173-49B. No more than two side walls
shall be necessary for any building so long as the two outermost loading
berths each are shielded by at least one side wall.
B. If a side wall shielding a loading berth extends from the building, a
landscaped area not less than five feet in width shall be provided along
the outside of such side wall for the full length of the side wall, as
extended from the building. Plantings shall be determined by the Shade
Tree Commission.
C. In addition to the provisions of Borough of Closter Code § 173-46
governing the minimum number of loading berths, the maximum
number of loading berths permitted in Zone District No. 4, Commercial
Area, and Zone District No. 5, Industrial Area, shall be the following:
Building Floor Area, Excluding
Area of Loading Berths
(square feet)
Maximum Permitted Number of
Loading Berths
0 to 4,999 0
5,000 to 9,999 1
10,000 to 14,999 2
15,000 to 19,999 3
20,000 to 29,999 4
30,000 to 39,999 5
40,000 to 50,000 6
Thereafter, per every 20,000
square feet and no part thereof
1
D. The interior area encompassed by the loading area required by
§ 200-47A shall not be included in determining the total building
coverage pursuant to § 200-41.
E. The interior area encompassed by the loading area required by
§ 200-47A shall be included in determining the maximum lot coverages
pursuant to § 200-42.
F. It is expressly understood that the provisions of § 200-47C are design
standards and are not subject to the exception process of Borough of
Closter Code § 173-8. Such provisions are intended to be substantive
zoning regulations which may be modified only by variance, pursuant to
law, by the Zoning Board of Adjustment and/or Planning Board of the
Borough of Closter.
§ 200-47 WATER § 200-48
189:761
§ 200-48. Masonry block prohibited. [Added 12-12-1979 by Ord. No.
1979:368; amended 6-23-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:381; 6-24-1981 by
Ord. No. 1981:408]
The outside of buildings hereafter erected in Zone District No. 5, Industrial
Area, shall not consist of unfinished masonry block or painted unfinished
masonry block.
§ 200-48 CLOSTER CODE § 200-48
189:762
ARTICLE XI
AH (Affordable Housing) District
[Added 2-10-1988 by Ord. No. 1988:557; amended 3-9-1988 by
1988:558; 9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:848; 3-12-2003 by Ord. No.
2003:891]
§ 200-49. Purpose.
The purpose of the Affordable Housing (AH) District is to provide within
the Borough of Closter affordable living opportunities for people with
disabilities and for senior citizens.
§ 200-50. Permitted uses.
No building or premises shall be used and no building or part of a building
shall be erected, constructed or altered which shall he arranged, intended,
or designed to be used for any purpose other than the following uses:
§ 200-51. Area, bulk, and dimensional requirements.
A. Group homes with no more than 16 bedrooms, pursuant to the
agreement dated May 23, 2001, between the Borough of Closter and
Spectrum for Living Development, Inc. (Spectrum), provided that
Spectrum prepares an acceptable plan for administering controls on
affordability.
B. Senior citizen housing limited to townhouse developments designed
and operated for mature adults aged 55 and over, at a maximum density
of six units/acre with a 20% set-aside. Any affordable Senior citizen
units shall comply with the Borough's Affordable Housing Ordinance.199
A. Group homes.
(1) Minimumtractsize: four acres.
(2) Minimum open space: 25% of tract area.
(3) Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories/30 feet.
B. Senior citizen housing (townhouses).
(1) Mininium tract size: one acre.
(2) Maximum density: six units/acre.
(3) Dimensional requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 2,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width at setback: 22 feet.
(c) Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories/30 feet.
199. Editor's Note: See Art. XIB, Affordable Housing.
§ 200-49 WATER § 200-51
189:763
§ 200-52. (Reserved)
(d) Minimum yards:
[1] Front: 25 feet.
[2] Side: 10 feet (end units only).
[3] Rear: 25 feet.
(e) Maximum impervious surface: 50%.
(4) Dwellings shall be arranged in groups or clusters of not more than
six units per building.
(5) Any common areas within a townhouse development, which are not
accepted by the Township, shall be deeded to a corporation,
association, individuals, or other legal entity consisting of a
majority of the property owners within the development for their
use, control, managemnent, and maintenance.
§ 200-51 CLOSTER CODE § 200-52
189:764
ARTICLE XIA
Residential Quadruplex
[Added 12-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018:1251]
§ 200-53. Intent; uses and number of units.
§ 200-54. Design requirements and bulk standards.
A. The intent of the RQ Zone District is to provide for a diversity of housing
types to meet the needs of Closter's residents and to implement the
terms of the June 2018 settlement agreement in the matter captioned.
"In the Matter of the Application of the Borough of Closter for A
Determination of Mount Laurel Compliance" (Docket No. BERL-
6372-15), which requires, in part, the provision of affordable housing
on-site.
B. In Residential Quadruplex, no buildings or premises shall be used and
no building or part of a building shall be erected, constructed or altered
which shall be arranged, intended or designed to be used for any
purpose other than the following uses:
(1) All permitted, conditional and accessory uses permitted in
Residence Area A, in accordance with all design requirements
contained in §§ 200-6 through 8.
(2) Quadruplex dwellings, with the provision of a 17% set-aside of
affordable units as defined in §§ 200-54.9 and 200-54.13.
(a) The total number of units is limited to 12 dwellings, inclusive of
two affordable units. This is nominally 3.75 units per acre;
however, regardless of tract size in excess of three acres, the
total number of units is fixed at 12.
(b) The affordable housing component shall include one twobedroom
unit affordable to households defined as low-income,
and one three-bedroom unit affordable to households defined
as moderate-income.
A. The design of buildings shall be residential in character, reflecting the
architectural types and practices of the development in Closter
Borough and shall comply with the following:
(1) Site plan approval is required. Required documents, plans and
materials for site plan review include, but are not limited to site
plan, survey, architectural elevations and floor plans, and NJDEP
approvals, if applicable, shall be provided at the time of application
for site plan approval.
(2) The residential quadruplex buildings should be complimentary in
appearance; however variations in setback, materials, colors and
design including breaks in the building facade setback and roofline
shall be encouraged to reduce and separate the building mass.
§ 200-53 WATER § 200-54
189:765
(3) The maximum footprint of each building is limited to 2,600 square
feet.
(4) Individual market-rate dwellings may include either two or three
bedrooms per unit and may be mixed in any ratio.
(5) Interior space within individual units shall be not less than 900
square feet and not more than 1,500 square feet in size.
(6) Building height is limited to 28 feet pursuant to the definition of
building height contained in § 200-5.
(7) Any space intended for occupancy must provide a minimum ceiling
height of eight feet.
(8) All HVAC and mechanical equipment shall be adequately screened
from view pursuant to the Board Engineer's review during site plan
review.
(9) Any community trash or recyclable collection area shall be suitably
screened and designed in coordination with the overall project. Any
outdoor facilities shall be fully enclosed with materials consistent
with the architectural design and materials of the principal
buildings and shall provide gated access.
B. The location of buildings shall provide the following yards, buffers and
setbacks:
(1) A front yard setback shall be provided along Piermont Road of 40
feet; however, the Planning Board is authorized to reduce the
required front yard setback, but to not less than 25 feet, based on
the quality of proposed landscaping and the nature of the building
architecture.
(2) All other setbacks shall be maintained at 40 feet. The setback area
may include the required landscape buffer as provided herein.
(3) A planted landscape buffer area shall extend from all exterior
property lines of the tract a minimum depth of 15 feet. The buffer
area may be included in the required setback area. The buffer shall
be subject to all NJDEP regulations. Buffering shall be designed to
provide a year-round visual screen. The buffer area may include
decorative fencing only to a height permitted in the zone district.
No buildings, including but not limited to quadruplex buildings,
detached garages, and storage buildings are permitted in the
buffer area. No parking areas, sidewalks are permitted in the buffer
area. Roadway access into and out of the development may occur
through the buffer area. The buffer area will be reviewed by the
Environmental Commission as part of the site plan review process.
(4) No parking or drive aisles, other than those providing tract access,
shall be located in the required setback and buffer areas.
§ 200-54 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54
189:766
(5) Garages are subject to all setback requirements contained within
the Closter Zoning Ordinance. No garages are permitted within the
required landscape buffer area.
(6) No building shall be closer to any other on-site building than 35
feet.
(7) No building shall be closer to any parking aisle or access roadway
than 20 feet.
(8) Access to the subject property shall be from a county road.
(9) Patios and decks are only permitted as shown on the approved site
plan, and may not encroach into the required setback areas.
(10) Detached accessory structures, such as sheds and garages are only
permitted as shown on the approved site plan.
§ 200-54 WATER § 200-54
189:767

ARTICLE XIB
Affordable Housing Overlay
[Added 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:892; amended 12-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018:1249]
§ 200-54.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Affordable Housing Overlay (AHO) District is to provide
realistic opportunities to capture affordable housing in an effort to meet
the Borough of Closter's unmet need obligation. The Affordable Housing
Overlay District (AHO) creates a realistic opportunity for housing with an
affordable component in the Borough's Commercial (District No. 4) and
Industrial (District No. 5) areas.
§ 200-54.2. Uses.
In addition to those uses permitted in the underlying districts (i.e.
Commercial or Industrial) the following inclusionary housing options are
permitted conditional uses in the Affordable Housing Overlay District,
subject to the conditional use standards contained in § 200-54.3. Site plan
and conditional use approvals are required.
§ 200-54.3. Conditions.
A. Owner-occupied townhouses at a maximum density of eight units per
acre, with a 20% affordable set-aside.
B. Apartments at a density of 12 units per acre, with a 20% affordable setaside
for all properties in the Affordable Housing Overlay, except for the
Reuten Drive Industrial Zone District, which is identified on the Zoning
Map as "Affordable Housing District Overlay Reuten." Affordable
Housing District Overlay Reuten apartment density is 10 units per acre.
All other conditions, bulk regulations, other regulations, and
affordability requirements as contained herein are the same for the
Affordable Housing Overlay Districts and the Affordable Housing
Overlay Reuten District.
C. All sites to be developed with townhouses or apartments must meet the
conditions listed in § 200-54.3 (below).
D. All sites to be developed with townhouses or apartments must include a
20% affordable set-aside whereby 20% of the units are affordable to
low- and moderate-income households. In the event that the 20% of the
total number of residential units does not result in a complete integer,
the fraction number of units shall be rounded upward to provide one
additional whole unit. For example, if a development includes 16 units,
the 20% set-aside equals an affordable obligation of 3.2 units. The
fractional unit is rounded up to the next integer; therefore, the
development would include four affordable units.
A. Minimum lot area:
§ 200-54.1 WATER § 200-54.3
189:769
§ 200-54.4. Bulk regulations.
(1) Townhouses: one acre.
(2) Apartments: five acres.
B. Frontage on and accessibility from a collector or subcollector street, as
defined in the Borough's Zoning Code.
C. When adjacent to an existing single-family-dwelling, or adjacent to the
Residence Area A Zone District or the Residence Area B Zone District,
each side and rear yard setback shall be:
(1) Townhouse: 30 feet Apartment: 60 feet.
A. Townhouses.
(1) Minimum lot width at setback: 22 feet.
(2) Maximum Height: 2.5 stories/30 feet.
(3) Density: eight units per acre.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback (except for those situations where
adjacent to existing single-family detached dwelling, or Residence
Area A or B as referenced in § 200-54.3, above): 10 feet.
(a) Side yard setback shall be measured from the end unit to the
side property line.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback (except for those situations where
adjacent to existing single-family detached dwelling, or Residence
Area A or B referenced in § 200-54.3, above): 20 feet.
(7) Maximum impervious coverage: 50%.
(8) Dwellings shall be arranged in groups or clusters of not more than
six units/building.
(9) There shall be a minimum open space of at least 50 feet between
the front and/or rears of any two buildings, or 30 feet between any
other combination of facades.
(10) All common areas within a townhouse development shall be deeded
to its homeowner or condominium association or other legal entity
consisting of a majority of the property owners within the
development for their use, control, management and maintenance.
B. Apartments.
(1) Minimum lot width at setback: 125 feet.
(2) Maximum building height: 2.5 stories/30 feet.
§ 200-54.3 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.4
189:770
§ 200-54.5. Other regulations.
(3) Density:
(a) Affordable Housing Overlay District: 12 units per acre.
(b) Affordable Housing Overlay District Reuten: 10 units per acre.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback (except for those situations where
adjacent to existing single-family detached dwelling, or Residence
Area A or B as referenced in § 200-54.3, above): 45 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback (except for those situations where
adjacent to existing single-family detached dwelling, or Residence
Area A or B as referenced in § 200-54.3, above): 60 feet.
(7) Maximum impervious coverage: 55%.
(8) Setback between buildings: 30 feet.
(9) The maximum building length is 120 feet.
(10) Parking is prohibited between apartment building and public
roadway.
(11) All common areas within an apartment development shall be
deeded to its homeowner or condominium association or other
legal entity consisting of a majority of the property owners within
the development for their use, control, management and
maintenance.
(12) The apartment complex shall provide an active outdoor recreation
area designed to serve the needs of the apartment residents.
Examples of potential active recreation amenities include, but are
not limited to, playground equipment and swimming pools. The
active outdoor recreation area shall be, at a minimum, a size equal
to 75 square feet per dwelling unit.
A. Homeowner's association.
(1) Every owner-occupied apartment and/or townhouse development
in the Affordable Housing Overlay shall establish a homeowner or
condominium association, or other legal entity. The property owner
(with rental units) and/or association shall own all common spaces,
including but not limited to open spaces, common areas, recreation
areas, parking areas, road areas and sidewalks. The association
shall be responsible for, at a minimum, collection of garbage and
recyclable material, snow removal, road and sidewalk
maintenance, maintenance of buffer area and other common
landscape areas.
B. Landscape buffer and plantings.
§ 200-54.4 WATER § 200-54.5
189:771
§ 200-54.6. Affordability.
(1) Every apartment and/or townhouse development in the Affordable
Housing Overlay shall include a planted landscape buffer to
mitigate the visual impact of the development. A planted landscape
buffer area shall extend from all exterior property lines of the tract
a minimum depth of 10 feet. The buffer area may be included in the
required building setback area to exterior tract property lines
referenced above. Buffering shall be designed to provide a yearround
visual screen. The buffer area may include decorative
fencing only to a height of six feet. No buildings, driveways or
sidewalks are permitted in the buffer area. Roadway access into
and out of the development may occur through the buffer area. The
buffer area will be approved as part of the conditional use review,
and will be subject to review by the Borough Engineer.
(2) A variety of landscape plantings and open lawn areas are required
throughout the townhouse and/or apartment development. The
landscape plan shall be required as part of the conditional use
review by the Planning Board.
C. All parking requirements shall conform to Chapter 173 of the Code of
the Borough of Closter, as well as the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards.
D. Apartment and/or townhouse buildings shall have a compatible
architectural theme, with complementary variations in exterior design
and color. This shall include varying building and/or facade orientation,
modifying dwelling unit widths and heights, changing rooflines and
altering color and fenestration patterns. All sides of a building facing a
public street shall be architecturally designed to be consisted with
regard to style, materials, colors and details. Designs including
mansard roofs, defined as a roof with four sloping sides, are
encouraged.
E. All building entrances shall include architectural elements, including
but not limited to columns, porches, overhangs, etc.
F. The facades of apartment units in a group shall be varied by changed
front yard setbacks and variation in materials or design so that not
more than two abutting apartments will have the same front yard
setback and the same or essentially the same architectural treatment of
facades and roof lines.
G. Apartments shall be developed as a building consisting of three or more
dwelling units where each unit has direct access to the outside with use
of a vestibule.
A. All affordable housing units shall be subject to the all applicable
municipal and New Jersey State review processes and approvals.
§ 200-54.5 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.6
189:772
B. All affordable units shall be subject to all the provisions of the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (U.H.A.C.), including but not limited to,
bedroom distribution, ownership and rental, unit administration.
C. The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number of
affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income unit.
D. In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
E. Within inclusionary developments, of the total number of affordable
units, at least 13% shall be affordable to very-low-income households.
The affordable units shall comply with the Borough's Affordable
Housing Ordinance contained in Article XID.
§ 200-54.6 WATER § 200-54.6
189:773

ARTICLE XIC
District No. 3A, Business Area
[Added 12-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018:1247]
§ 200-54.7. Permitted uses.
In District Number 3A, Business Area 3A, no building or premises shall be
used and no building or part of a building shall be erected, constructed or
altered which shall be arranged, intended or designed to be used for any
purpose other than the uses permitted in District No. 3, Business Area, as
contained in § 200-11 of the Code of the Borough of Closter.
§ 200-54.8. Conditional uses.
A. In District Number 3A, Business Area 3A, a mix of business/commercial
and housing uses will be a permitted conditional use in the zone
district. Such mixed-use developments would require site plan and
conditional use approvals. The residential component of the mixed use
will include an affordable component in an effort to meet the Borough's
unmet need obligation. If the residential units are rental units, 15% of
the units shall be reserved for affordable households. If the units are
for-sale, 20% of the units shall be reserved for affordable units.
B. The mixed use shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) The ground floor use shall be a business or commercial use that is
permitted in Business District Number 3A, as provided in § 200-11.
(2) The second and third floors use shall be residential apartments.
(3) Maximum residential density of 10 units per acre.
(4) The bulk regulations for the Business District Number 3, as
contained in Schedule A of the Borough Zoning Ordinance, shall be
met, with the exception of minimum lot area and maximum
permitted building height (feet and stories), which shall be
governed by Subsection B(5) and (6) herein.
(5) Minimum lot area: one acre.
(6) Maximum permitted building height (feet): 34 feet.
(7) Maximum permitted building height (stories): three stories.
(8) All parking requirements shall conform to Chapter 173 of the Code
of the Borough of Closter, as well as the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards.
(9) If the residential units are rental units, 15% shall be reserved for
affordable households. If the units are for-sale, 20% shall be
reserved for affordable units. In the event that the 15% or 20% of
the total number of residential units does not result in a complete
integer, the fraction number of units shall be rounded upward to
§ 200-54.7 WATER § 200-54.8
189:775
§ 200-54.9. Design standards.
§ 200-54.10. Affordability.
provide one additional whole unit. For example, if a mixed-use
development includes 16 units, the 20% set-aside equals an
affordable obligation of 3.2 units. The fractional unit is rounded up
to the next integer; therefore, the development would include four
affordable units.
A. Dwelling units shall have a compatible architectural theme, with
complementary variations in exterior design and color. This shall
include varying building and/or facade orientation, modifying dwelling
unit widths and heights, changing rooflines and altering color and
fenestration patterns. All sides of a building facing a public street shall
be architecturally designed to be consistent with regard to style,
materials, colors and details.
B. The facades of apartment units in a group shall be varied by changed
front yard setbacks and variation in materials or design so that not
more than two abutting apartments will have the same front yard
setback and the same or essentially the same architectural treatment of
facades and roof lines. Mansard roofs, defined as a roof that has four
sloping sides, each of which becomes steeper halfway down are
encouraged.
C. All building entrances shall include architectural elements, including
but not limited to columns, porches, overhangs, etc.
D. It is the goal of this article to generate appropriately scaled
development, promote buildings with architectural distinction and
encourage environmental sustainability. Variations in design as well as
establishing patterns of building widths and lots are encouraged. For
the nonresidential component of the mixed use, conformity among
signage and awnings is encouraged.
E. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be located in the rear third of
the roof area, except for corner lots in which case the mechanical
equipment shall be located on the rear half of the roof area. This
requirement shall be subject to the review of the Planning Board and
the Borough Engineer as part of the site plan review process.
F. Mixed-use sites shall be designed to maximize available light, air and
open space.
A. All affordable housing units shall be subject to the all applicable
municipal and New Jersey State review processes and approvals and
the Borough's June 2018 settlement agreement.
B. All affordable units shall be subject to all the provisions of the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls (U.H.A.C.), including but not limited to,
bedroom distribution, ownership and rental, unit administration.
§ 200-54.8 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.10
189:776
C. The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number of
affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income unit.
D. In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be low-income units.
E. Within mixed-use developments, of the total number of affordable
rental units, at least 13% shall be affordable to very-low-income
households.
F. The affordable units shall comply with the Borough's Affordable
Housing Ordinance contained in Article XID.
§ 200-54.10 WATER § 200-54.10
189:777

ARTICLE XID
Affordable Housing and Affirmative Marketing
[Amended 3-12-2003 by Ord. No. 2003:894; 12-13-2006 by Ord. No.
2006:979; amended 4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1158; 12-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018:1245; 12-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2018:1248]
§ 200-54.11. _____
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Affordable Housing
Ordinance of the Borough of Closter."
§ 200-54.12. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a mechanism for assuring that
housing units designed for occupancy by low- and moderate income
households remain affordable to and occupied by low- and moderate-income
households.
§ 200-54.13. Definitions.
The following terms when used in this article shall have the meanings given
in this section:
ACT — The Fair Housing Act of 1985, P.L. 1985, c. 222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301
et seq.).
ADAPTABLE — Constructed in compliance with the technical design
standards of the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity designated by the Borough to
administer affordable units in accordance with this article, N.J.A.C. 5:93,
and UHAC (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26).
AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING — A regional marketing strategy designed
to attract buyers and/or renters of affordable units pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.15.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — The average percentage of median income
at which New restricted units in an affordable housing development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — A sales price or rent level that is within the means of a
low- or moderate-income household as defined within N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4, and,
in the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms
to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included in
or approved pursuant to the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or
otherwise intended to address the Borough's fair share obligation, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable housing development.
§ 200-54.11 WATER § 200-54.13
189:779
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM(S) — Any mechanism in a municipal
Fair Share Plan prepared or implemented to address a municipality's fair
share obligation.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit proposed or created pursuant to
the Act and approved for crediting by the Court and/or funded through an
affordable housing trust fund.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population such that all the residents of the development wherein the unit
is situated are 62 years of age or older; or at least 80% of the units are
occupied by one person who is 55 years of age or older; or the development
has been designated by the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development as "housing for older persons" as defined in Section
807(b)(2) of the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. § 3607.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1, et seq.).
ALTERNATIVE LIVING ARRANGEMENT — A structure in which households
live in distinct bedrooms, yet share kitchen and plumbing facilities, central
heat and common areas. Alternative living arrangements include, but are
not limited to: transitional facilities for the homeless; Class A, B, C, D and
E boarding homes as regulated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs; residential health care facilities as regulated by the
New Jersey Department of Health; group homes for the developmentally
disabled and mentally ill as licensed and/or regulated by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services; and congregate living arrangements.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility that is licensed by the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services
are available when needed for four or more adult persons unrelated to the
proprietor and that offers units containing, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing, as established by the New
Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301, et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
DEFICIENT HOUSING UNIT — A housing unit with health and safety code
violations that requires the repair or replacement of a major system. A
major system includes weatherization, roofing, plumbing (including wells),
heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic systems), lead paint
abatement and/or load bearing structural systems.
DEVELOPER — Any person, partnership, association, company or
corporation that is the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
§ 200-54.13 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.13
189:780
land included in a proposed development including the holder of an option
to contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation, or enlargement of any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure, or land or extension
of use of land, for which permission may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1, et seq.
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT — A development containing both
affordable units and market rate units. This term includes, but is not limited
to new construction, the conversion of a nonresidential structure to
residential use and the creation of new affordable units through the gut
rehabilitation or reconstruction of a vacant residential structure.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a low-income
household.
MAJOR SYSTEM — The primary structural, mechanical, plumbing,
electrical, fire protection, or occupant service components of a building
which include but are not limited to, weatherization, roofing, plumbing
(including wells), heating, electricity, sanitary plumbing (including septic
systems), lead paint abatement and load bearing structural systems.
MARKET-RATE UNITS — Housing not restricted to low- and moderateincome
households that may sell or rent at any price.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for the
applicable housing region as adopted annually by COAH or a successor
entity approved by the Court.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the regional
median household income by household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
NONEXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than the
transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of ownership
between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial decree of divorce
or judicial separation, but not including sales to third parties; the transfer of
ownership between family members as a result of inheritance; the transfer
of ownership through an executor's deed to a class A beneficiary and the
transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently incomeeligible
households are selected for placement in affordable housing units
§ 200-54.13 WATER § 200-54.13
189:781
such that no preference is given to one applicant over another except for
purposes of matching household income and size with an appropriately
priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value in each housing
region affordable to a four-person household with an income at 80% of
the regional median as defined by duly adopted Regional Income Limits
published annually by COAR or a successor entity.
REHABILITATION — The repair, renovation, alteration or reconstruction of
any building or structure, pursuant to the Rehabilitation Subcode, N.J.A.C.
5:23-6.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including the
rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid utilities
computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA for its Section
8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not include charges for
food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or an
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1, as amended and supplemented, but does not include a marketrate
unit financed under UHORP or MONI.
UHAC — The Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in N.J.A.C.
5:80-26, et seq.
VERY-LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 30% or less of the regional median household
income by household size.
VERY-LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a verylow-
income household.
WEATHERIZATION — Building insulation (for attic, exterior walls and crawl
space), siding to improve energy efficiency, replacement storm windows,
replacement storm doors, replacement windows and replacement doors,
and is considered a major system for purposes of a rehabilitation program.
§ 200-54.14. Applicability.
A. The provisions of this article shall apply to all affordable housing
developments and affordable housing units that currently exist and that
are proposed to be created within the Borough of Closter pursuant to
the Borough's most recently adopted Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan.
B. Moreover, this article shall apply to all developments that contain lowand
moderate-income housing units, including any currently
unanticipated future developments that will provide low- and moderateincome
housing units.
C. Any property in the Borough of Closter that is currently zoned for
nonresidential use and subsequently receives a zoning change, use
variance or any other development approval to permit multifamily
§ 200-54.13 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.14
189:782
§ 200-54.15. Monitoring requirements.
residential development, or any property in the Borough of Closter that
is currently zoned for residential use and receives a zoning change
or density variance or any other development approval to permit
multifamily residential development, which multifamily residential
development results in five or more residential units shall provide
a minimum affordable housing set-aside of 20%. The 20% affordable
housing set-aside is applicable for both for-sale and rental
developments. This provision does not affect residential development
on sites that are zoned for inclusionary residential development as
part of the Borough's Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, which are
subject to the affordable housing set-aside requirements set forth in
the applicable zoning. This requirement does not give any developer
the right to any such rezoning, any other approval, variance or other
relief, or establish any obligation of the part of the Borough of Closter
to grant such rezoning, variance or other relief. A property shall not
be permitted to be subdivided so as to avoid compliance with this
requirement. All affordable units created pursuant to this subsection
shall be governed by the provisions of this article.
A. On the first anniversary of the execution of the settlement agreement,
and every anniversary thereafter through July 1, 2025, the Borough
agrees to provide annual reporting of its Affordable Housing Trust Fund
activity to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Council on
Affordable Housing, or Local Government Services, or other entity
designated by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair
Share Housing Center (FSHC) and posted on the municipal website,
using forms developed for this purpose by the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs (NJDCA), Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
or Local Government Services (NJLGS). The reporting shall include an
accounting of all Affordable Housing Trust Fund activity, including the
source and amount of funds collected and the amount and purpose for
which any funds have been expended.
B. On the first anniversary of the execution of the settlement agreement,
and on every anniversary of that date through July 1, 2025, the Borough
agrees to provide annual reporting of the status of all affordable
housing activity within the municipality through posting on the
municipal website with a copy of such posting provided to Fair Share
Housing Center, using forms previously developed for this purpose by
COAH or any other forms endorsed by the Special Master and FSHC.
C. By July 1, 2020, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, the
Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to
FSHC, a status report as to its implementation of its plan and an
analysis of whether any unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms
continue to present a realistic opportunity and whether any
mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or supplemented.
Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit comments to
§ 200-54.14 WATER § 200-54.15
189:783
§ 200-54.16. Alternative living arrangements.
§ 200-54.17. Phasing schedule for inclusionary zoning.
In inclusionary developments the following schedule shall be followed:
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Low and
Moderate Income Units
Completed
25 0
25 + 1 10
50 50
the municipality, with a copy to FSHC, regarding whether any sites
no longer present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing
before the Court regarding these issues.
D. For the review of the very-low-income housing requirements required
by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1, within 30 days of the third anniversary of the
settlement agreement, executed June 21, 2018, and every third year
thereafter, the Borough will post on its municipal website, with a copy
provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction of its very-lowincome
requirements, including its family very-low-income
requirements. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality and FSHC on the issue of whether the
municipality has complied with its very-low-income and family very-lowincome
housing obligations.
A. The administration of an alternative living arrangement shall be in
compliance with 5:93-5.8 and UHAC, with the following exceptions:
(1) Affirmative marketing (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15), provided, however,
that the units or bedrooms may be affirmatively marketed by the
provider in accordance with an alternative plan approved by the
Court;
(2) Affordability average and bedroom distribution (N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3).
B. With the exception of units established with capital funding through a
twenty-year operating contract with the Department of Human
Services, Division of Developmental Disabilities, alternative living
arrangements shall have at least thirty-year controls on affordability in
accordance with UHAC, unless an alternative commitment is approved
by the Court.
C. The service provider for the alternative living arrangement shall act as
the administrative agent for the purposes of administering the
affirmative marketing and affordability requirements for the alternative
living arrangement.
§ 200-54.15 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.17
189:784
Maximum Percentage of Market-
Rate Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Low and
Moderate Income Units
Completed
75 75
90 100
§ 200-54.18. New construction.
A. Low/moderate split and bedroom distribution of affordable housing
units:
(1) The fair share obligation shall be divided equally between low- and
moderate-income units, except that where there is an odd number
of affordable housing units, the extra unit shall be a low-income
unit. At least 13% of all restricted rental units shall be very-lowincome
units (affordable to a household earning 30% or less of
regional median income by household size). The very-low-income
units shall be counted as part of the required number of low-income
units within the development.
(2) In each affordable development, at least 50% of the restricted units
within each bedroom distribution shall be very-low or low-income
units.
(3) Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be
structured in conjunction with realistic market demands such that:
(a) The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units
shall be no greater than 20% of the total low- and moderateincome
units;
(b) At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
two-bedroom units;
(c) At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units; and
(d) The remaining units may be allocated among two- and threebedroom
units at the discretion of the developer.
(4) Affordable developments that are age-restricted shall be structured
such that the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of agerestricted
low- and moderate-income units within the inclusionary
development. This standard may be met by having all one-bedroom
units or by having a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
B. Accessibility requirements:
(1) The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all
restricted units in all other multistory buildings shall be subject to
the technical design standards of the Barrier Free SubCode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7 and the following:
§ 200-54.17 WATER § 200-54.18
189:785
(2) All restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in
other multistory buildings in which a restricted dwelling unit is
attached to at least one other dwelling unit shall have the following
features:
(a) An adaptable kitchen on the first floor; and
(b) An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor; and
(c) An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor; and
(d) An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door
or the casing for the installation of a door, on the first floor;
and
(e) If all of the foregoing requirements in Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) cannot be satisfied, then an interior accessible
route of travel must be provided between stories within an
individual unit, but if all of the terms of Subsection B(2)(a)
through (d) above have been satisfied, then an interior
accessible route of travel shall not be required between stories
within an individual unit; and
(f) An accessible entranceway as set forth at P.L. 2005, c. 350
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq.) and the Barrier Free SubCode,
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that Closter has collected funds
from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
[1] Where a unit has been constructed with an adaptable
entrance, upon the request of a disabled individual who is
either purchasing or will reside in the dwelling unit, an
accessible entrance shall be installed.
[2] To this end, the builder of restricted units shall deposit
funds within the Borough of Closter's Affordable Housing
Trust Fund sufficient to install accessible entrances in 10%
of the affordable units that have been constructed with
adaptable entrances.
[3] The funds deposited under Subsection B(2)(f)[2] above
shall be used by the Borough of Closter for the sole
purpose of making the adaptable entrance of an affordable
unit accessible when requested to do so by a person with a
disability who occupies or intends to occupy the unit and
requires an accessible entrance.
[4] The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design
plan and cost estimate to the Construction Official of the
Borough of Closter for the conversion of adaptable to
accessible entrances.
§ 200-54.18 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.18
189:786
[5] Once the Construction Official has determined that the
design plan to convert the unit entrances from adaptable
to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier Free
SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of
such conversion is reasonable, payment shall be made to
the Borough's Affordable Housing Trust Fund in care of
the Borough Treasurer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund and
appropriately earmarked.
[6] Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be
required where an entity can demonstrate that it is site
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of
site impracticability shall be in compliance with the
Barrier Free SubCode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
C. Design:
(1) In inclusionary developments, to the extent possible, low- and
moderate-income units shall be integrated with the market units.
(2) In inclusionary developments, low- and moderate-income units
shall have access to all of the same common elements and facilities
as the market units.
D. Maximum rents and sales prices:
(1) In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units,
the administrative agent shall follow the procedures set forth in
UHAC, utilizing the regional income levels established by COAH or
a successor entity.
(2) The maximum rent for restricted rental units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 60% of median income, and the average rent for
restricted rental units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 52% of median income.
(3) The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted rental units
shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom type for both lowincome
and moderate-income units, provided that at least 13% of
all low- and moderate-income rental units shall be affordable to
very-low-income households, earning 30% or less of the regional
median household income, with such very-low-income units shall
be part of the low-income requirement.
(4) The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each
affordable development shall be affordable to households earning
no more than 70% of median income, and each affordable
development must achieve an affordability average of 55% for
restricted ownership units; in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for at least
§ 200-54.18 WATER § 200-54.18
189:787
three different sales prices for each bedroom type, and low-income
ownership units must be available for at least two different sales
prices for each bedroom type.
(5) In determining the initial sales prices and rent levels for
compliance with the affordability average requirements for
restricted units other than assisted living facilities and agerestricted
developments, the following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a 1 1/2 person
household;
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a three-person
household;
(d) A three-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a four and one-half
person household; and
(e) A four-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a six-person
household.
(6) In determining the initial sales prices and rents for compliance with
the affordability average requirements for restricted units in
assisted living facilities and age-restricted developments, the
following standards shall be used:
(a) A studio shall be affordable to a one-person household;
(b) A one-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a one and one-half
person household; and
(c) A two-bedroom unit shall be affordable to a two-person
household or to two one-person households.
(7) The initial purchase price for all restricted ownership units shall be
calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of the unit, including
principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of
the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest),
taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance and
condominium or homeowner association fees do not exceed 28% of
the eligible monthly income of the appropriate size household as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the price shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(8) The initial rent for a restricted rental unit shall be calculated so as
not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the appropriate
size household, including an allowance for tenant paid utilities, as
determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be amended and
supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
§ 200-54.18 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.18
189:788
§ 200-54.19. Utilities.
§ 200-54.20. Occupancy standards.
In referring certified households to specific restricted units, the
administrative agent shall, to the extent feasible and without causing an
undue delay in the occupancy of a unit, strive to:
§ 200-54.21. Control periods for restricted ownership units and
enforcement mechanisms.
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3, as may
be amended and supplemented.
(9) The price of owner-occupied low- and moderate-income units may
increase annually based on the percentage increase in the regional
median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be
lower than the last recorded purchase price.
(10) The rents of very-low-, low- and moderate-income units may be
increased annually based on the permitted percentage increase in
the Housing Consumer Price Index for the United States. This
increase shall not exceed 9% in any one-year. Rent increases for
units constructed pursuant to low-income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing
low-income housing tax credits.
A. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market
units within an inclusionary development.
B. Tenant-paid utilities included in the utility allowance shall be set forth
in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved
by HUD for the Section 8 program.
A. Provide an occupant for each bedroom;
B. Provide children of different sexes with separate bedrooms;
C. Provide separate bedrooms for parents and children; and
D. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
A. Control periods for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5, as may be amended and supplemented, and
each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the requirements
of this article for a period of at least 30 years, until Closter takes action
to release the unit from such requirements; prior to such action, a
restricted ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
§ 200-54.18 WATER § 200-54.21
189:789
§ 200-54.22. Price restrictions for restricted ownership units,
homeowners associates fees and resale prices.
Price restrictions for restricted ownership units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented, including:
B. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership unit shall
commence on the date the initial certified household takes title to the
unit.
C. Prior to the issuance of the initial certificate of occupancy for a
restricted ownership unit and upon each successive sale during the
period of restricted ownership, the administrative agent shall
determine the restricted price for the unit and shall also determine the
nonrestricted, fair market value of the unit based on either an appraisal
or the unit's equalized assessed value without the restrictions in place.
D. At the time of the initial sale of the unit, the initial purchaser shall
execute and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note
obligating the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors
and assigns) to repay, upon the first non-exempt sale after the unit's
release from the restrictions set forth in this article, an amount equal to
the difference between the unit's nonrestricted fair market value and its
restricted price, and the recapture note shall be secured by a recapture
lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage on the unit.
E. The affordability controls set forth in this article shall remain in effect
despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure with
respect to restricted ownership units.
F. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a continuing
certificate of occupancy or a certified statement from the Construction
Official stating that the unit meets all Code standards upon the first
transfer of title following the removal of the restrictions provided under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(a), as may be amended and supplemented.
A. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent.
B. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing and
in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing
standards.
C. The master deeds of inclusionary developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association fees
and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income purchasers
and those paid by market purchasers.
D. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of anticipated capital improvements. Eligible capital
§ 200-54.21 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.22
189:790
§ 200-54.23. Buyer income eligibility.
§ 200-54.24. Limitations on indebtedness secured by ownership
unit; subordination.
improvements shall be those that render the unit suitable for a larger
household or the addition of a bathroom. See § 200-54.21.
A. Buyer income eligibility for restricted ownership units shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and
supplemented, such that low-income ownership units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate-income ownership units shall be
reserved for households with a gross household income less than 80%
of median income.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the administrative agent may, upon
approval by the Borough Council, and subject to the Court's approval,
permit a moderate-income purchaser to buy a low-income unit if the
administrative agent can demonstrate that there is an insufficient
number of eligible low-income purchasers in the housing region to
permit prompt occupancy of the unit and all other reasonable efforts to
attract a low-income purchaser, including pricing and financing
incentives, have failed. Any such low-income unit that is sold to a
moderate-income household shall retain the required pricing and
pricing restrictions for a low-income unit.
C. A certified household that purchases a restricted ownership unit must
occupy it as the certified household's principal residence and shall not
lease the unit; provided, however, that the administrative agent may
permit the owner of a restricted ownership unit, upon application and a
showing of hardship, to lease the restricted unit to another certified
household for a period not to exceed one year.
D. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit,
and the estimated monthly housing cost for the particular unit
(including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees, as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible monthly
income.
A. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted
ownership unit, the owner shall apply to the administrative agent for a
determination in writing that the proposed indebtedness complies with
the provisions of this section, and the administrative agent shall issue
such determination prior to the owner incurring such indebtedness.
B. With the exception of First Purchase Money Mortgages, neither an
owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
§ 200-54.22 WATER § 200-54.24
189:791
§ 200-54.25. Capital improvements to ownership units.
§ 200-54.26. Control periods for restricted rental units.
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership unit to exceed 95%
of the maximum allowable resale price of the unit, as such price is
determined by the administrative agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.6(b).
A. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the
administrative agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit
on the basis of capital improvements made since the purchase of the
unit. Eligible capital improvements shall be those that render the unit
suitable for a larger household or that add an additional bathroom. In
no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved housing unit
exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
B. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership unit, all items of property that
are permanently affixed to the unit or were included when the unit was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer,
dishwasher, wall-to-wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum
allowable resale price. Other items may be sold to the purchaser at a
reasonable price that has been approved by the administrative agent at
the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The purchase of
central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
unit and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
unit resale provided the price, which shall be subject to ten-year,
straight-line depreciation, has been approved by the administrative
agent. Unless otherwise approved by the administrative agent, the
purchase of any property other than central air conditioning shall not
be made a condition of the unit resale. The owner and the purchaser
must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has
taken place at the time of or as a condition of resale.
A. Control periods for restricted rental units shall be in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, as may be amended and supplemented, and each
restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the requirements of this
article for a period of at least 30 years, until Closter takes action to
release the unit from such requirements. Prior to such action, a
restricted rental unit must remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property, and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Bergen. The deed shall identify each affordable unit by
apartment number or address, and identify whether that unit is
designated as a moderate; low- or very-low-income unit. The
§ 200-54.24 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.26
189:792
§ 200-54.27. Rent restrictions for rental units: leases.
§ 200-54.28. Tenant income eligibility.
affordability designation shall not change during the term of the deed
restriction. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
C. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability controls
of this article despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(2) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit; or
(3) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure on the
property containing the unit.
A. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units and
tenants shall be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of
the rent as stated on the lease. A copy of the current lease for each
restricted rental unit shall be provided to the administrative agent.
B. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, to cover the
customary charges for food and services) without the express written
approval of the administrative agent.
C. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not
exceed 5% of the monthly rent of the applicable restricted unit and shall
be payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls applicable to the unit as set forth in this
article.
D. No rent control ordinance or other pricing restriction shall be
applicable to either the market units or the affordable units in any
development in which at least 15% of the total number of dwelling units
are restricted rental units in compliance with this article.
A. Tenant income eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.13, as may be amended and supplemented, and shall be
determined as follows:
(1) Very-low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional
median household income by household size.
(2) Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a
gross household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional
median household income by household size.
§ 200-54.26 WATER § 200-54.28
189:793
§ 200-54.29. Municipal housing liaison.
(3) Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with
a gross household income less than 80% of the regional median
household income by household size.
B. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a very-low-income
household, low-income household or a moderate-income household, as
applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not
exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may
be amended and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may
be exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances exists:
(1) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for
rent, and the proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
(2) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(3) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living
conditions;
(4) The household documents the existence of assets with which the
household proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
(5) The household documents reliable anticipated third-party
assistance from an outside source such as a family member in a
form acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
C. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the
existence of the circumstances in Subsections A(1) through B(5) above
with the administrative agent, who shall counsel the household on
budgeting.
A. The Borough of Closter shall appoint a specific municipal employee to
serve as a Municipal Housing Liaison responsible for overseeing the
Borough's affordable housing program, including affordability controls;
the affirmative marketing plan; monitoring and reporting requirements;
and supervising the administrative agent(s). Closter shall adopt an
ordinance creating the position of Municipal Housing Liaison and a
resolution appointing the person to fulfill the position of Municipal
Housing Liaison. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be appointed by
the governing body and may be a full or part time municipal employee.
B. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight and
administration of the affordable housing program for Closter, including
§ 200-54.28 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.29
189:794
§ 200-54.30. Administrative agent.
An administrative agent shall be an independent entity serving under
contract to and reporting to the municipality. The fees of the administrative
agent shall be paid by the owners of the affordable units for which the
services of the administrative agent are required. The administrative agent
shall perform the duties and responsibilities of an administrative agent as
set forth in UHAC, including those set forth in Sections 5:80-26.14, 16 and
18 thereof, which includes:
the following responsibilities which may not be contracted out to the
administrative agent:
(1) Serving as Closter's primary point of contact for all inquiries from
the state, affordable housing providers, Administrative Agents and
interested households;
(2) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in Closter's Fair Share
Plan;
(3) Compiling, verifying, submitting and posting all monitoring reports
as required by the Court and by this article;
(4) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as needed; and
(5) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing at least
annually and more often as needed.
C. Subject to the approval of the Court, the Borough of Closter shall
designate one or more Administrative Agent(s) to administer and to
affirmatively market the affordable units constructed in the Borough in
accordance with UHAC and this article. An operating manual for each
affordable housing program shall be provided by the administrative
agent(s) to be adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject
to approval of the Court. The Operating Manual(s) shall be available for
public inspection in the office of the Borough Clerk, in the office of the
Municipal Housing Liaison, and in the office(s) of the administrative
agent(s). The Municipal Housing Liaison shall supervise the work of the
administrative agent(s).
D. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at the time of the
appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
A. Affirmative marketing:
(1) Conducting an outreach process to affirmatively market affordable
housing units in accordance with the affirmative marketing plan of
the Borough of Closter and the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15;
and
§ 200-54.29 WATER § 200-54.30
189:795
(2) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling services
to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as
budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease
requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
B. Household certification:
(1) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on interviews
with interested households;
(2) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation of
gross income and assets upon which to base a determination of
income eligibility for a very-low, low- or moderate-income unit;
(3) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(4) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units execute a
certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of either the
ownership or rental certificates set forth in Appendices J and K of
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
(5) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region where the
units are located;
(6) Employing a random selection process as provided in the
affirmative marketing plan of the Borough of Closter when
referring households for certification to affordable units; and
(7) Notifying the following entities of the availability of affordable
housing units in the Borough of Closter: Fair Share Housing Center,
the New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP, the Latino Action
Network, Bergen County NAACP, Urban League of Bergen County,
Bergen County Housing Coalition, and Supportive Housing
Association.
C. Affordability controls:
(1) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed restrictions
and mortgages for recording at the time of conveyance of title of
each restricted unit;
(2) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(3) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and cancellation
of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly filed with the
Bergen County Register of Deeds or Bergen County Clerk's office
after the termination of the affordability controls for each
restricted unit;
§ 200-54.30 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.30
189:796
(4) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(5) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy or
certifications pursuant to NJ.AC. 5:80-26.10.
D. Resales and rerentals:
(1) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information between owners and the administrative agent
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental;
and
(2) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of communicating
information to very-low, low- and moderate-income households
regarding the availability of restricted units for resale or rerental.
E. Processing requests from unit owners:
(1) Reviewing and approving requests for determination from owners
of restricted units who wish to take out home equity loans or
refinance during the term of their ownership that the amount of
indebtedness to be incurred will not violate the terms of this
article;
(2) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices from
owners of restricted units who wish to make capital improvements
to the units that would affect the selling price, such authorizations
to be limited to those improvements resulting in additional
bedrooms or bathrooms and the depreciated cost of central air
conditioning systems;
(3) Notifying the municipality of an owner's intent to sell a restricted
unit; and
(4) Making determinations on requests by owners of restricted units
for hardship waivers.
F. Enforcement:
(1) Securing annually from the municipality a list of all affordable
housing units for which tax bills are mailed to absentee owners,
and notifying all such owners that they must either move back to
their unit or sell it;
(2) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units, at
the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project or
development, written acknowledgement of the requirement that no
restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way committed, to
any person, other than a household duly certified to the unit by the
administrative agent;
(3) Posting annually, in all rental properties (including two-family
homes), a notice as to the maximum permitted rent together with
§ 200-54.30 WATER § 200-54.30
189:797
§ 200-54.31. Administrative marketing requirements.
the telephone number of the administrative agent where
complaints of excess rent or other charges can be made;
(4) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(5) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to the
municipality's Affordable Housing Trust Fund; and
(6) Creating and publishing a written operating manual for each
affordable housing program administered by the administrative
agent, to be approved by the Borough Council and the Court,
setting forth procedures for administering the affordability
controls.
G. Additional responsibilities:
(1) The administrative agent shall have the authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
(2) The administrative agent shall prepare monitoring reports for
submission to the Municipal Housing Liaison in time to meet the
Court-approved monitoring and reporting requirements in
accordance with the deadlines set forth in this article and the
settlement agreement.
(3) The administrative agent shall attend continuing education
sessions on affordability controls, compliance monitoring, and
affirmative marketing at least annually and more often as needed.
A. The Borough of Closter shall adopt by resolution an affirmative
marketing plan, subject to approval of the Court, that is compliant with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, as may be amended and supplemented.
B. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry,
marital or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being
marketed by a developer, sponsor or owner of affordable housing. The
affirmative marketing plan is intended to target those potentially
eligible persons who are least likely to apply for affordable units in that
region, and due to the Borough's settlement agreement, must include
notice to the Fair Share Housing Center, the NJ State Conference of the
NAACP, the Latino Action Network, Bergen County NAACP, Urban
League of Bergen County, Bergen County Housing Coalition, and
Supportive Housing Association. It is a continuing program that directs
§ 200-54.30 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.31
189:798
§ 200-54.32. Enforcement of affordable housing regulations.
marketing activities toward Housing Region 1 and is required to be
followed throughout the period of restriction.
C. The affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for
all households that live and/or work in Housing Region 1, comprised of
Bergen, Hudson, Passaic and Sussex Counties.
D. The municipality has the ultimate responsibility for adopting the
affirmative marketing plan and for the proper administration of the
Affirmative Marketing Program, including initial sales and rentals and
resales and rerentals. The administrative agent designated by the
Borough of Closter shall implement the affirmative marketing plan to
assure the affirmative marketing of all affordable units.
E. In implementing the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative
agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low- and moderateincome
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant
law.
F. The affirmative marketing plan shall describe the media to be used in
advertising and publicizing the availability of housing. In implementing
the affirmative marketing plan, the administrative agent shall consider
the use of language translations where appropriate.
G. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall
begin at least four months (120 days) prior to the expected date of
occupancy.
H. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several
locations, including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building
and/or the County Library for each county within the housing region;
the municipal administration building and the municipal library in the
municipality in which the units are located; and the developer's rental
office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
I. In addition to other affirmative marketing strategies, the administrative
agent shall provide specific notice of the availability of affordable
housing units in Closter, and copies of the application forms, to the
following entities: the FSHC, the NJ State Conference of the NAACP, the
Latino Action Network, Bergen County NAACP, Urban League of
Bergen County, Bergen County Housing Coalition, and Supportive
Housing Association.
J. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable
units shall be the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing an
affordable unit by an owner, developer or tenant, the municipality shall
§ 200-54.31 WATER § 200-54.32
189:799
have all remedies provided at law or equity, including but not limited
to foreclosure, tenant eviction, a requirement for household
recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recuperation of any funds from a sale in violation of the regulations,
injunctive relief to prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on
the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or
tenant of a low or moderate-income unit and advising the owner,
developer or tenant of the penalties for such violations, the municipality
may take the following action(s) against the owner, developer or tenant
for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
(1) The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2A:58-11 alleging a violation or violations of the regulations
governing the affordable housing unit. If the owner, developer or
tenant is adjudged by the Court to have violated any provision of
the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties, at the discretion of the Court:
(a) A fine of not more than $500 per day or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both, provided that each and
every day that the violation continues or exists shall be
considered a separate and specific violation of these provisions
and not a continuation of the initial offense; in the case of an
owner who has rented a low- or moderate-income unit in
violation of the regulations governing affordable housing units,
payment into the Borough of Closter Affordable Housing Trust
Fund of the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
(b) In the-case of an owner who has rented a low- or moderateincome
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units, payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable
relocation costs, as determined by the Court.
(2) The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court
seeking a judgment that would result in the termination of the
owner's equity or other interest in the unit, in the nature of a
mortgage foreclosure. Any such judgment shall be enforceable as if
the same were a judgment of default of the First Purchase Money
Mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low- or moderateincome
unit.
(a) The judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the
municipality, by means of an execution sale by the Sheriff, at
which time the low- and moderate-income unit of the violating
owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less than the
amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any First
Purchase Money Mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the
§ 200-54.32 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.32
189:800
enforcement proceedings incurred by the municipality,
including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his
right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed
pursuant to the Sheriffs sale.
(b) The proceeds of the Sheriffs sale shall first be applied to satisfy
the First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior liens
upon the low- and moderate-income unit. The excess, if any,
shall be applied to reimburse the municipality for any and all
costs and expenses incurred in connection with either the
court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the
Sheriffs sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriffs
sale are insufficient to reimburse the municipality in full as
aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible
for the full extent of such deficiency, in addition to any and all
costs incurred by the municipality in connection with collecting
such deficiency. In the event that a surplus remains after
satisfying all of the above, such surplus, if any, shall be placed
in escrow by the municipality for the owner and shall be held in
such escrow for a maximum period of two years or until such
earlier time as the owner shall make a claim with the
municipality for such. Failure of the owner to claim such
balance within the two-year period shall automatically result in
a forfeiture of such balance to the municipality. Any interest
accrued or earned on such balance while being held in escrow
shall belong to and shall be paid to the municipality, whether
such balance shall be paid to the owner or forfeited to the
municipality.
(c) Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the
regulations governing affordable housing units shall not
extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing
affordable housing units as the same apply to the low- and
moderate-income unit. Title shall be conveyed to the purchaser
at the Sheriffs sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions of
the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. The
owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of this
plan and from whom title and possession were taken by means
of the Sheriffs sale shall not be entitled to any right of
redemption.
(d) If there are no bidders at the Sheriffs sale, or if insufficient
amounts are bid to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage
and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low- and moderate-income unit by satisfying the First Purchase
Money Mortgage and any prior liens and crediting the violating
owner with an amount equal to the difference between the
First Purchase Money Mortgage and any prior liens and costs
of the enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the
maximum resale price-for which the low-and moderate-income
§ 200-54.32 WATER § 200-54.32
189:801
§ 200-54.33. Affirmative marketing.
unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be
treated in the same manner as the excess which would have
been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
(e) Failure of the low- and moderate-income unit to be either sold
at the Sheriffs sale or acquired by the municipality shall
obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from any
qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the
municipality, with such offer to purchase being equal to the
maximum resale price of the low- and moderate-income unit as
permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing
units.
(f) The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable
for complying with the terms and restrictions of governing
affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
A. Program definition. The administrative agency shall develop and
implement an affirmative marketing program for affordable housing
units. The affirmative marketing plan is a regional marketing strategy
designed to attract buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority
groups, regardless of sex, age or number of children, to housing units
which are being marketed by the developer of affordable housing. It is a
continuous program and covers the period of the deed restriction. The
affirmative marketing plan shall provide a regional preference for all
households that live and/or work in the Department Housing Region 1,
comprised of Bergen, Hudson, Passaic and Sussex Counties.
B. Advertising.
(1) Advertising for affordable housing units shall begin at least four
months prior to expected occupancy. There shall be at least one
paid advertisement in The Record and The Star Ledger during the
first week of the marketing program. The advertisement shall
include:
(a) The location of the units;
(b) Directions to the housing units;
(c) A range of prices for the housing units;
(d) The size, as measured in bedrooms, of the housing units;
(e) The maximum income permitted to qualify for the housing
units;
(f) The location of applications for the housing units; and
§ 200-54.32 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.33
189:802
(g) The business hours when interested households may obtain an
application for a housing unit.
(2) The administrative agency shall supplement newspaper
advertisements by:
(a) Providing quarterly published materials to the Bergen,
Hudson, Passaic and Sussex County Offices on Aging; Boards
of Social Service; and Boards of Realtors.
(b) Providing quarterly published materials to mailing lists of
employers, public housing authorities, community
development block programs and nonprofit agencies that
provide housing services within Bergen, Hudson, Passaic, and
Sussex Counties. Such materials shall be mailed to:
[1] The Hudson County Welfare Department.
[2] Community Development Agencies of Bayonne,
Guttenberg, Hoboken, Jersey City, Union City and West
New York.
[3] Housing Authorities of Cliffside Park, Edgewater,
Englewood, Fort Lee, Garfield, Hackensack and Lodi.
[4] Housing Authorities of Guttenberg, Bayonne, Harrison,
Hoboken, Jersey City, North Bergen, Secaucus, Union City,
Weehawken, West New York, Paterson and Passaic.
(c) Posting advertisements in local businesses in and surrounding
Closter Borough.
(d) Mailing information about affordable housing to local religious
organizations.
(e) Notice the following organizations of all available affordable
housing units:
[1] The Fair Share Housing Center;
[2] The New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP;
[3] The Latino Action Network;
[4] Bergen County NAACP;
[5] Urban League of Bergen County;
[6] Bergen County Housing Coalition; and
[7] Supportive Housing Association.
(3) The cost of all newspaper and radio advertising shall be the
developer's responsibility and shall be established at preliminary
approval.
§ 200-54.33 WATER § 200-54.33
189:803
C. Applications.
(1) Applications for affordable housing shall be available at the Closter
Municipal Building, the Closter Municipal Library, and the
developer's sales office, as well as the County Administration
Building and/or the County Library for each County in Housing
Region 1. As well as the following organizations:
(a) The Fair Share Housing Center;
(b) The New Jersey State Conference of the NAACP;
(c) The Latino Action Network;
(d) Bergen County NAACP;
(e) Urban League of Bergen County;
(f) Bergen County Housing Coalition; and
(g) Supportive Housing Association.
(2) Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants upon
request.
D. Random selection procedures. Applications for low- and moderateincome
units shall be reviewed as follows:
(1) Households that apply for low- and moderate-income housing shall
be screened for preliminary income eligibility by comparing their
total income to the low- and moderate-income limits adopted by
COAH. Applicants shall be notified as to their eligibility status.
(2) Having screened applicants for preliminary income eligibility, the
administrative agency may analyze the income and household sizes
of applicants to determine which applicants have the assets and/or
income necessary to purchase or rent each available low- or
moderate-income unit.
(3) The administrative agency shall interview each applicant and
utilize the procedures outlined to verify the applicant's income and
household size, determine the applicant's asset availability and
review the applicant's credit history. Applicants shall be required to
submit income verification for each household member 18 years or
older. This process shall be utilized in establishing the final
certified applicant group.
(4) The process described in Subsection D(1) through (3) above shall
begin no sooner than one month after the initial advertisement
outline in Subsection B(2) above. Households shall proceed
through the process described in Subsection D(1) through (3)
based on their ability to provide the information required pursuant
to Subsection D(1) through (3) and pursuant to the occupancy
selection procedures included in § 200-54.33. Households shall be
§ 200-54.33 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.33
189:804
certified for affordable units using the procedures outlined in the
affordable housing. The process described in Subsection D(1)
through (3) shall be continued until all the low-and moderateincome
units are occupied.
E. Procedures following initial occupancy. Following the initial sale or
rental of affordable units, the administrative agency shall:
(1) Maintain a current pool of at least five income eligible applicants
for each low- and moderate-income unit.
(2) Contact each income eligible applicant annually to request updated
information regarding income and family size.
(3) As units become available, the administrative agency shall select
eligible applicants for the units as described in Subsection D(2)
through (4) until the units are occupied by low- and moderateincome
households.
F. Responsibilities.
(1) The administrative agency is the agency under contract with
Closter Borough to administer the affirmative marketing program.
The administrative agency has the responsibility to income-qualify
low- and moderate-income households in low- and moderateincome
units upon initial occupancy; to provide for the initial
occupancy of low- and moderate-income units with incomequalified
households; to continue to qualify households for
reoccupancy of units as they become vacant during the period of
affordability controls; to assist with advertising and outreach to
low- and moderate-income households; and to enforce the terms of
the deed restriction and mortgage loan. The administrative agency
shall also provide counseling services to low- and moderate-income
applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage
qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
(2) The Borough's Administrator shall be designated to attend an
affirmative marketing housing program approved by COAH and
serve as the liaison to the administrative agency.
(3) All developers shall submit an affirmative marketing plan for
marketing low- and moderate-income units that conforms to this
subsection of the article. The affirmative marketing plan shall be
subject to the administrative agency approval and shall be
incorporated as a condition of approval of the development
application. The developer shall also be responsible for the
following unless such responsibilities are waived by the
administrative agency:
(a) Submissions of information as to financing terms readily
available to low- and moderate-income households for use by
the administrative agency in computing maximum sales prices.
§ 200-54.33 WATER § 200-54.33
189:805
§ 200-54.34. General provisions.
(b) Submission of an affordable housing plan and an affirmative
marketing plan to the administrative agency for approval and
submission of proofs of publication to ensure compliance with
said plan.
(c) The marketing of all low- and moderate-income units in
accordance with the requirements of this article.
(d) Submissions of quarterly reports to the administrative agency
detailing the number of low- and moderate-income households
who have signed leases or purchase agreements, as well as the
number who have taken occupancy of lower income units,
including household size, number of bedrooms in the unit, sale
price and monthly carrying costs or, in the case of rental units,
the monthly rental charges and utilities included.
(4) The developer's responsibilities hereunder shall expire
automatically with respect to for-sale low- and moderate-income
units upon the date upon which the last low- and moderate-income
unit within the particular development is sold by the developer.
With respect to rental low- and moderate-income units, the
developer's responsibilities shall be assumed by the landlord and
shall be performed by the landlord so long as such unit is a rental
low- and moderate-income unit and subject to the restrictions of
this article.
(5) The developer of affordable housing units shall be responsible for
returning all applicant and sales records for affordable units to the
administrative agency to aid in reporting to the court or COAH
(whichever has jurisdiction) and to aid in the evaluation of the
affirmative marketing program.
A. Wherever reference is made to low- or moderate-income housing in the
Borough's Zoning Ordinance, the standards, definitions and procedures
in this section shall apply.
B. Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, no low-income unit shall
be offered for sale or rental except at prices that are affordable by lowincome
households, and no moderate-income unit shall be offered for
sale or rental except at prices that are affordable by moderate-income
households. The provisions of this subsection shall apply equally to
qualified low- and moderate-income units or renters in terms of controls
on sale, resale, rental, or rerental of any low- and moderate-income
unit.
C. However, nothing contained in this article shall restrict or preclude any
household which was classified as low- or moderate-income based upon
its gross aggregate household income at the time it purchased or leased
a low- or moderate-income unit from continuing to own or lease said
§ 200-54.33 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.34
189:806
§ 200-54.35. Occupancy selection.
Applications shall be accepted only if submitted on an application form
prepared and/or approved by the administrative agency. Applications shall
be completely filled out and notarized. Knowingly or intentionally making
any false statement on a form shall be grounds for disqualifying an applicant
even if the applicant is otherwise eligible. In placing households in lowand
moderate-income unit, the following verification and certification
procedures shall be employed:
unit after its income exceeds the income ceilings established in this
article.
D. Prospective purchasers of low- and moderate-income units shall
receive, prior to or simultaneously with the execution of the contract to
purchase a low- and moderate-income unit, a copy of the deed
restriction and shall execute a disclosure statement which briefly
summarizes the salient features of the use, occupancy and resale
restrictions applicable to the low- and moderate-income unit. It shall be
the developer's responsibility to provide such for the initial sales and
subsequent owner's responsibility to provide the same for resales. The
developer shall record the deed restriction prior to conveying any title
to any individual low- and moderate-income unit, and the deeds and
leases of individual low- and moderate-income units must reference the
deed restriction.
E. The bylaws of the homeowner's association shall provide that the
proportional relationship between the condominium fees initially
assessed against market units and lower income units upon initial sale
shall be held constant over time with changes in the assessments.
Further, the public offering statement for any market units in
inclusionary developments shall clearly disclose the proportional
relationship to prospective purchasers.
A. Every household member 18 years of age or over who will live in the
affordable unit and receives income shall be required to provide income
documentation. This includes income received by adults on behalf of
minor children for their benefit. Household members 18 years of age or
over not receiving income must produce documentation of current
status.
B. Verification may include, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Four consecutive pay stubs including overtime, bonuses, or tips
dated within 120 days of the interview date or a letter from an
employer stating present annual income figure as projected
annually;
(2) A copy of regular IRS form 1040 (tax computation form) 1040A, or
1040 EZ, as applicable and state income tax returns filed for each
of the three years prior to the date of the interview;
§ 200-54.34 WATER § 200-54.35
189:807
(3) A letter of appropriate reporting form verifying benefits such as
social security, unemployment, welfare, disability or pension
income (monthly or annually);
(4) A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying any other sources
of income claimed by the applicant such as alimony and child
support;
(5) Reports that verify income from assets to be submitted by banks or
other financial institutions managing trust funds, money market
accounts, certificate of deposits, stocks or bonds;
(6) Evidence or reports of income from assets such as real estate or
businesses that are directly held by any household member;
(7) Evidence or reports that verify assets that do not earn regular
income such as non-income-producing real estate or savings that
do not earn interest; and
(8) A notarized statement of explanation in such form as to be
satisfactory to the administrative agency.
C. Generally, sources of annual income shall be based on regular income
reported to the IRS and which can be utilized for mortgage approval.
Household annual gross income shall be calculated by projecting
current gross income over a twelve-month period.
D. Income includes but is not limited to wages, salaries, tips, commission,
alimony, regularly scheduled overtime, pensions, social security,
unemployment compensation, AFDC, verified regular child support,
disability, net income from business or real estate, and income from
assets such as savings, CDs money market, mutual funds, stocks and
bonds and imputed income from non-income producing assets such as
equity in real estate.
E. Assets not earning a verifiable income shall have an imputed interest
income using a current average annual savings interest rate. Assets not
earning income include present real estate equity. Applicants owning
real estate must produce documentation of a market value appraisal
and outstanding mortgage debt. The difference will be treated as the
monetary value of the asset and the imputed interest added to income.
F. Income from assets that have delayed earnings, such as IRA's or
annuity programs, shall not be included in the current income until
such payments are being received. However, these assets must be
reported and verified.
G. Net rent from real estate is considered income after the monthly
mortgage payment including real estate taxes and insurance is
deducted. Other expenses are not deductible. In addition, the equity in
the rented real estate is considered an asset and will have the imputed
interest income on the calculated value of equity added to income.
§ 200-54.35 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.35
189:808
H. Income does not include payments, rebates, or credits received under
federal or state low-income home energy assistance programs, food
stamps, payments received for care of foster children, relocation
assistance benefits, income of live-in attendants, scholarships, student
loans, personal property such as automobiles, lump-sum additions to
family assets such as inheritances, one-time lottery winnings, and
insurance settlements except for additional income earned from these
additions, and casual, sporadic or irregular gifts and bonuses.
I. Standard credit information services that provide conventional credit
and tenant reports may be utilized when certifying a household with
required written permission from the household. An unsatisfactory
credit history or credit information that demonstrates a
disproportionate debt-to-income ratio may result in a denial of
certification. Court-ordered payments for alimony or child support to
another household shall be considered a regular monthly debt whether
or not it is being paid regularly.
J. Households whose total gross annual income is measured at 50% or
below 50% of the authorized median income guideline shall be certified
as low-income households and referred to units designated for lowincome
households.
K. Households whose total gross annual income is measured above 50%
but below 80% of the authorized median income guideline shall be
certified as moderate-income households and referred to units
designated for moderate-income households.
L. Generally, households will be referred to units where predetermined
total monthly housing costs correspond to the household's calculated
ability to pay using 28% of gross monthly income as a standard for
home ownership and 30% of gross monthly income as standard for
rental units.
M. At the discretion of the administrative agency, households may also be
required to produce documentation of household composition for
determining the correct unit size and applicable median income guide.
N. Generally, households will be referred to available units using the
following standards of occupancy:
(1) A maximum of two persons per bedroom;
(2) Children of same sex in bedroom;
(3) Unrelated adults or persons of the opposite sex other than husband
and wife in separate bedrooms; and
(4) Children no in the same bedroom with parents.
O. Households may be considered for units other than as above, but in no
case shall a household be referred to a unit that provides for more than
§ 200-54.35 WATER § 200-54.35
189:809
one additional bedroom per household occupancy standard as stated in
Subsection N above.
P. A form for certification shall be prepared and signed by the
administrative agency. Only households receiving certification shall be
referred to affordable units.
Q. Certified household who reject an opportunity for affordable housing
may remain on the referral list at their request and may be
reinterviewed for certification when their name appears on a list for a
subsequent unit.
R. Certification shall be valid for no more than 120 days unless a valid
sales contract or lease has been executed within that time period. In
this event, certifications shall be valid until such time as the sales
contract or lease is ruled invalid and no occupancy has occurred.
Certifications may be renewed in writing at the request of a certified
household for no more than an additional period of 120 days at the
discretion of the administrative agency.
S. Households who are denied certification may make a written request
for redetermination. Households shall be required to produce
additional documentation to support their claim.
§ 200-54.35 CLOSTER CODE § 200-54.35
189:810
ARTICLE XII
Trash and Garbage Stations
[Added 11-14-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:364]
§ 200-55. Purpose.
This Article is enacted to amend the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Closter to safeguard the health, life, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
Borough of Closter.
§ 200-56. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — Includes the residue from the burning of wood, glass, coke or
other combustible materials.
GARBAGE — Includes all putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods.
RUBBISH — Includes nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes),
consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass and similar materials.
TRASH — Includes all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes,
including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, solid market and industrial wastes or any material
no longer considered usable.
TRASH AND GARBAGE COMPACTING TRANSFER STATIONS — Includes
any stationary compacting unit, transfer station or other unit which is
operated by a mechanical device and which has as its purpose the
compacting of trash, garbage, rubbish and/or ashes of any and all kinds.
§ 200-57. Uses prohibited.
§ 200-58. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No.
1993:663]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as set forth
in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this
Code.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall manage, conduct, maintain or
operate a business the purpose of which is to store, treat, transfer or
compact trash, garbage, rubbish or ashes or similar debris within the
Borough of Closter.
B. The activities prohibited by Subsection A shall be deemed prohibited
uses in all zones in the Borough of Closter.
§ 200-55 WATER § 200-58
189:811

ARTICLE XIII
General Regulations
§ 200-59. Roadstands prohibited.
No structure commonly known as a "roadstand" which is used for the sale
of foodstuffs, beverages, confections, cigars, cigarettes or tobacco in any
form or any other products shall be permitted in the Borough of Closter.
This restriction shall not apply to stands selling farm products which have
been raised or produced on the premises.
§ 200-60. Permits for hospitals; data required.
The Board of Adjustment, as created herein, may authorize the issuance of
permits to build a hospital for other than contagious diseases, philanthropic
and eleemosynary institutions, public or private, but not treating contagious
diseases and not for the care of epileptic, insane, feebleminded, drug or
liquor patients. Said Board of Adjustment shall not issue said permits in
any case where the premises are contained in Residence Area A. Before
any permit shall be issued, proof shall be furnished that the building or
places to be used shall be located at least 50 feet from the nearest adjoining
premises and that parking facilities for visitors, employees and the staffs of
such institutions or establishments are available and arranged for such use
on the premises so as to avoid congestion of traffic on the public streets.
Proof shall also be furnished, to be evidenced by a certificate from the Board
of Health of the Borough of Closter, that the use will comply with all state
and local health regulations. Proof shall also be furnished to the satisfaction
of the Board of Adjustment that such use will not constitute a nuisance and
be prejudicial to the public welfare or be detrimental to the preservation of
the general character of the neighborhood.
§ 200-61. Permits for mortuary parlors; data required.
The Board of Adjustment, as created herein, shall also authorize the
issuance of permits for undertaking or mortuary parlors. Said permits shall
not be issued in any case where the premises are contained in Residence
Area A. Before said permit shall be issued, proof shall be furnished that the
building or place to be used shall be located at least 50 feet from the nearest
adjoining premises. Further proof shall be furnished that parking facilities
shall be available on the premises in order to avoid congestion of traffic on
the public streets.
§ 200-62. Permits for amusement parks, etc; restrictions. [Amended
8-11-1980 by Ord. No. 1980:387; 9-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:633]
A. All permits for the use of premises for amusement parks, circuses or
carnivals shall be issued by the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Closter, but no permit shall be issued for any said purpose for any lands,
premises or buildings in Residence Area A or Residence Area B.
§ 200-59 WATER § 200-62
189:813
§ 200-63. Specific use regulations for all districts.
The provisions, restrictions, prohibitions and requirements hereinafter set
forth shall apply to all districts set forth and designated in this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter which prohibit the use of premises for an
amusement park, carnival or circus shall not apply to any charitable
organization requesting a permit, provided that:
(1) Such activities are conducted on property owned by such
charitable organization.
(2) Such activities are in compliance with N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq. and the
rules and regulations as promulgated by the Legalized Games of
Chance Control Commission.
(3) Approval of said permit is granted by resolution of the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter
A. No building, structure, premises or lot of land shall be used for any
trade, industry, business or purpose which is or may reasonably be
expected to be noxious, obnoxious or offensive by reason of causing or
emitting odors, smoke, vapor, gas, dust, refuse matter, noise or
vibration, radioactivity or electronic interference or is dangerous to the
public health, safety, morals or welfare of the Borough.
B. No building, structure or premises or part thereof shall be used as a
trailer camp or for the parking, storage or sale of trailers. The word
"trailer" herein means any mobile or portable structure designed,
intended or suitable for use as a dwelling.
C. No building, structure, premises or part thereof may be used for a
motor court, motel, motor hotel, hotel or use of a similar nature or for
any drive-in restaurant, refreshment stand or ice cream parlor or
establishment.
D. No building, structure or premises shall be used for or in conjunction
with the outdoor sale of automobiles or for the sale of more than one
used car or for the following purposes:
(1) Sale of used or secondhand materials or parts.
(2) Outdoor storage of motor vehicles or other power equipment not in
operating condition.
(3) Storage or sale of surplus materials or junk, including wrecked or
junked automobiles.
(4) Outdoor storage of contractor's power-operated or power-actuated
equipment.
(5) Drive-in theaters.
(6) Outdoor or drive-in food markets.
§ 200-62 CLOSTER CODE § 200-63
189:814
§ 200-64. Specific use regulations for District Nos. 1 and 2.
The provisions, restrictions, prohibitions and requirements hereinafter set
forth shall apply to District Nos.1 and 2 set forth and designated in this
chapter.
(7) Outdoor storage of supplies, parts, components, raw materials,
goods in process or finished goods, except, however, trees, shrubs,
plants or other garden supply products.
E. No building shall be erected, constructed or altered for any
nonresidential use or purpose unless the provisions of Article IX shall
have been followed and until the site plan, as therein set forth, shall
have been approved by the Planning Board and by the Mayor and
Council.
F. Temporary permits may be issued for a use permitted in a zone for a
duration of no longer than one month (30 days), up to a maximum of
three temporary permits per vendor in any twelve-month period. The
duration of the temporary permit may be waived and/or revised by the
Mayor and Council. To obtain a waiver/revision, the applicant must
submit a written appeal to the Mayor and Council, via the Borough
Clerk. Thereafter, the appeal shall be heard as soon as practicable at a
public meeting. [Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1210]
A. The owner or occupant of residential premises may store his or her own
boat or a boat for his or her own use, provided that: [Amended
12-11-1985 by Ord. No. 1985:519]
(1) The boat is stored so that no portion of the boat is between the
building setback line and the front property line. On corner lots,
each adjoining street frontage shall be considered to have a
building setback line and a front property line.
(2) No boat shall be stored closer than five feet to any property line.
B. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon a
public street improved to meet the Borough's standards and accepted
by the Borough for maintenance.
C. A yard or other open space provided about any buildings for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall not be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building,
and a yard or other open space on another lot shall not be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building on any other lot.
D. Accessory buildings in residential zones shall be located within the
setback line controlling principal buildings on adjoining lots on the
same side of the street within the same block.
E. Commercial motor vehicles. [Added 7-28-1976 by Ord. No.
1976:288]
§ 200-63 WATER § 200-64
189:815
§ 200-64.1. Home office uses in residential zones. [Added 8-23-2000
by Ord. No. 2000:831]
Home office use, meaning an office activity carried on for gain by a resident
in a dwelling unit, shall be a permitted accessory use in residential zone
districts, provided:
(1) Commercial motor vehicle defined. "Commercial motor vehicle"
shall mean and include every type of motor-driven vehicle used for
commercial purposes, including but not limited to the
transportation of goods, materials, wares, chattels and
merchandise and motor vehicles used for making service calls
which have a gross registered vehicle weight in excess of 7,000
pounds. An exception is made for recreational vehicles which are
registered as such.
(2) No commercial vehicle, bus, truck or tractor shall be parked in
Residence District Nos. 1 or 2, except for commercial vehicles
during the course of services or repairs being rendered to or at a
residence at which such vehicle is parked.
F. Front yard parking or standing of motor vehicles. No person shall park,
stop or stand any motor vehicle or permit or suffer the same to be done
for any extended period in any front yard, as defined in § 200-5, except
on driveways constructed and installed in compliance with applicable
Borough ordinances. For purposes of this subsection, "extended period"
shall mean on a regular basis, not necessarily daily or continuous, so as
to be a normal practice; it shall not include periods of time where, by
way of example, a family member is home on school break or summer
vacation. [Added 12-9-1992 by Ord. No. 1992:642]
A. The use is limited solely to office use;
B. The use is operated by or employs in the residence only a resident or
residents who are permanent full-time residents of the dwelling unit,
and no other persons;
C. No nonresident employees, customers, or business invitees or guests
shall visit the dwelling unit for business purposes;
D. The use shall be located in only one room of the dwelling unit, which
shall not be served by an entrance separate from the household;
E. Interior storage of materials shall only consist of office supplies;
F. There shall be no change to the exterior of buildings or structures
because of the use, and no outside apearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to parking, storage, signs, or lights.
G. The use operates no equipment or process that creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic interference, including
§ 200-64 CLOSTER CODE § 200-64.1
189:816
interference with telephone, radio or television reception, detectable by
neighboring residents;
H. The use does not require any increased or enhanced electrical or water
supply;
I. The quantity and type of solid waste disposal is the same as other
residential uses in the zone district;
J. The capacity and quality of effluent is typical of normal residential use,
and creates no potential or actual detriment to the sanitary sewer
system or its components;
K. Delivery trucks shall be limited to United States Postal Service, United
Parcel Service, Federal Express, and other delivery services providing
regular service to residential uses in the zone district;
L. All vehicular traffic to and from the home office use shall be limited in
volume, type and frequency to what is normally associated with other
residential uses in the zone district.
§ 200-64.1 WATER § 200-64.1
189:817

ARTICLE XIV
Nonconforming Buildings
§ 200-65. Change to conforming use final.
Where a nonconforming use is changed to a use permitted in the district in
which it is located, it shall not thereafter be changed from said conforming
use to a nonconforming use.
§ 200-66. Change by abandonment.
Whenever there shall be a discontinuance or cessation of any
nonconforming use for a period of one year, such nonconforming use shall
be adjudged as abandoned, and the premises can only thereafter be used in
conformity with the existing requirements of the zone or district in which
said premises are located.
§ 200-65 WATER § 200-66
189:819

ARTICLE XV
Gasoline Stations, Public Garages and Repair Shops
§ 200-67. Permit required; applications; data.
No person, firm or corporation shall erect, alter or use any structure for
a gasoline station, public garage, repair shop or similar use without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Closter. Application for said permit shall be made in writing, accompanied
by detailed plans and specifications of the structure intended to be erected,
altered or so used. No permit shall be granted unless the structure or use
conforms to the following minimum requirements:
A. The lot upon which the proposed use is situated shall not be within a
distance of 200 feet, as measured along the public street, of a school,
church, hospital, theater or public library.
B. The lot upon which the use is to be located shall not be situated or have
an entrance or exit within 50 feet of any property in the Residence Area
A, Residence Area B or Business Area Zones.
C. All facilities used in connection with said business shall be located
entirely upon private property, and no facilities shall be installed for the
servicing of any cars while said cars are located on the public street.
D. No public garage or repair shop shall have any openings in the side or
rear walls or roof within 10 feet of any lot line.
E. No public garage shall have any of its ground floor storage space or
workshop within 25 feet of the front street line.
F. All exterior walls of a public garage, gasoline station or repair shop
shall be constructed of fireproof materials.
G. All automobile repair work shall be done inside the building and not out
of doors; provided, however, that the mechanical repair work (i.e.,
working on mechanical parts of a vehicle and not painting, bodywork,
refinishing, etc.) may be done out of doors during the hours of 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. [Amended 1-2-1997 by Ord. No. 1996:736]
H. The entrance or exit driveways for a public garage shall be at least
eight feet wide and shall be extended directly to a street.
§ 200-67 WATER § 200-67
189:821

ARTICLE XVI
Accessory Buildings
§ 200-68. Location requirements.
All accessory buildings in residence zones and the business area shall
conform to the following regulations as to their location on the lot or plot:
A. Where there is an interior lot fronting upon only one street, no
accessory building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon
any part of the front half of the lot depth nearest said street.
B. Where there is an interior lot fronting upon two or more streets, no
accessory building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon
the one-fourth ( 1/4) of the lot depth nearest each and every street.
C. Where there is a corner lot fronting upon two streets, no accessory
building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon the area
between each respective street and a line drawn parallel to each such
street in a manner to divide the lot into two equal parts.
D. Where there is a corner lot fronting upon three or more streets, no
accessory building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon
that one-fourth ( 1/4) of the lot depth nearest each and every street.
E. No accessory building on any interior lot shall be located within 10 feet
of its rear or side lot line where such line forms part of the front half of
the side line of an adjacent lot or front quarter of the side line of an
adjacent through lot.
F. No accessory building on a corner lot shall be located within 10 feet of
its rear or side lot line when such line forms part of the front half of the
side lot line of an adjacent lot or the front quarter of the side line of an
adjacent through lot, whether the latter is an interior or corner lot.
G. No accessory building shall project beyond the setback line controlling
the adjoining buildings on the same side of the street within the block.
H. Any accessory building in a residence or business zone shall be distant
at least three feet from any lot or parcel line and, if within 72 feet from
the street line, shall be distant at least seven feet from any lot or parcel
side line.
I. Where the height of the ground on any lot or parcel in a residence zone
is five feet or more above the curb level at a point 15 feet from the
street line and continuous at such or greater height to the rear of the
lot, a masonry garage may be constructed within not less than five feet
from the street line and not less than seven feet from the side line of the
lot or parcel, provided that such garage shall not extend more than five
feet above the general level of the ground adjacent to the garage, such
height to include cheek walls, roof or ornamental parapet.
§ 200-68 WATER § 200-68
189:823
J. The limitations imposed by this section upon the location of an
accessory building shall be waived when the accessory building is
incorporated as an integral part of or is enclosed by the same enclosing
walls as the building to which it is accessory.
§ 200-68 CLOSTER CODE § 200-68
189:824
ARTICLE XVII
Heights and Open Spaces
§ 200-69. Restrictions; schedule.
A. All buildings hereafter erected, constructed or altered within the
Borough of Closter shall be placed and designed in conformity with
certain restrictions, which restrictions are set forth in Limiting
Schedules A and B in this chapter and made a direct part of this
section.200 [Amended 7-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:671]
B. Said schedules shall contain requirements, including but not limited to
the height of buildings, the size of lot area, lot width, lot depth, street
frontage, number of families, building coverage impervious area
coverage, yard setbacks, open space and parking spaces. [Amended
7-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:671]
C. The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter deem these
requirements as set forth herein and the schedule made a part of this
chapter to be necessary for the best public interest and health, comfort,
convenience and protection of property values and the preservation of
public peace, safety, morals, order and general welfare of the Borough
of Closter.
D. Schedules. [Amended 7-13-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:671]
(1) Schedule A, Limiting Schedule, sets forth the limiting schedule for
permitted uses in all Borough districts and for conditional uses in
all districts excepting No. 1 Residence Area A and No. 2 Residence
Area B.201
(2) Schedule B, Limiting Schedule for Group Gathering Uses.202
(a) This schedule sets forth the limiting schedule for churches or
places of worship as a conditional use and other group
gathering uses, only if approved by use variance, in residential
zones.
(b) The requirements of Limiting Schedule B are the requirements
for all group gathering uses in the Borough's residential
districts, notwithstanding the provisions of § 200-70A and B
and § 200-71, which regulate residential uses only.
(c) All group gathering uses in residential districts shall also be
subject to the conditions imposed upon churches and houses of
worship as set forth in § 200-6.1, Conditional uses.
200. Editor's Note: Schedules A and B are included at the end of this chapter.
201. Editor's Note: Schedule A is included at the end of this chapter.
202. Editor's Note: Schedule B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 200-69 WATER § 200-69
189:825
E. Number of uses and buildings per lot. [Amended 4-21-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980:372; 6-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1186]
(1) Number of uses on lot. There shall be no more than one principal
use on each lot, with the exception of the Business Area (Zone 3).
(2) Number of principal buildings on a lot. There shall be no more than
one principal building on each lot, with the exception of the
Business Area (Zone 3).
F. Where there presently exists a building which was in conformity with
the zoning regulations of the Zoning Code of the Borough of Closter in
District No. 1, Residence Area A, or District No. 2, Residence Area B, at
the time of the original construction but which is not in conformity at
the time an application is filed with the Construction Official for
alteration or addition, the Construction Official shall review the survey
showing the proposed construction, and if said survey indicates that the
alteration or addition does not violate any currently existing limiting
schedule requirement (excepting minimum size of lot and lot width at
the building setback line), then a building permit shall be issued
without the need of a variance. [Added 7-24-1985 by Ord. No.
1985:512; amended 4-10-1991 by Ord. No. 1991:609; 11-13-1991
by Ord. No. 1991:616]
G. Floor area ratios. [Added 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005: 953203]
(1) Residential development and construction shall be subject to the
maximum floor area ratios contained herein. The maximum floor
area ratio that is applicable to a lot(s) is as follows:
(a) For lot(s) with a lot area of 5,000 square feet or less, there shall
be no maximum floor area ratio.
(b) For lot(s) with a lot area greater than 5,000 square feet and up
to and including 7,500 square feet, the floor area ratio shall not
exceed 0.45.
(c) For lot(s) with a lot area greater than 7,500 square feet and
less than 10,000 square feet, the floor area ratio shall not
exceed 0.40.
(d) For lot(s) with a lot area of 10,000 square feet and less than
25,000 square feet, the floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.35.
(e) For lot(s) with a lot area greater than 25,000 square feet, the
floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.30.
203. Section 4 of this ordinance provided in part as follows: Any and all applications for zoning
approval submitted on or before October 26, 2005, and approved within the statutory
period shall not be subject to the FAR Ordinance restrictions, and any and all construction
projects for which building permits have been issued on or before October 26, 2005, shall
not be subject to the FAR Ordinance restrictions.
§ 200-69 CLOSTER CODE § 200-69
189:826
§ 200-70. Setbacks.
Setbacks shall be in accordance with the following:
(2) Nothing herein shall be construed to alter the minimum lot area
requirements of the Limiting Schedule.
A. District No. 1, Residence Area A.
(1) Average setback of existing buildings on the same side of the street
between intersecting streets. The maximum requirements in any
case shall be 50 feet. Where no buildings exist in the same block,
the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 35 feet.
(2) Dwellings on corner lots shall have the required front setback upon
the street which the residence faces. The other street frontage
shall comply with the average setback of existing buildings on the
same side of the street between intersecting streets. The maximum
requirements in any case shall be 50 feet. Where no buildings exist
in the same block, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 35
feet.
B. District No. 2, Residence Area B.
(1) Average setback of existing buildings on the same side of the street
between intersecting streets. The maximum requirement in any
case shall be 40 feet. Where no buildings exist in the same block,
the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25 feet.
(2) Dwellings on corner lots shall have the required front setback upon
the street which the residence faces. The other street frontage
shall comply with the average setback of existing buildings on the
same side of the street between intersecting streets. The maximum
requirement in any case shall be 40 feet. Where no buildings exist
in the same block, the minimum depth of the front yard shall be 25
feet.
C. District No. 3, Business Area.
(1) A minimum depth or setback which shall be equal to the average
setback of the two nearest adjacent buildings or structures
permitted in the Business Area or a distance of 10 feet from the
front property line, whichever is the lesser.
(2) Wherever there is an existing residential structure erected upon a
lot in the Business Area, upon which lot it is desired to erect a
structure permitted in this district, said new structure shall be
assessed to the existing residential structure and, thereafter, the
first floor of said residential structure shall be used only for a use
permitted in said area, exclusive of a use permitted in Residential
Area A or Residential Area B where the same is situate.
D. District No. 4, Commercial Area.
§ 200-69 WATER § 200-70
189:827
§ 200-71. Exceptions to limiting schedule.
(1) A minimum depth or setback which shall be equal to the average
setback of the two nearest adjacent buildings or structures
permitted in the Commercial Area or a distance of 10 feet from the
property line, whichever is the lesser.
(2) Wherever there is an existing residential structure erected upon a
lot in the Commercial Area, upon which lot it is desired to erect a
structure permitted in this district, said new structure shall be
assessed to the existing residential structure, and thereafter, the
first floor of said residential structure shall be used only for a use
permitted in said area, exclusive of a use permitted in Residential
Area A or Residential Area B where the same is situate.
E. District No. 5, Industrial Area. Wherever there is an existing residential
structure erected upon a lot in the Industrial Area, upon which lot it is
desired to erect a structure permitted in this district, said new
structure shall be assessed to the existing residential structure, and
thereafter, the first floor of said residential structure shall be used only
for a use permitted in said area, exclusive of a use permitted in
Residential Area A or Residential Area B where the same is situate.
[Amended 12-12-1979 by Ord. No. 1979:368; 6-23-1980 by Ord.
No. 1980:381; 6-24-1981 by Ord. No. 1981:408]
A. Any plot 50 feet or more in width existing as a separate parcel and not
complying with the requirement at the time of passage of this chapter
(December 19, 1940) may, notwithstanding such fact, be improved with
a building in accordance with the other regulations of its district,
provided that the owner owns no adjacent land which may be included
as part of the lot in question. This exception is limited to the erection of
one-family dwellings and applies only to parcels located in District No.
2, Residence Area B.
B. Any plot 60 feet or more in width existing as a separate parcel prior to
July 21, 1943, and not complying with the requirements of the limiting
schedule for District No. 2, Residence Area B, under frontage width, as
amended, may, notwithstanding such fact, be improved with a building
in accordance with the other regulations of its district, provided that
the owner owns no adjacent land which may be included as part of the
lot in question. This exception is limited to the erection of one-family
dwellings and applies only to parcels located in District No. 2,
Residence Area B.
C. Any plot 75 feet or more in width existing as a separate parcel prior to
July 21, 1948, and not complying with the requirements of the Limiting
Schedule, District No. 1, Residence Area A, under frontage width, as
amended may, notwithstanding such fact, be improved with a building
in accordance with other regulations of its district, provided that the
owner owns no adjacent land which may be included as part of the lot in
§ 200-70 CLOSTER CODE § 200-71
189:828
§ 200-72. Flag lots. [Added 4-29-1987 by Ord. No. 1987:538]
Flag lots shall not be permitted in any district in the Borough of Closter.
§ 200-73. Drainage rights-of-way.
question. This exception shall apply only to parcels of land situated in
District No. 1, Residence Area A.
D. Improvements.
(1) Any plot, either in District No. 1, Residence Area A, or District No.
2, Residence Area B, may be improved with a building in
accordance with other regulations of its district, provided that such
plot or parcel shall, prior to the date of the passage of this chapter,
fulfill either of the following requirements:
(a) Said parcel shall have existed as a separate parcel and shall
have constituted a legal building plot prior to the passage of
this chapter, provided that the owner thereof owns no adjacent
land which may be included as part of the plot in question; or
(b) Said plot was included as part of a subdivision heretofore
approved by the Planning Board of the Borough of Closter and
constituted a legal building plot in said subdivision prior to the
passage of this chapter.
(c) To allow for no more than a twenty-four-inch-by-seventy-eightinch
extension for a chimney structure to the side yard
limitations of this chapter. [Added 9-8-1999 by Ord. No.
1999:807]
(d) To allow for no more than a twenty-four-inch soffit. [Added
9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:848]
(2) This exception shall be limited to the erection of one-family
dwellings upon any such plot.
A. No building, structure or any part thereof and no fence or other
structure shall be constructed, altered, located or placed nearer to the
center line of any drainage canal, stream or brook than as hereinafter
specified:
(1) Tenakill Brook (also known as "Tenakill Drainage Canal"). For that
section of Tenakill Brook from the boundary between the Borough
of Norwood and the Borough of Closter to Durie Avenue: 55 feet;
for that section of Tenakill Brook from Durie Avenue to the
boundary between the Borough of Closter and the Borough of
Demarest: 50 feet.
B. No bridges, culverts, viaducts, watersheds or drainage structures or
any structures shall be constructed over, under or in the bed or across
any brook, drainage canal or stream unless the same shall have been
§ 200-71 WATER § 200-73
189:829
designed by a licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey
and reviewed and approved by the Borough Engineer and approved by
the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter. Such approval shall be
denied if, in the opinion of the Borough Engineer, the proposed bridge,
culvert, viaduct, watershed or drainage structure or other structure
shall obstruct the flow of water in said drainage canal, brook or stream
to such an extent as to be liable to cause flooding in the area.
C. Nothing hereinafter provided shall be construed so as to prohibit the
construction of a bridge, culvert, viaduct, watershed or drainage
structure by any governmental agency authorized so to do.
§ 200-73 CLOSTER CODE § 200-73
189:830
ARTICLE XVIIA
Conservation Zone
[Added 2-27-2013 by Ord. No. 2013:1137]
§ 200-73.1. Conservation Zone established. [Amended 6-25-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014:1169]
The Conservation Zone shall consist of the following Borough-owned
properties:
Block Lot(s) Property Name
1801 1 Blanch Woods
(contiguous with Nature
Center and Buzzoni
Farm)
1802 1 Blanch Woods
1803 1 Blanch Woods
1804 1 and 2 Blanch Woods
1806 2 Buzzoni Farm Park
1701 3 Lenapehoking Preserve
1702 2.01, 6, 7 Lenapehoking Preserve
804 6 Memorial Park
607 1 Mollicone Park
1402 25, 26 Closter Nature Center
1501 22, 26, 27, Closter Nature Center
28, 29 Closter Nature Center
1601 10 Closter Nature Center
1901 1, 33.03 Closter Nature Center
1902 1, 4, 5 Closter Nature Center
907 14, 42 Farrell Woods
(contiguous with Olaf &
Ingeborg Hagen Park)
1002 17, 7, 8 Olaf & Ingeborg Hagen
Park
1006 9, 10, 11, Olaf & Ingeborg Hagen
Park
12, 21, 23, 24 Olaf & Ingeborg Hagen
Park
913 6, 7 Olaf & Ingeborg Hagen
Park
§ 200-73.1 WATER § 200-73.1
189:831
Block Lot(s) Property Name
804 1, 2, 3, 4 Remembrance Park
(contiguous with
Memorial Park)
1501 28 Ruckman Park
1902 1, 2, 3 Ruckman Park
515 3 Schauble Park
516 3 Schauble Park
517 3, 4, 5, 6 Schauble Park
518 5 Schauble Park
601 1 Schauble Park
604 1, 2, 3 Schauble Park
605 1 Schauble Park
§ 200-73.2. Uses.
The following regulations are applicable in the Conservation Zone:
A. Permitted uses. No building, structure, premises or facility shall be
used and no building, structure or facility shall be erected or physically
and structurally altered except for the following uses:
(1) Centers with related facilities for the purpose of studying, learning,
recordkeeping, and gathering information on the wildlife, ecology
and natural resources indigenous to the surrounding area.
(2) Parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, botanical gardens,
conservatories and similar open space.
B. Prohibited uses. Except as set forth above, all uses not specifically
permitted are therefore prohibited.
C. Accessory uses. Permitted is any accessory use on the same lot with and
customarily incidental to any principal use permitted in this district. No
accessory structure shall be larger in area than 15% of the area of the
principal structure. Permitted accessory uses shall consist of but not
necessarily be limited to 1) nature trails for walking and biking and 2)
toilet facilities.
§ 200-73.1 CLOSTER CODE § 200-73.2
189:832
ARTICLE XVIII
Administration
§ 200-74. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare.
§ 200-75. Enforcement officer.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer.
The Code Enforcement Official shall enforce resolutions of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and the Planning Board. [Amended 11-13-1996
by Ord. No. 1996:732; 9-12-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:848]
B. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to keep a record of all
applications for permits, together with a record of all permits issued.
He or she shall file and safely keep copies of all plats submitted and
shall have them available for the use of the officials of the Borough of
Closter.
C. The Zoning Officer shall not issue a permit for the construction or use of
any building or property unless there first is filed with him or her a copy
of the plans and specifications for the construction or alteration,
together with a plot plan drawn to scale showing the location of all
present and proposed buildings on the same. In addition thereto, he or
she shall require a complete statement of the use for which any present
or proposed buildings or premises are to be occupied. No such permit
shall be issued unless the construction or use shall also conform to the
requirements of this or all other ordinances of the Borough of Closter.
D. All requests for building permits shall be made in writing, on forms
supplied by the Construction Official, by the owner or his or her
authorized representative. [Amended 11-13-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:732]
E. All building permits granted by the Construction Official shall be valid
for a period of six months from the date of issuance, and all such
permits shall bear the date of issuance. If no construction or alteration
has commenced within said six-month period after issuance, the
applicant may not commence any construction or alteration thereafter
unless he or she has applied for and obtained an extension of said
building permit for an additional six-month period prior to the
expiration thereof. The Construction Official is authorized to extend any
building permit for an additional six-month period, making a total
period of one year. If no construction or alteration has commenced one
year from the date of issuance of the original building permit, no
construction or alteration may commence thereafter under said
building permit. The applicant thereafter shall be required to obtain a
new building permit in compliance with this chapter and all other
§ 200-74 WATER § 200-75
189:833
§ 200-76. Certificate of zoning approval. [Amended 9-8-1971 by
Ord. No. 1971:224; 3-13-1985 by Ord. No. 1985:491; 9-12-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:848]
§ 200-77. Application for certificate; issuance. [Amended 9-12-2001
by Ord. No. 2001:848]
ordinances of the Borough of Closter at said time. [Added 8-9-1972 by
Ord. No. 1972:236; amended 11-13-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:732]
A. No building hereinafter erected or altered shall be occupied or used, in
whole or in part, for any use whatsoever, and no property shall be used
and no change of use shall hereafter be made of any building or part
thereof or any premises used until a certificate of zoning approval has
been issued by the Zoning Officer indicating that the building complies
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. When any structure or building or premises have been used or occupied
for a use which constituted a nonconforming use and such use is
discontinued or such occupancy ceases, then no person shall thereafter
occupy or use said structure or building or premises for any use
whatsoever until a certificate of zoning approval has been issued by the
Zoning Officer indicating that the proposed occupancy or use is
authorized and complies with the requirements of this chapter.
C. Existing buildings. Upon request from an owner of an existing building
or structure, the Zoning Officer shall issue a certificate of continued
zoning approval, provided that there are no violations of law or orders
of the Zoning Officer pending and it is established after inspection and
investigation that the alleged use of the building or structure has
heretofore existed. The certificate of continued zoning approval shall
evidence only that a general inspection of the visible parts of the
building has been made and that there are no apparent violations of the
regulations. Nothing in this provision shall prevent the continued use
and occupancy of any such lawfully existing building or structure.
A. Application for such certificate of zoning approval shall be made upon
forms to be obtained from the Zoning Officer, which application form
shall include an endorsement of approval, where necessary as
hereinafter specified, for the issuance of such certificate of zoning
approval by each of the following:
(1) The Borough Engineer, in all cases where the building is being
erected in a section where new roads, sidewalks, drains or other
public improvements are being installed.
(2) The Plumbing Inspector, in all cases where the building includes
the installation of plumbing or sanitary facilities.
B. Upon presentation of such application, properly endorsed to the Zoning
Officer, the issuance of such certificate of zoning approval shall be
§ 200-75 CLOSTER CODE § 200-77
189:834
§ 200-78. Fees. [Amended 10-13-1971 by Ord. No. 1971:226;
4-11-1973 by Ord. No. 1973:246; 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
The Zoning Officer shall collect a fee for the issuance of certificates of
occupancy in accordance with the sums set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and
Deposits.
§ 200-79. Variances: time requirements. [Added 8-9-1972 by Ord.
No. 1972:235; amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
Whenever any exception or variance is granted or recommended by the
Board of Adjustment pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 or
whenever the Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter approve a
recommendation for a variance pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d, any such exception or variance shall expire and become null
and void and of no effect one year after the date of such approval unless
the applicant has commenced construction upon the property for which
such exception or variance was granted or approved or has commenced
construction, alteration or conversion upon a building on such property for
which such variance or exception was granted or approved.
§ 200-80. Amendments.
The Mayor and Council may from time to time, on their own adoption or on
petition, after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement or change the
regulations and districts herein established and adopt rules and regulations
for the purpose of interpreting and carrying this chapter into effect. Every
such proposed amendment, supplement or change shall be referred by
the Mayor and Council to either the Board of Adjustment or any Planning
Board which may be legally in existence at that time for the purpose
of investigation and report. The recommendation sent to the Mayor and
Council shall be advisory only.
granted or denied within 10 days from the date of the application
therefor.
§ 200-77 WATER § 200-80
189:835

ARTICLE XIX
Board of Adjustment
§ 200-81. Composition; terms.
A. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven regular members and four
alternate members, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Borough Council, none of whom shall hold any elective
office or appointive position under the Borough of Closter. [Amended
3-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-931]
B. The members of the Board of Adjustment as heretofore established
shall constitute the regular members of said Board, and the terms of
said members are hereby continued until the respective dates of
expiration of the terms to which said members were appointed.
Subsequent appointments of regular members, except to fill vacancies
occurring during a term, shall be made for terms of three years,
commencing January 1 of the year in which the appointment is made.
C. The four alternate members first appointed to the Board of Adjustment
shall be appointed to terms as follows: Two alternate members shall be
appointed to a term of one year, each term to commence on January 1 of
the year in which said alternate members are appointed and two
alternate members shall be appointed to a term of two years, each term
to commence on January 1 of the year in which said alternate members
are appointed. Subsequent appointments of alternate members, except
to fill vacancies occurring during a term, shall be for a term of two
years, to take effect January 1 of the year in which the alternate
member is appointed. The terms of not more than two alternate
members shall expire in any one year. [Amended 3-9-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-931]
D. All vacancies in office on the Board of Adjustment arising from or
created by any cause other than expiration of term of office shall be
filled for the unexpired term only. Such vacancies shall be filled in the
manner hereinafter provided for making appointments.
E. Regular and alternate members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
appointed pursuant to and in accordance with the procedures provided
by New Jersey law. [Amended 3-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-931]
F. Regular and alternate members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
removable for cause by the Borough Council of the Borough of Closter
upon written charges and after public hearing.
G. The Chairman of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall designate the
alternate members as "Alternate No. 1," "Alternate No. 2," Alternate
No. 3" and "Alternate No. 4." The alternate members shall serve in
rotation, whenever possible, during the absence or disqualification of
any regular member or members of the Board. In no case, however,
§ 200-81 WATER § 200-81
189:837
§ 200-82. Procedure rules; meetings; records.
The Board of Adjustment shall adopt such rules and regulations as it may
deem necessary to govern its procedure. Meetings of the Board shall be
held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board
may determine. The Chairman of the Board or, in his or her absence, the
Acting Chairman shall have power to issue subpoenas for the attendance of
witnesses and the production of records and may administer oaths. Upon
the failure of any person to answer in response to a subpoena of such officer,
application may be made to the Supreme Court or any Justice thereof for
an order compelling the attendance of such witnesses. All meetings of the
Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately
filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public record.
§ 200-83. Appeals.
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved
or by any officer, department or board of the Borough of Closter affected
by any decision of the Zoning Officer. Such appeal shall be taken within a
reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the
Board of Adjustment and Zoning Officer a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Zoning Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from
was taken.
§ 200-84. Notices of appeal; serving.
An appeal shall stay all proceedings and the Board of Adjustment shall
fix a reasonable time for the hearing, giving due notice to the applicant.
Said applicant shall, at least five days prior to the time for hearing, give
personal notice to all owners of property within 200 feet of the property to
be affected by the appeal. Personal notice shall be by handing the notice
to the property owner or by leaving a copy at the owner's usual place of
abode when the property owner is a resident of the Borough of Closter.
shall more than seven members of the Board hear, act upon or
determine any matter appealed or presented to the Board for its official
action; provided however, that the presence of alternate members shall
not affect or disturb quorum, voting or other procedural requirements
when any case is heard by the seven regular members of the Board.
[Amended 3-9-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-931]
H. Unless it is otherwise expressly provided or there is something in the
subject or context repugnant to such construction, the terms "Board of
Adjustment" and "Board," when used in this chapter, shall be deemed to
mean any combination of regular and alternate members constituting
the Board on any given occasion.
§ 200-81 CLOSTER CODE § 200-84
189:838
Where the property owner is a nonresident of the Borough, notice shall
be by registered mail to the address shown on the most recent tax list
of the Borough or the last known address of said owner. Service on one
partner shall be sufficient for a partnership, and service upon an officer
shall be sufficient for service on a corporation. At the time of the hearing,
the appellant shall file an affidavit following proper serving of notice. Any
party may appear at the hearing, in person or by agent or attorney.
§ 200-85. Timely decision.
The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision within 60 days from the
date of hearing.
§ 200-86. Additional powers.
In addition to the above powers and duties, the Board of Adjustment shall
have the power to hear and decide cases and assume the powers granted
to them by the Laws of the State of New Jersey as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-36 to 40:55D-46, and all other laws now in existence or to be
hereafter enacted pertaining to said Board of Adjustment and its powers
and duties.
§ 200-84 WATER § 200-86
189:839

ARTICLE XX
Enforcement
§ 200-87. Violations and penalties.
A. Any owner, lessee or other person or persons who permits, takes part or
assists in any violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction for each and every violation thereof, be subject to a penalty
as set forth in Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and
Penalties, of this Code. [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord. No. 1993:663]
B. When such a violation shall continue for more than one day, each day of
the continuation of said offense shall be considered as a separate
violation of this chapter.
C. No provision of this section shall be construed to prevent the Borough
of Closter from taking injunctive proceedings in the Court of Chancery
of New Jersey or any other court for the proper enforcement of this
chapter and the prevention of continuance of violations of the same.
§ 200-87 WATER § 200-87
189:841

ARTICLE XXI
Satellite Earth Stations
[Added 7-11-1984 by Ord. No. 1984:475]
§ 200-88. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SATELLITE EARTH STATION — Any apparatus, building or structure which
is designed for the purpose of receiving television, microwave, satellite
or similar signals, in excess of 35 inches in diameter, used in connection
with what is commonly referred to as "dish-type antennas."[Amended
8-10-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1211]
§ 200-89. Administration officer designated.
The provisions of this Article shall be administered by the Zoning Official of
the Borough of Closter.
§ 200-90. Submission and review procedures.
§ 200-91. Plan details.
The plan shall be drawn on a map to a scale not smaller than one inch equals
40 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and shall include and
show the following information:
A. Any property owner or person or entity in possession of property shall
submit to the Zoning Official, prior to the placement of a satellite earth
station, a plan showing the size of the satellite earth station, the
proposed location of the same on the subject premises and such other
information as may be required herein.
B. The Zoning Official shall review said plan and render a decision within
20 days of the submission of said plan or within such further time as
may be consented to by the property owners or person in possession of
property.
A. The name and address of the applicant and the owner and the name,
address and the person or entity preparing the plan and accompanying
data, the date of preparation and the dates of each revision where
applicable.
B. An appropriate place for the signature of the Zoning Official.
C. The lot(s) and block number of the lot(s) from the Borough Tax Map and
the length and bearings of the lot lines of the proposed project.
D. The location, names and pavement and right-of-way widths of all
existing and proposed streets abutting the lot or lots in question, the
property lines of all abutting properties, together with the names and
§ 200-88 WATER § 200-91
189:843
§ 200-92. Design standards. [Amended 5-26-1993 by Ord. No.
1993:652]
addresses as disclosed on the Borough Tax Map and the tax rolls as of
the date of the application, and the location of existing buildings within
200 feet of the site in question.
E. All existing buildings and structures and all accessory buildings and
structures on the lot, if any, with dimensions showing present and
finished grade elevations at all corners.
F. All existing and proposed setback dimensions and landscape areas.
G. Existing and proposed plantings to provide screening as required by
this Article.
H. Any and all other information necessary to meet any of the
requirements of this Article not listed above.
A. The diameter of satellite earth station antennas (parabolic dish) shall
not be greater than three meters.
B. The maximum height of antennas and mounting structures measured
vertically from the highest point of the antenna when positioned for
operation shall not be greater than five meters above the ground. The
height set forth herein shall include the platform or structure upon
which said antenna is mounted or affixed.
C. In Zoning District Nos. 1, 2 and 3, satellite earth stations shall be only
installed in the rear yard of a lot, except that if credible evidence is
presented to the Zoning Official that satellite signals cannot be
obtained from such rear yard, then the earth station may be located in a
side yard, if so determined by the Zoning Official, and further excepting
that if credible evidence is presented to the Zoning Official that usable
satellite signals cannot be obtained from the rear yard or either side
yard of a lot, then the earth station may be located in the front yard of
the lot if so determined by the Zoning Official, and further provided that
if credible evidence is presented to the Zoning Official that satellite
signals cannot be obtained from any yard on the lot, then the earth
station may be placed on the roof or sidewall if so determined by the
Zoning Official. The Zoning Official, if he or she determines that a roof
or sidewall mounting is necessary, shall waive the requirements of
Subsection B of this section and shall require a mounting on the roof so
as to least obstruct the view and sunlight of the owners and occupants
of contiguous properties. "Credible evidence," as used in this chapter,
shall mean certification or an affidavit from a qualified expert that the
satellite earth station, if ground-mounted in the rear yard, then side
yard and then front yard, does not have the look angle with azimuth
alignment and elevation alignment needed to receive signals in a
substantially unobstructed manner.
§ 200-91 CLOSTER CODE § 200-92
189:844
D. No ground level satellite earth stations shall be closer than 35 feet from
the side property line and no closer than 20 feet from any rear property
line, except that the Zoning Officer may waive said requirements when
credible evidence is presented to him or her that satellite signals
cannot be obtained while complying with said setback requirements; if
the Zoning Officer so finds, he or she shall direct the placement of the
satellite earth station wherein satellite signals can be obtained with the
least encroachment upon the setbacks set forth herein.
E. Every satellite earth station shall be effectively screened by a special
planting screen or fence (in accordance with Chapter 103 of the Code of
the Borough of Closter, entitled "Fences") as approved by the Zoning
Official, which shall be maintained in good condition so that satellite
earth station shall not be readily visible from any adjacent property or
public street, provided that the Zoning Official may waive the screening
requirement to the extent necessary to ensure that usable satellite
signals can be obtained.
F. Earth stations shall meet all manufacturer's specifications, be of
noncombustible and corrosive-resistant material and be erected in a
secure, wind-resistant manner.
G. Every earth station must be adequately grounded for protection against
direct strike of lightning.
H. Power control and signal cables from or to the satellite earth station
shall be underground, where possible, and installed in accordance with
the appropriate building code, if any.
I. All construction and mounting of foundation on ground installation and
roof installation, if necessary, shall be approved by the Construction
Code Official in accordance with BOCA.
J. No satellite earth station shall be installed or used for commercial use
in a residential zone.
K. In no event shall any satellite earth station be placed so as to obstruct
the sight triangle of traffic on the street(s) on which the property fronts.
In reaching his or her decision concerning the placement of satellite
earth stations, the Zoning Official shall consider the following criteria,
placing the greatest weight upon them in the order in which they
appear:
(1) The ability of the satellite earth station to receive usable signals.
(2) Sunlight and aesthetic view of owners and occupants of
immediately contiguous properties.
(3) Aesthetic view of the public from street(s) on which subject
property fronts and from properties not immediately contiguous to
the subject property.
(4) Aesthetic view of the owner and occupants of the subject property.
§ 200-92 WATER § 200-92
189:845
§ 200-93. Fees.204
The application fee for a permit to install a satellite earth station shall be as
set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits. In addition, the applicant shall
deposit a sum as set forth in Chapter A301, Fees and Deposits, to cover the
cost of review sources deemed necessary by the Construction Official, such
as the Borough Engineer, the Borough Attorney or other Borough personnel.
The Treasurer shall place the deposit in a trust account and shall charge all
disbursements for said review services. Any unused portion of the deposit
shall be returned to the applicant. If the cost of review services exceeds the
amount of deposit, sufficient additional funds shall be deposited before any
permit shall be issued.
§ 200-94. Violations and penalties. 3 [Amended 1-3-1994 by Ord.
No. 1993:66]
Any person who violates any provision of this Article XXI shall, for each
and every violation thereof and for each and every day that said violation
continues to be in existence, be subject to a penalty as set forth in Chapter
1, General Provisions, Article II, Violations and Penalties, of this Code.
§ 200-95. Enforcement officer designated.
The Zoning Official of the Borough of Closter is hereby designated as the
public officer charged with the enforcement of the terms of this article. All
complaints for alleged violation of any of the terms of this article shall be
submitted, in writing, to said Zoning Official.
L. No more than one satellite earth station shall be permitted on a
building lot.
204. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Chapter 1, General Provisions,
Art. I.
§ 200-92 CLOSTER CODE § 200-95
189:846
ARTICLE XXII
Telecommunication Towers and Antennas
[Added 7-9-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:742]
§ 200-96. Purpose.
§ 200-97. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
towers, steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
A. The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of
this article are to:
(1) Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas.
(2) Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas.
(3) Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community.
(4) Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use
towers.
(5) Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal.
(6) Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening and
innovative camouflaging techniques.
(7) Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently.
(8) Consider the public health and safety of communication towers.
(9) Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
B. In furtherance of these goals, the Borough of Closter shall give due
consideration to the Borough of Closter's Master Plan, Zoning Map,
existing land uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving
sites for the location of towers and antennas.
§ 200-96 WATER § 200-97
189:847
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals
or other communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long
distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the lowest finished grade of the parcel to the highest point
on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of this article, including permitted
towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such
approval is current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.
§ 200-98. Applicability.
A. New towers and antennas. All new towers or antennas in the Borough
of Closter shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in
§ 200-98B through D, inclusive.
B. Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This article
shall not govern the installation of any antenna, owned and operated by
an amateur radio operator and used exclusively for receive-only
antennas and for private noncommercial purposes, which shall be
regulated elsewhere in the Code of the Borough of Closter.
C. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article,
other than the requirements of § 200-99F and G, absent any
enlargement or structural modification or the addition of any
structures.
D. AM array. For purposes of implementing this article, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered
one tower. Monuments for setbacks and separation distances shall be
§ 200-97 CLOSTER CODE § 200-98
189:848
§ 200-99. General requirements.
measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the
AM array by right.
A. Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot.
B. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zone development regulations,
including but not used to setback requirements, lot coverage
requirements and other such requirements, the dimensions of the
entire lot shall control even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
C. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the Site Plan Subcommittee of the Planning Board an
inventory of its existing towers, antennas or sites approved for towers
or antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the Borough of
Closter or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific
information about the location, height and design of each tower. The
Site Plan Subcommittee of the Planning Board may share such
information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals
or conditional use approvals under this article or other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Borough of
Closter; provided, however, that the Site Plan Subcommittee of the
Planning Board is not, by sharing such information, in any way
representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
D. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to
any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so
as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
E. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
§ 200-98 WATER § 200-99
189:849
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
F. State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
G. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from
time to time. If, upon inspection, the Borough of Closter concludes that
a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a
danger to persons or property, then, upon notice being provided to the
owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower
into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
H. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located
in the Borough of Closter irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
I. Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities.
J. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communication system in the Borough of Closter have
been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Site Plan Subcommittee of the Planning Board.
K. Public notice. For purposes of this article, any conditional use request,
variance request or appeal of an administratively approved use or
conditional use shall require public notice to all abutting property
owners and all property owners of properties that are located within the
corresponding separation distance listed in § 200-102B(5)(b), Table 2,
in addition to any notice otherwise required by this chapter.
L. No commercial signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower.
§ 200-99 CLOSTER CODE § 200-99
189:850
§ 200-100. Permitted uses.
§ 200-101. Administratively approved uses.
M. Building and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements
of § 200-103.
N. Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Borough of Closter encourages the
users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval
of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
A. General. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses
and shall not require administrative approval or a conditional use
approval.
B. Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
(1) Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by the Borough of Closter, provided that a license or
lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the
Borough of Closter; however, the Borough may, as a condition of
such lease, require site plan approval. The decision to extend such
leases to an applicant shall be vested solely with the municipality
and shall not be governed by this article.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
administrative approvals for towers and antennas.
(1) The Site Plan Subcommittee of the Planning Board may
administratively approve the uses listed in this section
(2) Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the Site
Plan Subcommittee of the Planning Board providing the
information set forth in § 200-102B(1) and (3) of this article and a
nonrefundable fee as established by the governing body to
reimburse the Borough of Closter for the costs of reviewing the
application.
(3) The Site Plan Subcommittee of the Planning Board shall review the
application for administrative approval and determine if the
proposed use complies with §§ 200-99, 200-102B(4) and
200-102B(5) of this article.
(4) The Site Plan Subcommittee of the Planning Board shall respond to
each such application within 60 days after receiving it by either
approving or denying the application. If the Site Plan
Subcommittee of the Planning Board fails to respond to the
applicant within said 60 days, then the application shall be deemed
to be referred to the entire Planning Board for approval.
§ 200-99 WATER § 200-101
189:851
(5) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Site Plan
Subcommittee of the Planning Board may, in order to encourage
shared use, administratively waive any zoning district setback
requirements in § 200-102B(4) or separation distances between
towers in § 200-102B(5) by up to 50%.
(6) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Site Plan
Subcommittee of the Planning Board may, in order to encourage
the use of monopoles, administratively allow the reconstruction of
an existing tower to monopole construction.
(7) If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an
application for a conditional use approval to the Planning Board
pursuant to § 200-102 prior to filing any appeal that may be
available under this chapter.
B. List of administratively approved uses. The following uses may be
approved by the Site Plan Subcommittee of the Planning Board after
conducting an administrative review:
(1) Locating antennas on existing structures or towers consistent with
the terms of Subsections B(1)(a) and (b) below:
(a) Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not
attached to a tower may be approved by the Site Plan
Subcommittee of the Planning Board as an accessory use to
any commercial, industrial, professional or institutional use,
provided that:
[1] The antenna as measured from the lowest grade does not
extend more than the maximum building height for the
zone wherein the structure is located.
[2] The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations.
[3] The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(b) Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to
an existing tower may be approved by the Site Plan
Subcommittee of the Planning Board and, to minimize adverse
visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering
of towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on
existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of
new towers, provided that such collocation is accomplished in
a manner consistent with the following:
[1] A tower which is modified or reconstructed to
accommodate the collocation of an additional antenna
shall be of the same tower type as the existing tower
unless the Site Plan Subcommittee of the Planning Board
allows reconstruction as a monopole.
§ 200-101 CLOSTER CODE § 200-101
189:852
§ 200-102. Conditional use permits.
[2] Height.
[a] An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller
height not to exceed the maximum tower height
established by this article
[b] The height change referred to in Subsection
B(1)(b)[2][a] may only occur one time per
communication tower.
[c] The additional height referred to in Subsection
B(1)(b)[2][a] shall not require an additional distance
separation as set forth in § 200-102. The tower's
premodification height shall be used to calculate such
distance separations.
[3] On-site location.
[a] A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna may be moved onsite
within 50 feet of its existing location.
[b] After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation,
only one tower may remain on the site.
[c] A relocated on-site tower shall continue to be
measured from the original tower location for
purposes of calculating separation distances between
towers pursuant to § 200-102B(5). The relocation of a
tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause a
violation of § 200-102B(5).
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning Board:
(1) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under § 200-100 of
this article or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant
to § 200-101 of this article, then a conditional use permit shall be
required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an
antenna in all zoning districts.
(2) Applications for conditional use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of Chapter 200,
Zoning, of the Closter Code, except as modified in this section.
(3) In granting a conditional use approval, the Planning Board may
impose conditions to the extent the Planning Board concludes such
conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties.
§ 200-101 WATER § 200-102
189:853
(4) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be certified
by a professional engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey.
(5) An applicant for a conditional use approval shall submit the
information described in this section and a nonrefundable fee as
established by the Mayor and Council to reimburse the Borough of
Closter for the costs of engineering and legal expenses of reviewing
the application.
B. Towers.
(1) Information required. In addition to any information required for
applications for conditional use approvals pursuant to Chapter 200,
Zoning and Chapter 173, Subdivision of Land and Site Plan Review,
of the Closter Code, applicants for a conditional use approval for a
tower shall submit the following information:
(a) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), district classification of the site and all
properties within the applicable separation distances set forth
in § 200-102B(5), adjacent roadways, proposed means of
access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the
proposed tower and any other structures, topography, parking
and other information deemed by the Planning Board to be
necessary to assess compliance with this article.
(b) A legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties
and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(d) The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to § 200-99C
shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant
shall also identify the type of construction of the existing
tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if
known.
(e) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(f) The method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
(g) A demonstration of compliance with §§ 200-99C, D, E, F, G, J,
L, and M and 200-102B(5) and all applicable federal, state or
local laws.
§ 200-102 CLOSTER CODE § 200-102
189:854
(h) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
(i) An identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(j) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures or alternative technology not requiring the
use of towers or structures to provide the services to be
provided through the use of the proposed new tower.
(k) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Borough of Closter based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event that the proposed tower is erected.
(2) Factors considered in granting conditional use approvals for
towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of
conditional use approval applications pursuant to Chapter 200,
Zoning, of the Closter Code, the Planning Board shall consider the
following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use
approval, although the Planning Board may waive or reduce the
burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the
Planning Board concludes that the goals of this article are better
served thereby:
(a) Height of the proposed tower.
(b) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries.
(c) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
(d) Surrounding topography.
(e) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
(f) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness.
(g) Proposed ingress and egress.
(h) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures as discussed in § 200-102B(3) of this article.
(3) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Board that no existing tower, structure or alternative
§ 200-102 WATER § 200-102
189:855
technology that does not require the use of towers or structures
can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant
shall submit information requested by the Planning Board related
to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that
no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any
of the following (although nothing should be construed to infer that
meeting one, some or all of the following shall entitle the applicant
to approval):
(a) No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
(b) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
(c) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and
related equipment.
(d) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or
structures would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
(e) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an
existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
(f) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(g) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a
cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render
the technology unsuitable.
(4) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a conditional use approval is required; provided,
however, that the Planning Board may reduce the standard setback
requirements if the goals of this article would be better served
thereby:
§ 200-102 CLOSTER CODE § 200-102
189:856
(a) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
(b) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
(c) No tower shall exist within required buffer areas if adjacent to
residential zones and as prescribed under local ordinance.
(5) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to
all towers and antennas for which a conditional use approval is
required; provided, however, that the Planning Board may reduce
the standard separation requirements if the goals of this article
would be better served thereby:
(a) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
[1] Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the
tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated
areas as specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided
in Table 1.
[2] Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in Table 1.
Table 1
Off-Site Use/Designated
Area
Separation Distance
Residential, public parks,
schools or house of
worship*
200 feet or 300% of height
tower, whichever is greater
Vacant single-family
residentially zoned land
plan approval which is not
expired
200 feet or 300% of height
either platted or has
preliminary subdivision of
tower, whichever is greater
Vacant unplatted
residentially zoned land**
100 feet or 200% of height
of tower, whichever is
greater
Nonresidentially zoned
lands or nonresidential uses
None; only setbacks apply
NOTES:
* Including nursing homes and other similar uses wherein
people are housed or receive care at least eight hours per
day.
** Includes any unplatted residential use properties
without a valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid
development plan approval and any multifamily
residentially zoned land greater than duplex.
§ 200-102 WATER § 200-102
189:857
(b) Separation distances between towers. Separation distances
between towers shall be applicable for and measured between
the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight
line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed
base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The
separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in
Table 2.
Table 2
Existing
Towers
Lattice
(feet)
Guyed
(feet)
Monopole
50 Feet in
Height
(feet)
Monopole
Less Than
30 Feet in
Height
(feet)
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 1,000
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 1,000
Monopole
50 feet in
height
1,500 1,500 1,500 1,000
Monopole
less than
30 feet
1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000
(6) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an
appropriate anticlimbing device.
(7) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a conditional use
approval is required.
(a) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences or planned
residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped
strip at least four feet wide outside the perimeter of the
compound.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
§ 200-102 CLOSTER CODE § 200-103
189:858
§ 200-103. Prohibited areas. [Amended 9-10-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:748]
No antenna, tower or alternative tower shall be located or constructed in
any residential zone.
§ 200-104. Buildings or other equipment storage.
A. Antennas mounted on structures or rooftops. The equipment cabinet or
structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the
following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 40 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure shall be located
on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable zoning and building codes.
B. Antennas mounted on utility poles, light poles or towers. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located
in accordance with the following:
(1) In a front or side yard, provided that the cabinet or structure is no
greater than six feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor
area, and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 75 feet
from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42 to 48 inches
and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(2) In a rear yard, provided that the cabinet or structure is no greater
than eight feet in height or 120 square feet in gross floor area. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 48
inches.
(3) In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from
view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across
the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence 6 feet in
height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet
and a planted height of at least 72 inches.
(4) Emergency generators shall be located below grade and suitably
soundproofed so that noise volumes measured at all property lines
do not exceed ambient levels. A nighttime restriction of 50 decibels
measured at all lot lines shall be imposed.
§ 200-103 WATER § 200-105
189:859
§ 200-105. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna
or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from
the Borough of Closter notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure
to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be
grounds to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there
are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower. The Borough may condition
the issuance of any permit to demolish or remove a tower or antenna on
the posting of an appropriate performance bond or other suitable guaranty
in a face amount of not less than 120% of the cost (as determined by
the Borough Engineer) of such removal, grading and restoration to a state
required under all applicable Borough ordinances, including but not limited
to the Borough Property Maintenance Code.205
§ 200-106. Existing towers.
Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas.
Nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may
not be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or
a conditional use approval and without having to meet the separation
requirements specified in § 200-102B(4) and (5). The type, height and
location of the tower on-site shall be of the same type and intensity as
the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility shall
comply with the then-applicable building codes and shall be obtained within
180 days from the date the facility is damaged or destroyed. No permit is
obtained or if said permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed
abandoned as specified in § 200-105.
§ 200-107. Severability.
The various parts, sections and clauses of this article are hereby declared
to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is
adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby.
§ 200-108. Repealer.
Any ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this article
are hereby repeated to the extent of such conflict.
§ 200-109. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon final passage and publication pursuant to
law.206
205. Editor's Note: See Ch. 147, Property Maintenance.
206. Editor's Note: Former Art. XXIII, Signs, added 10-28-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:778, was
repealed 12-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000:833.
§ 200-105 CLOSTER CODE § 200-109
189:860
Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 250
REVISED HEALTH CODE
§ 200-109 WATER § 200-109
189:861

Part 1
[Adopted 3G-1e7n-e1r9a9l4 PBroyvOisriodn. sNo. 1994-1]
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by Board of Health
§ 250-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Borough of Closter of a general and permanent nature, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp. and consisting of Chapter 250, are hereby approved, adopted,
ordained and enacted as Part III of the "Code of the Borough of Closter,"
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 250-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances of the Board of Health enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are expressly saved from
repeal or continued in force and effect hereinafter.
§ 250-3. When effective.
All provisions of this ordinance and the Code shall take effect 30 days after
the date of the first publication.
§ 250-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Secretary of the Board of Health and shall remain there for use and
examination by the public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and if
this ordinance shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Secretary
of the Board of Health, to be made available to persons desiring to examine
the same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 250-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Board of
Health to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Borough of Closter" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 250-1 WATER § 250-6
189:863
§ 250-6. Publication; filing.
The Secretary of the Board of Health, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in
a newspaper of general circulation in the borough. Sufficient copies of
the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Secretary for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 250-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Secretary, or someone authorized and directed by
the Secretary, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing
the Code required to be filed in the Secretary's office for the use of the
public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to
the effective date of this codification, which shall be adopted specifically
as part of the Code, shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 250-8. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Board of
Health to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $500.
§ 250-9. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part
thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not
be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or
parts thereof.
§ 250-10. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or parts thereof.
§ 250-11. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Board of
Health and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
§ 250-6 CLOSTER CODE § 250-11
189:864
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 250-12. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 250-11 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 250-13. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance of the Board of Health adopted subsequent to July 20,
1992.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
G. Any provisions of an ordinance or resolution of the Board of Health
creating employments, positions or offices and fixing salaries and duties
therefor which are not provided in the Code hereby adopted and which
are not in conflict or inconsistent therewith, or any ordinance
pertaining to the salaries and compensation of Board of Health officers
and employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Board of Health for
adoption and revision as part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4,
certain grammatical changes and other minor changes were made in
one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the Board of Health
that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the
ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to read
as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this
ordinance.207
§ 250-11 WATER § 250-13
189:865
C. Throughout this Code, wherever the term "Health Officer" appears, that
term shall be synonymous with "Registered Environmental Health
Specialist." [Added 11-19-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-4]
207. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 250-13B, the following sections were amended or added:
§§ 250-20D, E and H(4)(a); 250-25A(1); 250-26B(2); 250-27B(4), H and I; 250-38A;
250-46B; and 250-85.
§ 250-13 CLOSTER CODE § 250-13
189:866
Part 2
[Adopted 2-17-1983 By ROervdi.s Nedo .H 1e9a8l3th-1 C(oCdhe. 47 Of The 1967 Code)]
ARTICLE II
Rules of Construction; Definitions
§ 250-14. Title.
This Part 2 and all ordinances supplementary hereto and amendatory hereof
may be cited as the "Revised Health Code of the Borough of Closter (1982)."
§ 250-15. More restrictive provisions to prevail.
In case of conflict with any provision of the State Sanitary Code or any
other state or federal law or regulation, the more restrictive provision shall
prevail. The higher standard shall be enforced in order to promote and
protect the health and safety of the inhabitants of the Borough of Closter.
§ 250-16. Usage; definitions.
A. In the construction of this Part 2 or any amendments hereof or any
supplements hereto, words and phrases shall be read and construed:
(1) Within their context and, unless inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the Board, as expressed herein.
(2) Unless another or different meaning is expressly indicated, such
words or phrases shall be given the meanings expressed herein, or
if no such meaning is given, their generally accepted meaning,
according to the approved usage of the language, shall be applied.
(3) Technical, trade or commercial words and phrases and words and
phrases having a special or accepted meaning in the law shall be
construed in accordance with such technical, trade, commercial or
special and accepted meaning.
(4) Unless otherwise indicated by the context, the definitions herein
contained shall apply to the terms used in other definitions.
(5) Unless otherwise indicated by the context, the singular shall
include the plural and one gender shall include the other genders.
B. In addition to the definitions included in some of the following articles
of this Part 2, the following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and enforcement of this Part 2:
BOARD — The Board of Health of the Borough of Closter, New Jersey.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Closter, New Jersey.
CLEANING — The thorough removal of contaminating material or
materials.
§ 250-14 WATER § 250-16
189:867
CODE — The Revised Health Code of the Borough of Closter, unless
some other code is expressly indicated.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Health of the Borough of Closter,
New Jersey.
FOOD — Includes any article used for food or beverage for people
or animals and every ingredient therein, including, without limitation,
all confectionery, condiments, flavorings and other components of any
such article.
GARBAGE — The accumulation of animal or vegetable matter, or both,
liquid or otherwise, that tends to decay.
LICENSE or PERMIT — A duly authorized license or permit granted by
the Board and issued in accordance with this Part 2, the regulations of
the Board or applicable state statutes or regulations.
MEMBER — One of the persons who shall constitute the Board of
Health of the Borough of Closter.
NUISANCE — Any condition which is dangerous to human life or health
or which renders air, water, soil or any type of food hazardous or
injurious to human life or health.
PERSON — Any person, association, partnership, trust or corporation,
or any one or more of them or any combination of any of them.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place which is visited and is usually accessible
to the neighboring public and in which the public has an interest as
affecting the safety, health, morals and welfare of the community.
RETAIL FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any fixed or mobile
restaurant; coffee shop, cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill;
tearoom; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar; cocktail lounge;
nightclub; roadside stand; industrial feeding establishment; private,
public or nonprofit organization or institution serving food; catering
kitchen; commissary; box lunch establishment; retail bakery; meat
market; or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for a retail
eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served,
handled or provided for the public with or without charge, except
that agricultural markets, covered dish suppers or similar types of
church or nonprofit-type institution meal services shall meet the special
provisions of Chapter 12 of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Those rules and regulations prescribing
or directing action or forbearance which are required to be followed by
this Part 2.
SMALL ANIMALS — Includes cats, dogs, guinea pigs, rabbits, domestic
rodents or any other small animal kept or raised as pets or for other
noncommercial purposes; provided, however, that the term "small
animals" shall not apply if they total in the aggregate fewer than three
of the same species, except for dogs or cats under the age of six months
§ 250-16 CLOSTER CODE § 250-16
189:868
§ 250-17. References within Code.
All references in the Revised Health Code to chapters, Articles or sections
are to chapters, Articles or sections of the Revised Health Code. Such
references to chapters or Articles shall be construed to refer to all the
sections within the chapters or Articles to which such references are made,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 250-18. Certain material not part of Code.
In the construction of the Revised Health Code or any part thereof, no
analysis of any section or part thereof, no cross-reference or cross-reference
note, no indication of a source by parenthetical material after a section, no
note, no footnote and no section heading shall be deemed to be part of the
Revised Health Code.
§ 250-19. Effect of repealers.
Whenever an ordinance that repeals an earlier ordinance or part thereof is
itself repealed, such repeal shall not revive the former ordinance or part
thereof, unless specific provision is made therefor.
§ 250-20. Bylaws. [Amended 12-18-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-2]
or other small animals young enough to require the care of the mother
animal.
STATE DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey State Department of Health.
STATE HEALTH CODE — The New Jersey State Sanitary Code,
promulgated by the New Jersey State Department of Health, which has
the force and effect of law and is enforceable by the State Department
of Health, the local boards of health, local police authorities and other
enforcement agencies.
A. Organization. The Board shall organize annually, on the first day of
January in each year or as soon thereafter as may be feasible, at which
time it shall elect, by a majority vote of all the members of the Board
and from its members, a President and a Vice President. The Board, as
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough
Council, shall consist of seven members, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
26:3-3 [Revised Statutes of New Jersey (1947)].
B. Meetings.
(1) All meetings of the Board of Health of the Borough of Closter shall
be held at the Borough Hall, 295 Closter Dock Road, Closter, New
Jersey, at 7:30 p.m. and shall be properly advertised pursuant to the
provisions of the Open Public Meetings Act.208
208. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 250-16 WATER § 250-20
189:869
(2) Regular meetings shall be held monthly, on the third Thursday of
each month except during July and August. Special meetings may
be called at any time by the President or upon request of four
members of the Board. Four members shall constitute a quorum for
the transaction of business by the Board. All regular meetings of
the Board shall be open to the public. Special meetings may be
declared closed for the purposes of executive session by a majority
vote of the members present. In the cases of special meeting,
notice shall be given to all members of the Board, in writing, at
least 48 hours prior to the time fixed for holding the same.
(3) All meetings shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of
Order, except as this code provides otherwise.
C. Order of business. At the meetings of the Board, the order of business
shall be as follows, unless otherwise determined by resolution:
(1) Roll call.
(2) Approval of the minutes of the previous meeting.
(3) Communications.
(4) Report of committees and officers.
(5) Report of Health Officer.
(6) Report of Nurse.
(7) Reports of Secretary and Registrar of Vital Statistics.
(8) Hearings.
(9) Open and close meeting to the public.
(10) Unfinished business.
(11) New business.
D. Committees. At the first regular meeting of the Board, the President
shall appoint such standing committees as are deemed necessary to
serve for the current year. Special committees may be appointed by the
President from time to time as the need arises. The committees are as
follows: [Amended 3-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
(1) The Finance and Personnel Committee shall consist of three Board
members and shall develop and present the budget to the Board. It
shall make salary recommendations and personnel policies. It shall
monitor expenditures throughout the year.
(2) The Community Health Projects Committee shall consist of three
Board members who shall work in conjunction with the Health
Officer, Registered Nurse and Secretary in the performance of
§ 250-20 CLOSTER CODE § 250-20
189:870
emergency health services, the annual Health Fair or any
additional health services that arise.
(3) The Public Relations Committee shall consist of three Board
members and shall be responsible for contact with the press and
public.
(4) The Dog Licensing Committee shall consist of three Board
members.
(5) (Reserved)209
(6) The Legal Review Committee shall consist of three Board members
who shall review all public health laws and borough laws. It shall
recommend to the Board any required revisions or new regulations
it deems necessary.
(7) The Ad Hoc Committee shall be appointed at the will of the Board
President.
(8) The Nominating Committee shall consist of three Board members
with nonexpiring terms. They shall be appointed at the December
meeting, and the Committee shall make its report at the January
meeting on the nomination of President and Vice President.
E. Appointments. The Board shall appoint by majority vote at its first
annual meeting a Health Officer, Secretary, Registered Nurse, Medical
Advisor and Veterinarian. The Board shall accept the Attorney and
Animal Control Officer as appointed by the Mayor and Council of the
Borough of Closter. The Registrar of Vital Statistics shall be appointed
in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:8-13 [New Jersey
Revised Statutes (1947)]. The Board shall have the power to employ
such additional services as it may deem necessary and may delegate
discretionary authority to appointees of the Board when such action is
dictated by emergency. The salaries or other forms of compensation of
the aforesaid appointees shall be such as is fixed at the time of their
appointment by a resolution of the Board, subject to review and
approval by the appropriate financial agency of the municipal
government. [Amended 3-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
F. Counsel. The Counsel shall be the legal adviser of the Board and shall,
when required, attend its meetings. The Counsel shall, when authorized
to do so by the Board, represent it in all litigation to which it may be a
party and perform all such other legal services as may, from time to
time, be required.
G. Duties of the officers. The President shall preside at all meetings of the
Board and shall appoint all committees. During the intervals between
regular meetings, the President shall represent the Board in all
209. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection D(5), regarding the members of the Sanitation and
Health Committee, was repealed 4-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1.
§ 250-20 WATER § 250-20
189:871
executive and judicial matters. The Vice President, in the absence,
disability or resignation of the President, shall serve in the place of said
President with all his or her powers and duties. If the Vice Presidency
should be vacated, then the Board shall elect a new Vice President
immediately upon the vacancy occurring.
H. Duties of appointees.
(1) The Secretary shall keep the minutes of all the proceedings of the
Board; shall conduct all the official correspondence of the Board;
shall maintain proper copies of the same; shall tabulate and
complete all reports required by any superior authority, local, state
or national; and shall make such other reports as may be required
or directed by the Board. The Secretary shall procure all books,
stationery and other supplies as may be required by the Board and
shall keep adequate records of all applications for permits and
licenses and the action of the Board, if any, thereon and all such
other pertinent information as may be necessary for a complete
record of each such matter.
(2) The Registrar of Vital Statistics shall keep all such records of that
office as required by the Bureau of Vital Statistics of the State of
New Jersey and shall perform such other duties as may be
required.
(3) The Nurse shall be responsible for informational and other
appropriate services. The Nurse shall also perform other duties as
are required by state law or may be required from time to time by
the Board.
(4) The Health Officer shall act as the enforcing officer of the Board
and shall, in addition to such other duties as may be required from
time to time, perform such duties as required by state law or
regulations. The Health Officer is also responsible for the following:
(a) Investigation of all complaints arising under the Revised
Health Code of the Borough of Closter. [Amended 3-17-1994
by Ord. No. 1994-1]
(b) Periodic inspection of each food and food-handling
establishment to establish and report upon the sanitary
conditions of such establishments and to take such steps as are
necessary to ensure that sanitary conditions are maintained in
such establishments. The food establishments shall be
inspected at least four times in any one given year.
(c) Performance of such duties as may be required in connection
with control of communicable diseases, quarantine of the same
and release from quarantine, together with such duties as may
be required for compliance with the public health laws of the
State of New Jersey having to do with communicable diseases.
§ 250-20 CLOSTER CODE § 250-20
189:872
§ 250-21. Amendments.
The Board shall and may from time to time amend, supplement or
implement this Part 2 by other provisions amendatory thereof or
supplementary thereto.
§ 250-22. Suspension of provisions.
The Board may from time to time, by general resolution, suspend or declare
inoperative any provisions of this Part 2 which, in its judgment, are not for
the time being required for the protection of the health of the Borough of
Closter.
§ 250-23. Posting of premises.
Whenever the Health Officer determines that a retail food service
establishment or other public or private premises contains a health hazard
or is in violation of this Part 2 or of applicable state or federal statutes,
codes or rules so that a public health hazard is present or a public health
emergency may result, in addition to actual notice of the hazard or violation
(d) Collection of samples of food, water and other materials and
submission of the same to appropriate county or state agencies
for analysis where such analysis appears necessary or
desirable in connection with the maintenance of sanitary
conditions within the borough.
(e) Supervision of rodent and insect extermination in accordance
with Article XV of the Borough Health Code.
(f) Enforcement of the Borough Health Code and the State
Sanitary Code.
I. Ordinances and resolutions.
(1) Ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared for the consideration
of the Board by the Board Attorney upon the instructions of the
Board. No ordinance shall be adopted by the Board without an
affirmative vote of the majority of all members of the Board;
however, resolutions shall be adopted by the Board by vote of the
majority of the members of the Board present, provided that a
quorum exists.
(2) An ordinance or resolution may be introduced by any member of
the Board. The Secretary shall forthwith provide each member of
the Board with a copy thereof. Each resolution and ordinance shall
be limited to a single subject, which shall be expressed in its title,
and shall be reviewed at a conference meeting prior to submission
for public action.
(3) All resolutions shall take effect immediately upon final passage by
the Board unless otherwise specified in the resolution as approved.
§ 250-20 WATER § 250-23
189:873
to the owner or operator, the Health Officer may post the premises with a
notice to the public indicating the health hazard or violation and the date.
The posted notice shall not be removed except by the Health Officer after an
inspection has shown that the hazard has been eliminated or the violation
removed.
§ 250-24. Adoption of rules and regulations
The Board may from time to time adopt such rules and regulations as by law
it is permitted, authorized or empowered to so adopt and which shall, in its
judgment, act in the proper understanding and general enforcement of the
Code.
§ 250-23 CLOSTER CODE § 250-24
189:874
ARTICLE III
Animals
§ 250-24.1. Minimum standards for animal care. [Added 3-16-2006
by Ord. No. 2006-1]
§ 250-25. Cats.
A. Feeding. All animals shall be supplied with sufficient, wholesome food
and water, free from contamination. Food and water shall be in
sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily
requirements for the condition and size of each animal and to assure
the proper health of each animal.
B. Health of animals. Proper shelter and protection from the weather shall
be provided at all times to assure that no animal is overcrowded or
exposed to excessive heat or cold. Proper temperature for the wellbeing
of each animal shall be maintained at all times. No condition shall
be maintained or permitted to exist that is knowingly injurious to the
health of any animal.
C. Abandonment prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon
or attempt to abandon any animal within the Borough of Closter.
A. Order to seize, impound and destroy cats; methods.
(1) The Animal Control Officer or any person or organization
designated or appointed for that purpose by the Mayor and Council
of the Borough of Closter shall take into custody and impound or
cause to be taken into custody and impounded and thereafter
destroyed or disposed of, as provided in this article, any cat off the
premises of the owner, person or organization keeping or harboring
said cat, which said Animal Control Officer, person or organization
designated or appointed for the purpose or any agents thereof have
reason to believe is a stray cat. [Amended 6-16-1988 by Ord No.
1988-3; 3-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
(2) Any cat so taken into custody shall be impounded, destroyed or
disposed of in the same manner as provided for impounding,
destroying or disposing of dogs in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16 and the
amendments thereto and supplements thereof.
B. Authorization to enter property while in pursuit; exception. Any officer
or agent authorized to perform any duty under this article is hereby
authorized to go upon any property to seize for impounding any cat or
cats which he or she may lawfully seize and impound, when such officer
is in immediate pursuit of such cat or cats, except upon the premises of
the owner of the cat or cats if said owner is present and forbids the
same.
§ 250-24.1 WATER § 250-25
189:875
§ 250-26. Vaccination and licensing of cats. [Added 6-16-1988 by
Ord. No. 1988-3]
C. Interference prohibited. No person shall harm, molest or interfere with
anyone authorized or empowered to perform any duty under this article
or any other section of this Part 2.210
D. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates or refuses to comply
with the regulations of this article shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than $10 nor more than $50 for each offense, to be recovered by and in
the name of the Borough. [Amended 6-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-3]
A. License and vaccination required.
(1) No person shall own, keep or harbor any cat over four months of
age within the Borough of Closter unless such cat has been
licensed and vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in
accordance with the latest Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines
and Recommendations for Immunization, published by the National
Association of State Public Health Veterinarians.
(2) A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each cat
vaccinated on a form recommended by the Compendium or
otherwise approved by the Board of Health.
(3) Written application for a cat license shall be made to the Board of
Health and shall include the name and address of the owner and
the name, breed, color, age and sex of the cat. The applicant shall
pay the prescribed licensing fee and provide proof of current rabies
vaccination. No license shall be granted without proof of
vaccination.
(4) The licensing period shall be for one year. Licenses shall be
renewed by July 31. Application for a license must be made within
30 days after obtaining a cat over four months of age or after a cat
has exceeded four months of age. New residents must apply for a
license within 30 days of establishing residency. [Amended
10-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
(5) Effective July 1, 2008, a one-year license shall be issued after a
payment of a fee of $11.20 for each neutered/spayed cat and
$14.20 for each nonneutered/nonspayed cat. [Amended
10-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3; 10-18-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-1]
(6) Any person who fails to renew a cat license by July 31 of the year of
renewal and continues to fail to renew that license by September 1
of the same year shall pay, in addition to the license fee set forth
210. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding compensation, which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted 3-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1.
§ 250-25 CLOSTER CODE § 250-26
189:876
§ 250-27. Dogs and kennels.
above, a late charge in the amount of $20. [Added 10-18-1990 by
Ord. No. 1990-2; amended 10-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(7) The duration of the immunity against rabies shall be for at least the
duration of the licensing period. [Added 10-19-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-3]
(8) License must be issued in one adult person's name; said adult must
be 18 years of age or older. [Added 10-16-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
B. Tag and collar.
(1) Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the Board of
Health shall issue a durable license tag including an identifying
number and Borough of Closter. The license tag shall be attached to
the collar of the cat so as to assist in the identification of a lost cat.
(2) In case a license tag is lost or destroyed, a replacement will be
issued by the licensing official at the cost of a fee of $1. [Amended
3-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
(3) License tags shall not be transferable from one cat to another, and
no refunds shall be made on any cat license fee because of death of
the cat or the owner leaving the borough before expiration of the
license period.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not be intended to apply to cats
whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the Borough.
(5) The applicant in name is responsible for ensuring that the dog is
physically restrained under all circumstances. [Added
10-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
(6) License must be issued in one adult person's name; said adult must
be 18 years of age or older. [Added 10-16-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-2]
C. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates or refuses to comply
with the regulations of this article shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than $10 nor more than $100 for each offense, to be recovered by and
in the name of the Borough.
A. Definitions. As used in this article, the following items shall have the
meanings indicated:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of
seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
§ 250-26 WATER § 250-27
189:877
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except
a pet shop.
NONSPAYED AND NONNEUTERED DOG — Any dog of reproductive
age which has not had its reproductive capacity permanently altered
through sterilization.[Added 10-27-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-3]
OWNER — Any person having proprietorship in a dog, including any
person having care, custody or control of or harboring said animal or
keeping the same under his or her dominion. A person shall be deemed
to have a dog in his or her keeping and under his or her dominion
or control whenever the ownership or custody of any dog is in an
unemancipated infant or other member of his or her household.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen not
part of a kennel, wherein dogs for sale are kept or displayed.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of dogs seized either
under the provisions of this article or otherwise.
SHELTER — Any establishment where dogs are received housed and
distributed.
B. Dog license and registration required.
(1) License and registration tags; application. Any person who shall
own, keep, harbor or maintain a dog of licensing age within the
Borough of Closter shall by January 31 of each year apply for and
procure from the office of the Board of Health a license and official
metal registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept, harbored
or maintained and shall place upon each such dog a collar or
harness to which there shall be secured the license registration
tag.
(2) The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or any dog
which attains licensing age shall make application for a license and
registration tag for such dog within 10 days after such acquisition
or age attainment.
(3) Any person who shall bring or shall cause to be brought into the
Borough of Closter any dog licensed in another state for the current
year and bearing a registration tag and who shall keep the same or
permit the same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more
than 90 days shall immediately apply for a license and registration
tag for each such dog, unless such dog shall be licensed under a
licensed kennel.
(4) In case a license tag is lost or destroyed, a replacement will be
issued by the licensing official at the cost of a fee of $1. [Amended
3-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
C. License fee. [Amended 10-27-1983 by Ord. No. 1983-3; 6-16-1988
by Ord. No. 1988-3; 10-18-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-2]
§ 250-27 CLOSTER CODE § 250-27
189:878
(1) Effective January 1, 2008, a one-year license shall be issued after a
payment of a fee of $11.20 for each neutered/spayed dog and
$14.20 for each nonneutered/nonspayed dog. [Amended
10-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1]
(2) Any person who fails to renew a dog license by January 31 of the
year of renewal and continues to fail to renew that license by
March 1 of the same year shall be charged, in addition to the
license fee set forth above, a late charge in the amount of $20.
[Amended 10-16-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-2]
D. Licenses required for animal businesses.
(1) Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a
kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall, in the case of a renewal of
the license, apply to the licensing authority. Applications for the
creation of new establishments shall be made to the Mayor and
Council.
(2) The application shall describe the premises where the
establishment is located or is proposed to be located and the
purpose or purposes for which it is to be maintained and shall be
accompanied by the original approval of the Board of Health
showing compliance with local and state rules and regulations
governing locations of and sanitation at such establishments.
(3) All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall
state the purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and
all such licenses shall expire on the last day of January of each year
and shall be subject to revocation by the Board of Health on
recommendation of the State Department of Health or the
Department of Health of the Borough of Closter for failure to
comply with the rules and regulations of the State Department of
Health or the Closter Board of Health governing the same after the
owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State Department
of Health or the Department of Health of the Borough of Closter.
(4) Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee and kept at
such establishments. Such licenses shall not be transferable to
another owner or different premises.
(5) The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for
10 or fewer dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 dogs shall be
$25. The annual license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall
be charged for a shelter or a pound.
(6) No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be
permitted off such premises except on a leash or in a crate or other
device designed to contain a dog or under other safe control.
§ 250-27 WATER § 250-27
189:879
(7) The Board of Health shall forward to the State Department of
Health a list of all kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed
within 30 days after the licenses therefor are issued, which list
shall include the name and address of the licensee and the kind of
license issued.
E. Adoption of state law by reference. The regulations for the owning,
keeping or harboring of dogs and securing licenses for dogs and
kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds in the Borough of Closter shall
be as set forth in Chapter 151 of the Laws of 1941,211 insofar as said law
shall relate to the Borough of Closter.
F. 212No household in the Borough of Closter shall own, keep or harbor
more than a total of six dogs and/or cats. A household may have both
types of animals, as long as the limit of six in total of such animals is not
exceeded. Any household having more than a total of any combination
of six dogs and/or cats licensed in the Borough at the time this
subsection takes effect may relicense them, provided the owner has
complied with all other relevant ordinances of the Borough or the
Department of Health. When such dog or cat dies, or is given away or
sold, it may not be replaced if such replacement would bring the
household over the allowed number of dogs and/or cats. [Added
7-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2]
G. Record of complaints; annual canvass.
(1) The Board of Health shall keep and maintain a record of any
reported complaint made against any dog, including complaints
involving any alleged incident pertaining to the dog's having bitten
any person or animal within the borough, together with any record
of Municipal Court action pertaining to the same.
(2) Any person appointed for the purpose by the Board of Health of the
Borough of Closter shall annually cause a canvass to be made of
any dogs owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the borough
and shall report on or before the first day of September of each
year to the Board of Health, setting forth in separate columns the
names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring or
maintaining unlicensed dogs and the number of unlicensed dogs
owned, kept, harbored or maintained by each of said persons,
together with a complete description of each of said unlicensed
dogs.
H. Animal Control Officer; appointment. For the purpose of carrying out
the provisions of this Article and the state law controlling dogs, the
Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter shall annually appoint an
Animal Control Officer. In lieu of an appointment of an Animal Control
Officer, the Mayor and Council may appoint an organization or society
211. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-1 et seq.
212. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, Running at large, was repealed 10-16-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-2.
§ 250-27 CLOSTER CODE § 250-27
189:880
§ 250-28. Domestic animals. [Amended 6-16-1988 by Ord. No.
1988-3; 11-21-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-1]
to perform the duties of an Animal Control Officer. [Amended
6-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-3; 3-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
I. Placing unclaimed dogs in homes. The Chief of Police, Animal Control
Officer or other official designated may, at his or her discretion, place
an unclaimed dog in a legitimate home after seven days, as provided by
statute, but no dog shall be sold or given away for experimental
purposes. [Amended 6-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-3; 3-17-1994 by
Ord. No. 1994-1]
J. Dogs prohibited in food establishments. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation to allow a dog, with the exception of Seeing
Eye dogs, to enter any food establishment, including any place used in
the production, preparation, manufacture, packing, storage,
transportation or handling of food or foodstuffs intended for sale or
distribution.
K. Authority to enact quarantine proclamation. The Board of Health may
by proclamation require all dogs to be quarantined during such period
or periods in each year as to it may seem advisable.
A. Vicious dogs.
(1) The provisions of Chapter 307 of the Laws of New Jersey 1989213 be
and the same are hereby incorporated into this Part 2.
(2) Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-3]
(a) The owner of a potentially dangerous dog who is found to have
violated P.L. 1989, c. 307,214 as amended, shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $1,000 per day of the violation. Each and
every day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate and distinct violation.
(b) In addition to any and all other fines and/or remedies allowable
pursuant to law, the Animal Control Officer is authorized to
seize and impound any potentially dangerous dog whose owner
fails to comply with the provisions of Chapter 307, Laws of
New Jersey 1989, as amended.
(3) It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to receive and
investigate complaints involving attacks or bites by dogs,
dogfighting activities and the training and encouragement of dogs
to make unprovoked attacks upon persons and domestic animals.
[Amended 10-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
213. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
214. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
§ 250-27 WATER § 250-28
189:881
(4) It shall be the duty of the appropriate borough officials to enforce
the provisions of P.L. 1989, c. 307215 as amended. [Amended
10-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
(5) The owner of any dog which has been declared vicious or
potentially dangerous shall cause the animal to be forthwith
examined by a veterinarian who shall provide the Animal Control
Officer with a certificate as to the physical and emotional condition
of the animal, which certificate shall be received within 10 days of
the date of the impoundment and which report shall be provided at
the expense of the owner. [Amended 10-19-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-3]
(6) Responsibility of owner; impoundment. The owner of any dog
which has been declared vicious or potentially dangerous shall be
responsible for:
(a) All actual costs and expenses of impounding the dog.
(b) All costs of destroying the dog.
(c) All costs of convening the hearing, including but not limited to
panelist fees, expert fees and attorney's fees (prosecutorial).
(d) All costs of notices.
(e) All costs imposed on the Borough of Closter by Bergen County
pursuant to a contract for the Animal Control Officer with
reference to the subject dog.
(f) All related expenses incurred by the borough.
(7) No person shall keep or harbor any dog which has been declared
potentially dangerous within the Borough of Closter without
obtaining from the Board of Health a special municipal license
therefor and complying with all requirements of P.L. 1989, c.307, as
amended, N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., this subsection and the order of
the Municipal Court pursuant to P.L. 1989, c. 307,216 as amended.
The fee for such special municipal potentially dangerous dog
license shall be $700 or such other maximum amount as
established by statute. The Board of Health, when issuing such
license, shall assign a municipal registration number in accordance
with the uniform statewide municipal registration system
established by regulations of the New Jersey Department of Health,
together with a red identification tag. Prior to issuance of such
license, the Animal Control officer shall verify to the Board of
Health that the owner of the dog has complied with the Court's
orders. [Amended 10-19-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
215. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
216. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq.
§ 250-28 CLOSTER CODE § 250-28
189:882
B. Certain types of leashing prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner,
keeper or person in whose care, custody or control a dog has been left
to:
(1) Keep or maintain any dog leashed or tethered in the open upon any
property within the borough without providing said animal with
adequate food, water and a place of shelter within the radius of the
tether or leash.
(2) Tether or leash a dog by tying the same directly to the neck of the
animal or by connecting a leash or tether to a choke collar.
(3) Tether or leash a dog so as to permit or suffer the animal to block or
interfere with any gate, walk, path or steps when the same
constitutes the means of ingress or egress to the premises from the
public way; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent
any person from permitting a dog to run at large upon private
premises where the same are totally enclosed by a fence of
sufficient and adequate strength and height to prevent the animal
from leaving the enclosure, and provided further that there is
posted conspicuously at all entrances to the premises a sign with
lettering at least two inches and not more than three inches in
height and at least 1 1/2 inches and not more than three inches in
width, stating that there is a dog running at large upon said
premises.
C. Oral and written reports of rabies required; data. It shall be the duty of
all veterinarians, doctors or persons owning or having interest in or
having in their possession or under their care or control or having any
knowledge of any dog, cat or other animal affected with rabies to
forthwith notify the Board of Health by telephone, telegraph or in
person, if practicable, and also in writing, signed by the person making
the same, which report shall state where such animal may be found and
shall contain, if possible, a description of the animal, location of the
animal and the name and address of the owner.
D. Confinement of suspected cases of rabies; at owner's expense. The
Board of Health may order any dog, cat or other animal having rabies to
be confined at a place and for a period of time to be prescribed by the
Board. Any expense incurred by the confinement of a dog, cat or other
animal having or suspected of having rabies so ordered by the Board of
Health shall be borne by the owner of such animal.
E. Leashing required during danger of rabies epidemic. When in the
opinion of the Board of Health there is danger that rabies may spread
within the borough, dogs, cats or other animals susceptible to rabies
may, at the discretion of the Board, be permitted outside of pens,
enclosures or buildings only when they are actually being walked or
exercised on a leash by a responsible person having the animal under
strict control.
§ 250-28 WATER § 250-28
189:883
F. Dog bites. Where it has been determined by a physician that a person
has been bitten by a dog, such individual, or his parent or guardian if he
is a minor, shall immediately notify the police. When the owner or
keeper of any dog shall be notified by the police that the dog has bitten
any individual or individuals, the owner or keeper of the dog must
comply with the following procedures: [Amended 10-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-3]
(1) The dog shall be placed in quarantine in the owner's home or at a
kennel for a period of 10 days.
(2) At the end of the ten-day quarantine period, the owner shall have
the dog examined by a veterinarian and a written report of the
dog's state of health sent to the Board of Health.
G. Surrender of suspect animals required. The Board of Health may, if it
has reason to suspect a dog, cat or other animal within its jurisdiction of
having rabies, order the owner of such dog, cat or other animal to
forthwith surrender the same to the Board of Health veterinarian for
examination.
H. Examination expense charged to owner. Any expense involved in the
examination so ordered by the Board of Health shall be borne by the
owner of the suspect animal. The Board of Health may, in the light of
the veterinarian's report and in consideration of his or her
recommendations, order any dog, cat or other animal determined by
the veterinarian to have rabies to be exterminated immediately by said
veterinarian.
I. Release by veterinarian only. No dog, cat or other animal whose owner
has been ordered by the Board of Health to surrender the same to the
Board of Health veterinarian for examination shall be released except
at the discretion of said veterinarian.
J. Sanitary condition of premises required. All persons possessing animals
or fowl on their premises shall at all times maintain such premises in a
sanitary condition as may be required by the Board of Health and at the
discretion of the Board of Health. All areas in which domestic animals
are harbored shall be kept clean and free of all animal excrement.
K. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with
§ 250-25C or § 250-27B shall be liable to a fine of not less than $5
nor more than $50, plus costs of court, for each offense.
(2) Any person who shall violate § 250-27F shall be liable to a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $100, plus costs of court, for the
first offense and to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500,
plus costs of court, for a second offense and each offense
thereafter.
§ 250-28 CLOSTER CODE § 250-28
189:884
§ 250-28.1. General poultry prohibition and exception. [Added
3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1]
No person, firm or corporation shall raise, keep or harbor any poultry, i.e.,
ducks, chickens, swans, geese, turkey, guinea fowl, pheasants, pea fowl and
pigeons, for commercial or noncommercial purposes within the Borough.
Exception: Any person, firm or corporation who was duly licensed to do so
by the Borough on or before the effective date of this section may retain or
continue to raise, keep or harbor poultry and is exempt from this general
prohibition (i.e., grandfathered).
§ 250-29. Poultry.
(3) Any person who shall be deemed to suffer a dog previously
determined to be vicious under § 250-28A to run at large shall be
liable to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200, plus costs
of court for a first offense and to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $300, plus costs of court, in the discretion of the court,
for a second offense and each offense thereafter.
(4) Any owner who allows a vicious dog to run at large within the
Borough shall, in the event that said animal is deemed to have
bitten any person or other domestic animal, be subject to a fine of
not less than $300 and not more than $500.
A. Minimum distance from human habitations. No pigeons, chickens or
other poultry shall be kept within 25 feet of any structure owned by
another and used for human habitation, occupation or assembly.
B. Maximum number. In no case shall any person be permitted to keep in
the Borough more than 20 chickens, ducks or other poultry, including
pigeons.
C. Permitting poultry to stray or run within certain distance of human
habitations. No pigeons, chickens or other poultry shall be permitted to
run, fly or stray within 25 feet of any structure owned by another and
used for human habitation, occupation or assembly. This section shall
not apply to homing pigeons.
D. Sanitary regulations for houses and coops. The regulations and
conditions in this section shall be complied with in the keeping and
housing of pigeons, chickens and other poultry in the borough. Houses
or coops shall be kept in the following manner:
(1) Dry and ventilated, with windows placed to admit sunlight.
(2) Whitewashed or painted within.
(3) Cleaned at least once a week between November 1 and May 1;
twice a week between May 1 and November 1. They shall be
cleaned and disinfected on a more frequent basis if necessary.
§ 250-28 WATER § 250-29
189:885
§ 250-29.1. Rabbits. [Added 3-16-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-1]
No domestic rabbit or one maintained as a pet shall be allowed to run at
large in the Borough of Closter. All such rabbits shall be kept either inside
the owner’s residence or confined to a suitable rabbit hutch as set forth in
Subsections A and B below.
§ 250-30. Bees. [Amended 11-18-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-3]
(4) Perches shall be removable and kept clean.
(5) Chicken nests shall be removable and cleaned, aired and sunned at
frequent intervals.
(6) The yard shall be kept clean and free from odors.
E. Permits required; fees; expiration. No person shall keep pigeons,
chickens or other poultry in the Borough without having first obtained
from the Borough Health Officer a permit for that purpose. Such permit
may be issued by the Health Officer upon payment of a fee of $20. The
permit shall expire on December 31 of each year. [Amended
11-15-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-3]
F. Revocation and suspension.
(1) If the conditions and regulations set forth in § 250-29D are not
complied with, the permit required by § 250-29E shall be revoked.
Nothing in this section shall apply to such pigeons, chickens or
other poultry confined in coops in regularly licensed markets or
stores for the sale, slaughter and plucking of poultry. Whenever, in
the opinion of the Board of Health, the environment has changed
since granting the permit to keep and maintain pigeons, chickens
or other poultry to such an extent that the maintenance thereof
may constitute a nuisance, such permit may be revoked by the
Health Officer.
(2) The Borough Health Officer is hereby empowered to suspend or
revoke the license held by any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article. No license, however, shall be suspended
or revoked until after a hearing. A notice in writing, stating the
time and place of such hearing, shall be served upon the licensee at
least five days prior to holding of such hearing.
A. Every rabbit hutch shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be subject at all times to inspection by the Health Officer.
B. No part of any rabbit hutch shall be maintained within 20 feet of any
building used in whole or in part as a dwelling.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish certain requirements of
sound beekeeping practices, which are intended to avoid problems
§ 250-29 CLOSTER CODE § 250-30
189:886
that may otherwise be associated with the keeping of bees in
populated areas.
(2) Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this
section, it shall be unlawful for any beekeeper to keep any colony or
colonies in such a manner or of such disposition as to cause any
unhealthy condition or nuisance.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following items shall have the
meaning indicated:
APIARY — A place where bees are kept.
BEE — Any stage of the common domestic honey bees (Apes Mellifera)
species.
COLONY — A hive and its equipment and appurtenances, including
bees, comb, honey, pollen and brood.
HIVE — A structure intended for the housing of a bee colony.
BEEKEEPER — It shall be presumed for purposes of this section that
the beekeeper is the person or persons who own or otherwise have the
present right of possession and control of the tract upon which a hive
or hives are situated. The presumption may be rebutted by a written
agreement authorizing a person or persons to maintain the colony or
colonies upon the tract setting forth the name, address and telephone
number of the other person(s) who is acting as the beekeeper.
C. No person, firm, corporation, association, society or partnership shall
raise, keep or harbor any bees for commercial or noncommercial
purposes within the Borough. The only exception are honey bees (Apis
Mellifera) on a minimum of five acres and a maximum of two hives, if a
license has been issued by the Health Officer of the Closter Board of
Health which grants said exception.
D. License required; compliance with provisions.
(1) Application for license. Application for license shall be made in
writing to the Health officer c/o the Board of Health, Borough of
Closter, and shall state the name of applicant, description of the
premises to be used by the licensee for beekeeping, the name of the
owner(s) of the premises or lessee of the premises and such other
information as shall be determined to be reasonably necessary by
the Board of Health for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
this section. The application must be signed by the applicant and
owner(s) or lessees of the property.
(2) Issuance of license. The Health Officer shall issue a license upon
application made pursuant of this section, and each license so
issued shall be signed by the duly designated representative of the
Board of Health. Said license shall bear the date of this issuance,
the name of the person so licensed, description of the premises
covered by the license and be prominently displayed in and about
§ 250-30 WATER § 250-30
189:887
the area of said place where the bees are kept and maintained.
Every license shall be nontransferable and shall cover only the
licensed premises and the named licensee (beekeeper).
(3) Cost of license. The cost for the license is $25 per year.
(4) Denial of license. The Health Officer shall deny a license to any
applicant who does not meet the requirements of any subsection(s)
of this section. A written letter of denial stating the reason(s) for
the denial of the license will be issued by the Health Officer.
(5) Appeal of denials. Applicants who have been denied a license
pursuant to this section of the Code may appeal said denial to the
Closter Board of Health.
(6) Expiration date. All licenses under this section shall automatically
expire on the 31st day of December in the year in which it was
issued.
E. Conditions for beekeeping.
(1) All bee colonies shall be kept in Langstroth-type hives with
removable frames which shall be kept in sound and usable
condition with a height not to exceed 5 1/2 feet from ground level.
(2) The hives must be protected by an appropriate fence, at least four
feet in height and eight feet from the hives, with the gate being
locked at all times to prevent the bee hives from being accidently
disturbed.
(3) Bee hives shall be provided with a barrier which shall comply with
the following:
(a) Maximum mesh size for chain link or picket fences shall be 1-1/
4 inch (32mm) square unless the fence is provided with slats
fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to
not more than 1-3/4 inch (44mm).
(b) Pedestrian access gates shall open outwards away from the
hives and shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device
being locked when unattended.
(4) No hive of any type shall be located within 100 feet of any inhabited
building with the exception of the name of beekeepers residence or
25 feet from any roadside, sidewalk or path.
F. Water. Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available at all times to the bees so that the bees will not congregate at
swimming pools, bibcocks, pet watering bowls, bird baths or other
water sources where bees may cause human, bird or domestic pet
contact.
§ 250-30 CLOSTER CODE § 250-30
189:888
§ 250-31. Keeping and housing of animals.
G. Compliance. All keepers of bees, licensed as aforesaid, shall comply
strictly with the rules and regulations promulgated by the State
Department of Agriculture and/or such other state or county agency
insofar as they affect the keeping of honey bees. The licensee shall
freely admit to his premises inspectors from any and all governmental
agencies with jurisdiction and authority to make reasonable inquiry or
otherwise enforce the laws of and pertaining to the maintenance of the
hives.
H. Inspection.
(1) The hives must be inspected at least annually by the proper New
Jersey State Apiarist. The Health Officer shall have the right to
inspect any apiary between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Where practicable, prior notice shall be given to the beekeeper if
he resides at the apiary or if his name is marked on the hives.
(2) All colonies must be inspected by the beekeeper or his/her delegate
no less than three times between March 1 and October 1 of any
given year. The Health Officer will accompany the beekeeper or
delegate on these inspections.
(3) Upon receipt of information that any colony situated within the
Borough is not being kept in compliance with this article, the
Health Officer shall cause an investigation to be conducted. If he
finds that grounds exist to believe that one or more violations have
occurred, he shall issue a written notice of violation.
I. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates or refuses to comply
with the regulations of this article shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than $10 not more than $100 for each offense, to be recovered by and in
the name of the Borough.
A. Definitions. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CLASS I ANIMAL — A lion, tiger, bear or any other animal of large
size belonging to the biological order of Carnivora or any other
undomesticated mammal or reptile of large size.
CLASS II ANIMAL — A horse or any other animal belonging to the
biological order of Perissodactyla.
CLASS III ANIMAL — A cow, sheep, pig, goat or any other animal
belonging to the biological order of Artiodactyla.
B. Exceptions. Domestic cats and domestic dogs are specifically excluded
from the definitions of animals herein. For purposes of this exclusion:
§ 250-30 WATER § 250-31
189:889
(1) A "domestic cat" is a member of the Felidae family long kept by
man as a pet, but not including members of the Felidae family that
usually live in a wild state.
(2) A "domestic dog" is a member of the Canidae family long kept by
man as a pet, but not including members of the Canidae family
usually living in a wild state.
C. Keeping of Class I animals prohibited. No animal of Class I shall be kept
or maintained in the Borough of Closter.
D. Shelter and corral required. No animal or animals of Class II and Class
III shall be kept or maintained in the Borough of Closter unless such
animal or animals have a building for shelter and a fully enclosed corral
or coop for containment.
E. Location restrictions. No building, stable, outhouse or accessory
building used for housing an animal or animals of Class II and Class III
shall be located within 100 feet of any adjoining building nor within 20
feet of the adjacent property line.
F. Size of enclosure. The keeping or maintaining of any animal or animals
of Class II and Class III shall be forbidden unless such animal is kept on
land of sufficient area so that there shall be 40,000 square feet for each
animal, with an additional 20,000 square feet required for each
additional animal. There shall also be provided a pen or enclosure of at
least 1,600 square feet for each animal, with 400 square feet of pen or
enclosure required for each additional animal. Within the pen there
must be provided a stable or similar roofed enclosure having an area of
at least 100 square feet for each animal to be held therein.
G. Maintenance of structure. In the keeping or maintaining of any animal
or animals of Class II and Class III, the following rules and regulations
shall be followed.
(1) All structures and accessory buildings shall be painted inside at
least every 12 months with nonabsorbent, lead-free paint.
(2) All stables and accessory buildings shall be treated at least twice a
week with a substance which is designed to kill flies and rodents.
The name of this substance, as well as the record of such treatment
with the signature of the person performing this work, shall be
posted conspicuously in the stable.
(3) All stables shall have a sufficient supply of water for cleaning and
flushing purposes. All stables, accessory buildings and corrals shall
be cleaned of all manure, feculent matter and waste at least once
daily.
(4) All manure, feculent matter and waste must be placed in sealed,
nonporous containers or a closed manure pit of such design and
construction that flies, insects or rodents cannot have access to the
§ 250-31 CLOSTER CODE § 250-31
189:890
§ 250-31.1. Animal feeding. [Added 7-14-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-2;
amended 2-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-1]
No person shall place food intended for consumption by a wild animal
or a stray animal on any property, public or private, in the Borough of
Closter, This prohibition shall not apply to composting, growing vegetables,
scholarly research, environmental education conducted at the Closter
Nature Center, humane trapping of animals, or elevated bird feeders.
contents thereof and that noxious odors do not emanate therefrom.
No such container or pit shall be placed within 40 feet of an
adjoining dwelling or property line.
H. Health of animal. Each animal must be free from sickness and disease.
Should the Borough Health Officer question the health of any animal,
he or she shall have the authority to require an examination by a doctor
of veterinary medicine, such examination to be at the expense of the
owner.
I. Declaration of nuisance. In accordance with the purposes set forth in
the introductory clauses, a violation of § 250-31C, D, E, F and G of this
Article will be deemed to constitute a condition that will endanger the
health, safety and welfare of the public and is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance. Such nuisance is subject to abatement at the expense
of the property owner.
§ 250-31 WATER § 250-31.1
189:891

ARTICLE IV
Retail Food Service Establishments
§ 250-32. License requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a retail food establishment or
deliver milk or milk products without first having obtained from the Board a
license. Only a person who complies with the provisions of Chapter 12 of the
State Sanitary Code, which pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1
to 26:3-69.6 is incorporated by reference herein as if set forth in full herein,
three copies of which code are on file with and available for inspection at
the office of the Board in the custody of the Secretary of said Board, shall
be entitled to hold a license. Licenses shall not be transferable from one
person or place to another person or place. A valid license shall be posted in
every retail food service establishment. Licenses for temporary retail food
establishments shall be issued for a single location and a period of time
not to exceed seven days within any month, except at the discretion of the
Board.
§ 250-33. Food handler's and manager's certification.217 [Amended
7-13-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2; 11-18-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-5]
A. Any person desiring to operate a retail food service establishment shall
make written application for a license on forms provided by the Board
of Health. Such applications shall include the applicant's full name and
post office address and whether such applicant is an individual, firm or
corporation, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, together
with their addresses, shall be included; the location and type of the
proposed retail food service establishment; and the signature of the
applicant or applicants. If the application is for a temporary food
service establishment, it shall also include the inclusive dates of the
proposed operation.
B. In order to obtain a license to operate a retail food service
establishment, at least one member of the staff of the retail food
establishment shall possess a food handler's certification. A person
seeking certification as a food handler shall make application to the
Department of Health after first completing an approved course of
instruction generally in health education, sanitation, personal hygiene,
food poisoning, dish washing procedures and other related health
matters. The Board of Health may waive the requirements of an
approved course and examination and may certify a food handler
holding a current certification from another agency with substantially
equivalent standards.
C. In order to operate a retail food service establishment, there must be a
person (owner, manager or shift foreman) present during all hours of
217. Editor's Note: The title of this section was amended 3-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1 to
include "manager’s certification."
§ 250-32 WATER § 250-33
189:893
§ 250-34. Inspection required.
Upon receipt of an application pursuant to this Article, the Health Officer
shall make an inspection of the retail food service establishment to
determine the compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:2-62 to 26:2-71.
When an inspection reveals that the applicable requirements of this Part 2
and the State Sanitary Code have been met, a license shall be issued to the
applicant by the Board.
§ 250-35. Notice of hazard to public health; corrective action.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Part 2, whenever the Health
Officer finds unsanitary or other conditions in the operation of a retail food
service establishment which, in the Health Officer's judgment, constitute
operation who is a certified food handler. This certification must be
renewed every four years.
D. Certificates not transferable. No person to whom a food handler's
certificate is issued or granted shall give, loan, transfer or permit the
same to be used by any other person for any purpose whatsoever.
E. Records of employees to be maintained by employer. All employers
engaged in the business or service of preparing and processing food
intended for human consumption shall at all times keep and maintain
accurate records of the name and address of each employee, date of
employment and the date of issuance and certificate number of said
food handler's certificate, whose records shall be available at all times
for inspection by the Health Officer or his duly authorized
representatives.
F. Based on the risks of foodborne illness inherent to the food operation,
during inspections and upon request, the person in charge shall
demonstrate to the health authority knowledge of foodborne disease
prevention, application of the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point
(HACCP) principles, and the requirements of this chapter. The person in
charge shall demonstrate this knowledge by substantial compliance
with this chapter. By January 2, 2010, at least one person in charge in
Risk Type 3 food establishments shall be a certified food protection
manager who has shown proficiency of required information through
obtaining a food safety certificate by passing a food safety certification
examination administered by an accredited certifying program
recognized by the Conference for Food Protection. Certified food
protection managers shall maintain the currency of the food safety
certificate by following the accredited certifying program's
requirements for renewal. Information on accredited food safety
certification programs is available through the Department of Health
and Senior Services, Food and Drug Safety Program, by mailing a
written request to: Consumer and Environmental Health Services, Food
and Drug Safety Program, P.O. Box 369, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0369. [Added 3-18-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-1]
§ 250-33 CLOSTER CODE § 250-35
189:894
a substantial hazard to the public health, the Health Officer may, without
warning, notice or hearing, issue a written notice to the license holder or
operator citing such condition, specifying the corrective action to be taken
and specifying a time period within which such action shall be taken; and
if deemed necessary, such order shall state that the license is immediately
suspended and that all food service operations are to be immediately
discontinued. Any person to whom such an order is issued shall comply
immediately therewith but, upon written petition to the Health Officer, shall
be afforded a hearing pursuant to Article II of this Part 2.
§ 250-35 WATER § 250-35
189:895

ARTICLE V
Rest Rooms
§ 250-36. Requirements.
All comfort stations which are made available for use of patrons of
establishments or for the use of the general public shall comply with the
following requirements:
§ 250-37. Hand-washing facilities.
Approved hand-washing facilities shall comply with the following
requirements:
§ 250-38. Violations and penalties.
A. The pressure and volume of water shall be sufficient to ensure effective
flushing of toilets and urinals.
B. Toilets and urinals shall be constructed of vitreous or other approved
materials, the surface of which is smooth, hard, impervious and not
easily corrodible; shall be of rim flush type; and shall be properly vented
and trapped. All joints shall be tight. The construction shall be such as
to provide ample flushing action to ensure cleanliness. All toilets and
urinals shall be kept clean and in good order.
C. All toilets and urinals shall be located in well-lighted and well-ventilated
areas, accessible to approved hand-washing facilities. All toilet rooms
shall be kept clean and in good repair.
A. The lavatory shall be composed of vitreous or other approved material,
the surface of which is smooth, hard, impervious and not readily
corrodible. Taps connected with the lavatory shall be so installed as to
discharge at least one inch above the level at which the lavatory will
overflow upon the floor.
B. The water supply used in connection with said lavatory shall comply
with the requirements of this Part 2.
C. Soap in a suitable dispensing container and single-service paper towels
or some other form of individual towel service approved by the Board of
Health (Chapter 26) shall be provided.
D. Minimum plumbing shall comply with the Plumbing Code.218
A. Upon conviction of any violation of the provisions of this Article, the
Judge or court of proper jurisdiction may impose a penalty of not less
than $5 or more than $100. [Amended 3-17-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-1]
218. Editor's Note: See Ch. 89, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 250-36 WATER § 250-38
189:897
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 250-38 CLOSTER CODE § 250-38
189:898
ARTICLE VI
Septic Tanks; Cesspools; Privies; Portable Toilets
§ 250-39. Regulations.
A. Septic tanks, cesspools, privies.
(1) No person shall construct or install a cesspool, septic tank or privy
in the Borough of Closter.
(2) Whenever any premises contains a septic tank, cesspool or privy
which is abandoned or which the Board of Health determined is in a
dangerous condition, the same shall, upon notification to the owner
thereof, be promptly pumped out and filled with clean earth by the
owner or agent at the owner's expense.
B. Portable toilets.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall hereafter place or install a
portable toilet in the borough without first obtaining a permit from
the Board of Health to do so. Said applicant shall provide the
following information as part of the permit application procedures:
(a) The owner of the portable toilets.
(b) Dates during which toilets are to be provided.
(c) Proposed location of toilets.
(d) Emptying and maintenance procedures.
(2) No portable toilet shall be located within 200 feet of any
commercial food service operation or any surface waterway.
(3) Portable toilets shall have watertight, completely closed tanks for
storage of wastes, shall be flyproof, shall be adequately vented and
shall be provided with cleanable seats.
C. General provisions.
(1) No person shall maintain a septic tank, cesspool, privy or portable
toilet which creates a nuisance as a result of overflow, lack of
absorption or faulty design or construction.
(2) Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
cleaning or emptying septic tanks, privies, cesspools or portable
toilets shall use, in such instances, a suitable vehicle properly
provided with watertight, completely closed tanks or boxes
designed to prevent leakage onto the street or highways within the
borough and further designed to prevent the escape of offensive
odors into the atmosphere.
(3) No person shall maintain, use or permit to be used any receptacle
for human waste unless such receptacle is so constructed and
§ 250-39 WATER § 250-39
189:899
maintained that flies cannot gain access to the excremental matter
contained therein and unless such wastes shall, at all times, be
prevented from flowing over or upon the surface of the ground.
§ 250-39 CLOSTER CODE § 250-39
189:900
ARTICLE VII
Housing Standards
§ 250-40. Purpose.
The provisions of this Article shall constitute the standards to guide the
Health Officer or his or her agents in determining the fitness of a building
for human habitation, use or occupancy.
§ 250-41. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the words, terms or phrases listed below
shall be defined and interpreted as follows:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The department, branch or agency of
this municipality which is authorized by this Part 2 to administer the
provisions of this Article.
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof used for human
habitation, use or occupancy, and includes any necessary buildings and
appurtenance belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING — A building or structure or part thereof containing one or
more dwelling units or lodging units. For the purposes of this Article, a
mobile home shall be deemed to be a "dwelling."
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms or any part thereof located
within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable and other organic waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space within a dwelling unit
used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes,
excluding bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries,
foyers or communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
HEALTH OFFICER — The officer authorized by this Part 2 to exercise
powers prescribed by this Article.
INFESTATIONS — The presence, within or around a building, of any insects,
rodents or other pests.
LODGING HOUSE — Any building or that part of any building containing
one or more lodging units, each of which is rented by one or more persons
not related to the owner.
LODGING UNIT — A rented room or group of rooms containing no cooking
facilities used for living purposes by a separate family or group of persons
living together or by a person living alone, within a building.
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons in actual possession of and living in
the building or dwelling unit, including the owner.
§ 250-40 WATER § 250-41
189:901
OWNER — Any person properly authorized to exercise powers of or for
an owner of property for purposes of its purchase, sale, use, occupancy or
maintenance.
PERSON — The same meaning as defined in N.J.S.A. 1:1-2.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — All installed receptacles or devices which are
supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquid waste or sewage
into the drainage system with which they are directly or indirectly
connected.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste material, except
garbage.
UTILITIES — Electric, gas, heating, water and sewerage services and
equipment therefor.
§ 250-42. Water supply.
Every dwelling unit and lodging house shall be provided with a safe supply
of potable water meeting the standards as set forth in Potable Water
Standards as published by the New Jersey State Department of Health. The
source of such water supply shall be approved by the New Jersey State
Department of Health and/or the Borough Board of Health. The minimum
rate of flow of hot or cold water issuing from a faucet or fixture shall be not
less than one gallon per minute.
§ 250-43. Plumbing facilities.
§ 250-44. Waste materials.
Garbage or other organic waste shall be stored in watertight receptacles of
metal or other approved material. Such receptacles shall be provided with
tight-fitting covers. At least one approved-type garbage receptacle shall be
provided for each dwelling unit in accordance with § 250-47 of this Article.
Rubbish shall be stored in receptacles of metal or other approved material.
§ 250-45. Heating equipment. [Amended 12-18-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-2]
A. Every plumbing fixture shall be connected to water and sewer systems
approved by the Board of Health and shall be maintained in good
working condition.
B. Every kitchen sink, lavatory and bathtub or shower required by this
Part 2 shall be connected to both hot- and cold-water lines.
C. Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are installed
and maintained in good and safe working conditions, connected with
the hot-water lines required under the provisions of Subsection A of this
section and capable of delivering water at a minimum temperature of
not less than 120° F.
§ 250-41 CLOSTER CODE § 250-45
189:902
§ 250-46. Maintenance.
Every building, dwelling, dwelling unit and premises upon which such
building, dwelling or dwelling unit is located shall comply with the following
maintenance standards, as appropriate:
A. From October 1 of each year to the next succeeding May 1, every unit of
dwelling space and every habitable room therein shall be maintained at
a temperature of at least 68° F. between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m., and at least 65° F. between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. The heating system shall be capable of maintaining the minimum
required temperature in all habitable rooms without the necessity of
heating adjoining rooms more than five degrees higher than said
minimum required temperature. The design of the heating system shall
conform to ASHRAE Guide and Data Book. The heating standard herein
set forth may be modified by the Commissioner by emergency rule.
B. In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner shall not be responsible
for heat loss and the consequent drop in the interior temperature
arising out of action by the occupants in leaving windows or doors open
to the exterior of the building.
C. The owner shall be obligated to supply required fuel or energy and
maintain the heating system in good operating condition so that it can
supply heat as required herein, notwithstanding any contractual
provision seeking to delegate or shift responsibility to the occupant or
third person; except that the owner shall not be required to supply fuel
or energy for heating purposes at any unit where the occupant thereof
agrees, in writing, to supply heat to his or her own unit of dwelling
space and said unit is served by its own exclusive heating equipment for
which the source of heat can be separately computed and billed.
D. Every space heater, except electrical, shall be properly vented to a
chimney or duct leading to the outdoors. Unvented portable space
heaters burning solids, liquid or gaseous fuels shall be prohibited.
A. Every dwelling shall be free from rodents, vermin and insects. Rodent
or vermin extermination and rodentproofing and verminproofing may
be required by the Board of Health. Rodent and vermin extermination
shall be carried out in accordance with § 250-47 of this Article. Every
openable window, exterior door, skylight and other opening to the
outdoors shall be supplied with properly fitting screens in good repair
from May 1 until October 1 of each year. Such screens shall have a
mesh of not less than No. 16.
B. Every building, dwelling, dwelling unit and all other areas of the
premises shall be clean and free from garbage or rubbish and hazards
to safety. [Amended 3-17-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-1]
C. The Health Officer may order the owner to clean, repair, paint,
whitewash or paper such walls or ceilings within a dwelling when such
§ 250-45 WATER § 250-46
189:903
§ 250-47. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
The owners and occupants of buildings, dwellings and surrounding
premises shall have the following responsibilities and duties:
have deteriorated so as to provide a harborage for rodents or vermin
or when such a wall or ceiling has become stained or soiled or the
plaster, wallboard or other covering has become loose or badly cracked
or missing. Nothing in this subsection shall be so construed as to place
upon the nonresident owner responsibilities for cleanliness contained
in § 250-47 of this Article.
D. Every water closet compartment floor and bathroom floor shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be reasonably impervious to water so
as to permit such floor to be kept in a clean condition.
A. No owner or occupant shall cause any services, facilities, equipment or
utilities which are required under this Part 2 to be removed from, shut
off or discontinued in any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him or
her, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while
actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary
emergencies when discontinuance of service is authorized by the
Health Officer. In the event that any service or utility which the owner
has agreed to supply is discontinued, the owner shall take immediate
steps to cause the restoration of such service or utility.
B. The owner of a dwelling located in an area found by the Health Officer
to be infested by rats, insects or other vermin shall carry out such rat
stoppage, verminproofing or other means of preventing infestations of
said dwellings as may be required by the Board of Health.
C. No owner shall occupy or let to an occupant any vacant dwelling unit or
lodging unit unless it is clean and sanitary.
D. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or
lodging units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the common areas of the dwellings and premises
thereof.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, unless otherwise provided for
under lease agreement, to provide for the orderly maintenance of the
premises. The storage of objects or materials not covered in
Subsections G and H of this section or not otherwise prohibited by
municipal ordinances shall be done in an orderly manner so as to not
constitute a health, safety or fire hazard.
F. Every occupant of a dwelling shall keep in a clean and sanitary
condition that part of the dwelling which he or she occupies and
controls.
G. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or her garbage
and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents by
§ 250-46 CLOSTER CODE § 250-47
189:904
placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage
receptacles required by § 250-44 of this Article.
H. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his or her rubbish
in a clean sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers
required by § 250-44 of this Article.
I. In dwellings containing no more than three dwelling units, it shall be
the responsibility of the occupant of each dwelling unit to furnish the
receptacles outside the dwelling unit as are needed for the storage of
garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises. In lodging
houses and in dwellings containing four or more dwelling units, it shall
be the responsibility of the owner to furnish such receptacles outside
the lodging units or dwelling units as are needed for the storage of
garbage and rubbish until removal from the premises.
J. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing no more than
(3) dwelling units shall be responsible, unless provided for otherwise
under a lease agreement, for the periodic removal of all garbage and
rubbish from the premises each week in accordance with such
regulations of this municipality for the collection of garbage and
rubbish.
K. Every occupant of a dwelling comprising a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises, and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible
for such extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection,
whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a
dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units, extermination
thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
L. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for
the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
M. In dwellings containing two or more dwelling units having a common
source of heat for domestic hot water, it shall be the responsibility of
the owner to make provision for the proper operation of such facilities
at all times.
N. Every owner of a dwelling who permits to be occupied any dwelling unit
therein under any agreement, expressed or implied, to supply or furnish
heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat adequate to maintain
therein a minimum inside temperature of 65° F. in all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. throughout the year.
§ 250-47 WATER § 250-47
189:905
§ 250-48. Powers and duties of Health Officer.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to exercise all
powers as may be necessary to carry out and effect the purpose and
provisions of this Article, including the following, in addition to other
powers herein granted:
§ 250-49. Issuance of search warrant.
The Health Officer or his or her agents may, upon affidavit, apply to the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the borough for a search warrant setting
forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this Article
exists on the premises, and if the Municipal Judge is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in the affidavit, he or she shall authorize the issuance of
a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. A search warrant
may also be issued for the routine, periodic inspection of all structures in a
given area based upon possible cause, such as passage of time since the last
inspection, the nature of the buildings and structures involved, observable
deterioration of the general area and the like.
§ 250-50. More restrictive standards to prevail.
In any case where the provisions cf this Article impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinance or law, then the standards as set
forth herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this Article impose a
O. In the absence of a contract or agreement to the contrary, an owner
shall be obliged to provide heat wherever heating facilities are under
the control of the owner or whenever two or more dwelling units or
lodging units are heated by a common facility.
P. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all provisions of this
Article not specified as the responsibility of occupants.
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in the borough in order to
determine which dwellings are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Article.
E. To delegate any functions and powers under this Article to such officers
and agents as he or she may designate where such delegation is
allowed by law.
§ 250-47 CLOSTER CODE § 250-50
189:906
lower standard than any other ordinance or law, then the higher standard
contained in such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 250-50 WATER § 250-50
189:907

ARTICLE VIII
Swimming Pools
§ 250-51. Adoption of standards. [Amended 12-18-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-2]
The Board hereby adopts all provisions of the New Jersey State Recreational
Bathing Waters Code (1986), N.J.A.C. 8:22-1 et seq., regulating the
maintenance and operation of a swimming pool. As used herein, the term
"public swimming pool" shall include any swimming pool except one
constructed on private residential property and not operated as a business
for profit.
§ 250-52. License required.
No person shall maintain or operate a public swimming pool without having
first obtained a license therefor from the Board of Health.
§ 250-53. Operation to be in a sanitary manner.
All swimming pools, as well as all bathhouses, dressing rooms, locker
rooms, shower rooms and toilets used in connection with public swimming
pools, shall be operated and maintained in a clean and sanitary manner.
§ 250-54. Disinfection of pool and water.
The pool and the water therein shall be disinfected at such intervals and in
such manner as, in the opinion of the Health Officer, shall be necessary to
protect the health of the users of the pool.
§ 250-55. Testing of water. [Amended 12-18-1986 by Ord. No.
1986-2]
All chemical, bacteriological and microbiological analyses of swimming pool
waters shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in the
current edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewaters, American Public Health Association, 16th Edition.
§ 250-56. Reports of analyses.
Swimming pool operators shall have pool water samples analyzed at least
once weekly by a laboratory approved by the Board. Copies of reports of all
analyses shall be forwarded to the Board within 48 hours after completion.
§ 250-51 WATER § 250-56
189:909

ARTICLE IX
Water Supply
§ 250-57. Compliance required; permit.
Every water supply shall be constructed or materially reconstructed and
every existing water supply which is unsafe or subject to contamination
by reason of unsatisfactory location, protection, construction, operation or
maintenance shall be made to comply with the requirements of this Part 2.
No such water supply shall be constructed without the approval of plans
and specifications by the Board of Health or without a written permit from
the Board of Health.
§ 250-58. Pollution prohibited.
No person shall pollute or permit to be polluted any spring, well, cistern,
reservoir or other source of domestic or potable water supply or any surface
waters which drain into any such source of water.
§ 250-59. Construction and location of wells and springs.
Every well or spring shall be located and constructed in such manner
that neither underground nor surface contamination from any source of
pollution can affect such water supply.
§ 250-60. Standards of quality.
No person shall use or make available for the use of any other person for
drinking, bathing, culinary purposes, cleaning of utensils or other domestic
or potable purposes any water unless the same shall be of a quality safe for
the use to which the same is intended to be put and unless said water shall
fully meet the standards of quality for such purposes as fixed by the State
Board of Health.
§ 250-61. Discontinuance of unsafe sources.
Whenever the Board of Health shall have satisfactory evidence that any
spring, well or cistern or other source of water, the water of which is used
for domestic or potable purposes or for any of the purposes set forth in
§ 250-60, has become polluted or rendered unsafe for the use to which the
same is being put or is intended to be put, written notice to discontinue
the use of said water and the well, cistern or other sources may be sent
to the owner, agent or person in charge of said spring, well or cistern or
other sources of water, and such owner, agent or person shall forthwith,
on receipt of such notice, close said spring, well or cistern or other source
and discontinue and cause the discontinuance of the use of said water until
the cause of the pollution has been abated and until said water shall be
rendered safe and of the quality provided for in § 250-60.
§ 250-57 WATER § 250-61
189:911

ARTICLE X
Vending Machines
§ 250-62. Adoption of standards.
The operation and maintenance of food and beverage vending machines
within the Borough of Closter must comply with the provisions of the Food
and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New Jersey (1961) as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6, which is incorporated by reference herein as
if set forth in full herein, three copies of which code are on file with and
available for inspection at the office of the Board of Health in the custody of
the Secretary of said Board.
§ 250-63. License required.
No mechanical device for vending any food, beverage or ice shall be
installed, operated or maintained within the Borough of Closter unless a
license for the operation of such device has previously been issued by the
Board of Health.
§ 250-64. Inspection.
The Health Officer or Sanitarian shall inspect each device for approval
thereof and from time to time thereafter to ensure full compliance herewith.
§ 250-65. Identification.
Every such device shall be identified on the outside, plainly visible, with the
name and address of the owner and the number of the license issued to such
owner.
§ 250-66. Maintenance.
Every such device shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times and
in condition satisfactory to the Health Officer or Sanitarian, who shall have
access thereto and the interior thereof at all times.
§ 250-62 WATER § 250-66
189:913

ARTICLE XI
Licenses and Permits
§ 250-67. Application; issuance; term; display.
§ 250-68. Suspension or revocation.
A. It is intended that the terms "license" or "permit," wherever used
herein, be synonymous if, in the interpretation of any part hereof, such
synonym is required to carry out the manifest intent and purpose of this
Part 2.
B. All applications for any license or permit may be withheld at the
direction of the Board pending examination, investigation or inspection
of the person who or the premises which may be the subject matter of
the license or permit under consideration.
C. All licenses or permits issued under any of the several Articles of this
Part 2 shall be valid only for the balance of the licensing year in which
they are issued unless otherwise herein provided, except that a new
license or permit issued in December shall be issued for that month and
the following year. The licensing year shall run from January 1 until
December 31 of the same year. No license or permit shall be
transferable or assignable.
D. The Board shall evidence the granting of any license or permit issued by
furnishing to the licensee or permittee a suitable card, sign, placard,
disc, plate or writing which shall convey information concerning the
nature of such license or permit, the serial number of the same, the
name of the person to whom the same has been issued, the year in
which the same is so issued, the premises or vehicle so licensed, if that
is material or required, and such other information as the Board may
deem pertinent.
E. Every license or permit issued by the Board shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place in the establishment, premises or other place for
which the same is issued and shall likewise be so displayed on every
vehicle or conveyance so licensed for the period that said license or
permit shall be in force, unless the Board shall otherwise prescribe.
A. Notice to show cause; complaint; suspension; reinstatement.
(1) Every license or permit issued hereunder may, at any time during
the term for which the same is so issued, be suspended by the
Board or, in an emergency, by its Health Officer, pending a hearing,
to be granted the holder thereof, pursuant to a notice to show cause
why said license or permit should not be suspended further or
revoked by the Board.
(2) No such license or permit shall be suspended unless the Health
Officer shall file, with the Board, a compliant or charges evidencing
one or more violations of the Article hereof under which said
§ 250-67 WATER § 250-68
189:915
license or permit was originally issued or one or more violations of
the New Jersey State Sanitary Code or other applicable statutes or
regulations.
(3) Every suspension ordered under this section shall automatically
terminate two weeks from the date thereof unless the continuance
of such suspension shall be ordered by the Board for good cause,
and then such suspension shall continue only during the period of
any such continuance so ordered by the Board.
(4) During the period of any such suspension or ordered continuance
thereof, every license or permit so suspended shall be ineffective,
and the holder thereof shall, during the entire period of such
suspension, cease the operation of any business or discontinue
every activity or use permitted under the license or permit
suspended.
(5) Any person whose license has been suspended may at any time
make application for a reinspection for the purpose of
reinstatement of the license. Within 10 days following receipt of a
written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that
in his or her opinion the conditions causing suspension of the
license have been corrected, the Health Officer shall make a
reinspection. If the applicant is complying with the requirements of
this Part 2 and of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code or other
applicable statutes or regulations and has paid the requisite
reinstatement fee, the license shall be reinstated.
B. Revocation of license; hearing; notice; action.
(1) Any license or permit issued under the provisions of this Part 2 may
be revoked at any time by the Board for just cause or if the licensee
or permittee or any of the employees, agents or servants of said
licensee or permittee shall violate:
(a) Any of the provisions of this Part 2 or any amendments hereof
or supplements hereto;
(b) The Sanitary Code of the Department of Health of the State of
New Jersey specifically applicable to the subject matter for or
upon which said license or permit was issued; or
(c) Applicable state statutes, rules or regulations.
(2) Before any license or permit may be revoked, the Health Officer
shall notify the license holder in writing, stating the reasons for
which the license is subject to revocation and advising that the
license shall be permanently revoked at the end of five days
following service of such notice unless a written request for a
hearing is filed with the Health Officer, by the license holder, within
such five-day period.
§ 250-68 CLOSTER CODE § 250-68
189:916
(3) A license may be suspended for cause pending its revocation or a
hearing relative thereto.
(4) The time and place for such hearing shall be fixed at the discretion
of the Board; provided, however, that an unreasonable time shall
not be permitted to elapse between the date of any suspension of
license and the date fixed for revocation hearing.
(5) Notice of the time and place of any hearing held under this Article
shall be given by the Board to the holder of the license or permit so
involved, in writing and served either personally or sent to the
applicant by registered mail, addressed to him or her at the
address stated in the license or permit or by posting notice on the
premises either on or near the main entrance door. If there is more
than one entrance door, the notice shall be posted on the one
which, in the discretion of the Health Officer, is used by the general
public.
(6) A licensee or permittee who fails to appear at the time and place
fixed for such hearing shall not be entitled to any further hearing,
and in that event, the license or permit may, as a matter of course,
be forthwith revoked.
(7) The Board of Health, after a formal hearing, may order the license
restored, issue a conditional license or revoke the license pending
full compliance with all applicable codes and statutes.
C. Informal hearings. The Health Officer, as a result of any conditional or
unsatisfactory inspection report or other field inspection documenting
serious code violations, may ask the holder of a license or permit to
attend an informal hearing with the Health Officer and one or more
sanitary inspectors. At the informal hearing, the parties shall discuss
the health-related problems in the establishment, actions necessary to
correct said problems and a reasonable time schedule for completion.
The Health Officer shall make a narrative record of the hearing which
shall be the basis for a proposed consent agreement listing the
deficiencies and corrections needed and the time schedule for
completion. Refusal to attend an informal hearing or to sign a consent
agreement may result in a notice to show cause pursuant to
§ 250-68A(1) of this Part 2.
D. Formal hearing. Upon notice of suspension or revocation and a request
by the license or permit holder, the Board shall schedule a formal
hearing. The Board as a whole shall function as hearing officer;
testimony shall be offered by the Health Officer and Sanitary Inspector
and by the license or permit holder and any employee. An attorney may
be present to represent the license or permit holder. A verbal record
shall be taken on tape.
E. Conditional licenses. The Board may issue a conditional license after a
formal hearing or at the time a new license or renewal is sought. The
conditional license shall be for a specified time period during which the
§ 250-68 WATER § 250-68
189:917
license or permit holder shall meet the conditions set forth by the Board
in a manner satisfactory to the Health Officer. Upon expiration of the
conditional license, the license holder shall cease operations unless the
Board has extended the conditional license or granted a regular license
or permit.
§ 250-68 CLOSTER CODE § 250-68
189:918
ARTICLE XII
Fees; Additional License Provisions
§ 250-69. Fee schedule. [Amended 6-16-1988 by Ord. No. 1988-4;
12-18-1986 by Ord. No. 1986-2; 11-15-1990 by Ord. No. 1990-3;
8-20-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-1;219 7-13-1995 by 1995-1; 9-18-2003 by
2003-1; 4-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-1; 4-15-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-2; 11-18-2004 by 2004-4]
The following schedule of fees is hereby established:
A. Eating establishments, including restaurants, diners, luncheonettes
and pizza parlors: [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
(1) With seating capacities of zero to 49: $185.
(2) With seating capacities of 50 to 99: $250.
(3) With seating capacities of 100 or more persons: $400.
B. Food-handling establishments, including delicatessens, meat and food
markets: [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
(1) Up to 3,000 square feet: $150. [Amended 11-19-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-2]
(2) Three thousand to 6,000 square feet: $200. [Amended
11-19-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-2]
(3) Six thousand to 10,000 square feet: $375.
(4) Over 10,000 square feet: $735.
C. Vending machines: [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
(1) Coffee, tea, soup, sandwich, soda, milk: $35.
(2) Candy, ice cream, cookies, etc.: $30.
(3) Gumball-type: $10.
(4) Ice: $35.
(5) Battery of five or more at same location (per location); $80.
D. Temporary retail food establishments and events: [Amended
12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
(1) One to three days: $50.
(2) Four to seven days: $125.
219. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that all requests for public documents be
made in writing to the Board of Health.
§ 250-69 WATER § 250-69
189:919
(3) Refreshment stands; $100 annually. [Amended 11-19-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-2]
E. Bakeries: $165. [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
F. Each vehicle selling or dispensing box lunches or other food products
(including prepackaged ice cream): $190. [Amended 12-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-6]
G. Food caterers: $190. [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
H. Selling, dispensing or storing candy, ice cream or similar products: $50.
[Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6; Amended 11-19-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-2]
I. Milk. All milk and cream licenses (stores and vehicles): $5.
J. Nursery schools and day camps: $200. [Amended 12-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-6]
K. Poultry, pigeons or other fowl kept for other than business purposes.
License for premises: $45. [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-6]
L. Swimming pools: [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
(1) Nonprofit (excluding residential pools): $50.
(2) If operated as a business for profit: $275.
M. Laundromat. License to operate and conduct such establishments:
$150. [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6; Amended
11-19-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-2]
N. Wells. Drilling or boring of a potable deep well: $20. [Amended
12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
O. Transcripts of marriage, death, birth and domestic partnership
certificates: $10. [Amended 10-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-1]
P. Toilets: [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
(1) Portable: $30.
(2) Additional (each): $15.
Q. Whirlpools and hot tubs (per unit): $90. [Amended 12-16-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-6]
R. Copies of any public record: [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-6]
(1) For letter size or smaller: $0.05.
(2) For legal size or larger: $0.07.
§ 250-69 CLOSTER CODE § 250-69
189:920
§ 250-70. Terms of licenses.
All licenses for which fees are set forth herein shall be issued by the Board
of Health and be valid for the balance of the licensing year in which they
are issued, except that a new license permit issued in December shall be
issued for that month and the following year. The licensing year shall run
from January 1 until December 31 of the same year.
S. Body arts procedures.
(1) Plan review. Establishments performing body art procedures: $100.
(2) Annual licensing inspection. Establishment performing body
piercing, excluding ear piercing: $300.
(3) Annual licensing inspection. Establishment performing ear
piercing, excluding the ear lobe: $100.
(4) Annual licensing inspection. Establishment performing tattooing,
permanent cosmetics and/or body piercing: $300.
(5) Temporary license. Establishment performing body art procedures
(maximum 3 days): $150.
T. Various medical procedures - (flu shots). The fee shall be no less than $5
and no greater than $25 per procedure.
U. Honey bees (Apis Mallifera): $35. [Amended 12-16-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-6]
V. Food handler's and manager's course: $10 to $500 per person per
course. [Added 7-16-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1; amended
6-17-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-2]
W. When the inspection of a food establishment is conditional and requires
more than one revisit to correct the violation, a fee of $100 will be
charged for each reinspection until satisfactory. [Added 12-16-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-6; amended 4-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-1]
X. The fee associated with the review of plans conducted by the Health
Officer for a new or renovated establishment is $100. The fee for
subsequent reviews is $50. [Added 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
Y. Tanning salons: [Added 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6]
(1) Initial license: $150.
(2) Renewal of license: $100.
Z. Farmers market. $75 per vendor annually. [Added4-17-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-2]
§ 250-69 WATER § 250-71
189:921
§ 250-71. Accurate applications required.
Applicants for permits or licenses shall furnish all information required by
the Board of Health. Any false or misleading information shall constitute
sufficient cause for refusal to issue a license or permit or to revoke a license
or permit already granted.
§ 250-72. License or permit required.
The conducting of all business or performance of any work requiring a
license or permit without first obtaining such license or permit shall
constitute a violation of this Part 2. A single transaction shall constitute
"doing business" hereunder.
§ 250-73. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is specifically provided, any person, firm or
corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the terms, conditions
or provisions of this Part 2 shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500.
§ 250-74. Enforcement.
The provisions of this Part 2 are adopted pursuant to Board of Health
recommendations. The members of the Board of Health or such other
person or officer designated by the Board of Health shall be responsible for
the enforcement of this Part 2.
§ 250-71 CLOSTER CODE § 250-74
189:922
ARTICLE XIII
Inspections; Right of Entry; Warrants
§ 250-75. Inspections.
§ 250-76. Right of entry.
Where the Health Officer or his or her agent is refused entry or access or
is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator from
conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in violation
of this Part 2 and subject to penalties hereunder.
§ 250-77. Search warrant or access warrant.
The Health Officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Closter
Municipal Court for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual
conditions and circumstances that indicate what violations of this Part 2
may exist on the premises. If the Judge of the Closter Municipal Court is
satisfied as to the matter set forth in said affidavit, the Judge shall authorize
the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that
part of the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
A. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Health Officer has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses
an immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall only
take place where the time taken to apply for and secure the issuance of
a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition.
B. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in
times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-26
et seq.
§ 250-75 WATER § 250-77
189:923

ARTICLE XIV
Violations and Penalties
§ 250-78. Prohibited acts.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article, a person shall be in violation of
this Part 2 if he or she:
§ 250-79. Penalties.
Unless another penalty is specifically provided;
§ 250-80. Continuation of violation.
Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 250-81. Imposition of state penalties.
In the event that any violation of this Part 2 shall also be a violation of the
New Jersey State law for which a greater penalty or judgment is provided
than that contained in this Part 2, the Municipal Judge or Trial Judge before
A. Does or commits any act prohibited by the terms of this Part 2;
B. Does or commits any act for which a license is required, without having
secured and being in possession of a valid license, permit or certificate
at the time of the doing or commission thereof;
C. Omits to do or perform any act required by him or her to be so done or
performed by this Part 2;
D. Maintains any place, establishment, vehicle, conveyance, equipment or
article in violation of any of the provisions thereof;
E. Violates any of the provisions of any of the several Articles or sections
hereof;
F. Fails to maintain any condition, equipment or facility required therein
to be maintained; or
G. Fails to install any article of a particular type, kind, quality or
specification, where such installation is required.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Part 2 or who
shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $5 or more than $100 for the first
offense, and upon conviction of a subsequent violation within a period
of six months, the court may impose a fine of not less than $10 or more
than $500 for each such subsequent conviction.
B. The violation of any section or subsection of this Part 2 shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other
section or subsection or of any order issued pursuant to this Part 2.
§ 250-78 WATER § 250-81
189:925
whom any complaint is brought, based upon such violation, shall, in his or
her discretion, have the right to impose, in the place and in lieu of any
penalty provided for herein, that so provided for in the New Jersey State law
which has been so violated.
§ 250-82. Construal of provisions.
Every act herein designated as being unlawful is hereby prohibited, and
every act herein expressly prohibited is hereby designated as being
unlawful.
§ 250-81 CLOSTER CODE § 250-82
189:926
ARTICLE XV
Extermination Prior to Building, Demolition, Development or
Clearing
[Added 6-27-1985 by Ord. No. 1985-3; amended 4-13-1989 by Ord.
No. 1989-1]
§ 250-83. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated;
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL EXTERMINATING FIRM — Includes persons,
sole proprietorships, associations or other business entities wherein at
least one person is a certified professional exterminator engaged in rodent
elimination or eradication by use of rodenticides approved by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection. Wherever in this Article
work is to be conducted by a professional exterminating firm, the work must
be supervised by a licensed professional exterminator.
CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL EXTERMINATOR — Includes persons certified
by the State of New Jersey, Department of Environmental Protection, as
competent and authorized to use or supervise the use of pesticides who is
engaged in rodent elimination or eradication by use of rodenticides.
CLEARANCE — The act or acts ridding a property of obstructions,
entanglements or obstacles, including trees and other growth, provided that
the area affected is 500 square feet or more.
CONSTRUCTION — The erection, alteration or repair of any building or
structure as requires municipal approval or a building permit.
DEMOLITION — The act or acts of pulling down, tearing down or otherwise
leveling all or part of a building or structure as requires municipal approval
or a building permit.
EXCAVATION — The act or acts of digging or uncovering or removing soil
or material used as the foundation of a building or a structure as requires
municipal approval or a building permit.
HEALTH INSPECTOR — Includes the Health Officer of the Borough of
Closter or any duly authorized agent or employee of the Board of Health,
Borough of Closter, County of Bergen, New Jersey.
PERSON — Includes any person, persons, partnership, firm, association,
corporation and the owner of buildings or properties subject to demolition,
construction or excavation.
REAL ESTATE PREMISES — Includes any vacant land or structure, whether
public or private, or whether adapted for vacant land or any use.
RODENT EXTERMINATION — Includes the elimination or eradication of
rats, mice and other rodents on said real estate premises such that said
real estate premises are completely freed of such rodents or there is not
evidence of rodent infestation remaining after implementation of accepted
§ 250-83 WATER § 250-83
189:927
measures such as poisoning and other means approved by the Health
Officer.
§ 250-84. Inspection and approval.
A. It shall be the duty of any person engaged in the demolition,
construction, excavation or clearance of any real estate premises in the
Borough of Closter to first secure approval from the Health Officer
before commencement of such demolition, construction, excavation or
clearance.
B. Before granting permission for demolition, construction, excavation or
clearance of any real estate premises, a certified professional
exterminator shall inspect the premises and the immediate surrounding
premises to determine whether evidence of rodent infestation exists in
or about said real estate premises.
C. In the event that inspection reveals evidence of rodent infestation, the
Health Officer shall require a program of rodent extermination
undertaken and completed by a certified professional exterminating
firm. The program for rodent extermination in the case of vacant land
shall be baiting of dusting burrows, approved by the Health Officer,
until results of said baiting indicate to the satisfaction of the Health
Officer that rodent infestation is nonexistent or eliminated.
D. Thirty days prior to commencement of demolition, construction,
excavation or clearance, a certificate shall be issued by the Health
Officer.
E. After completion of a rodent extermination program as required herein,
the Health Officer shall reinspect the premises and, upon determination
that the program has been effective, shall issue a certificate from the
Board of Health signifying its approval of said extermination.
F. Notwithstanding the issuance of a certificate of approval, in the event
that evidence of reinfestation of said real estate premises is discovered
by the Health Officer, then, prior to demolition, construction,
excavation or clearance, the foregoing provisions of this Article shall
apply, and new requests for permission to demolish, construct, excavate
or clear shall be made by the persons required herein.
G. Notification of the Building Inspector. The Board of Health, upon
issuing a certificate of approval as set forth in § 250-84, shall notify the
Building Inspector of the Borough of Closter of said issuance. The
issuance of a certificate of approval shall be a condition precedent to
the issuance of any permits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23, the BOCA
National Building Code and municipal ordinances.
§ 250-83 CLOSTER CODE § 250-85
189:928
§ 250-85. Violations and penalties. [Amended 3-17-1994 by Ord. No.
1994-1]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Article shall, upon
conviction, either be imprisoned in the county jail or other place provided
by the municipality for the detention of prisoners for a term not exceeding
90 days or shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $500 nor less than
$100, or both.
§ 250-86. Fees.
A. Upon application to the Building Department for a permit for
demolition or construction of any premises, the applicant shall pay, in
addition to any other fees, an application fee of $20 to the Health
Officer.
B. Upon approval by the Health Officer for the demolition, construction,
excavation or clearance of any real estate premises, the applicant shall
pay a permit fee of $5.
C. Upon any reinspection by the Health Officer pursuant to this Article,
the applicant shall pay a fee of $20 for each and every inspection.220
220. Editor's Note: Original Article XVI, Dumpsters, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Part 1, General Provisions, Article I. Current
provisions regarding dumpsters can be found in Chapter 95 of the Borough of Closter
Code.
§ 250-85 WATER § 250-86
189:929

ARTICLE XVI
Nuisances
[Added 11-19-1987 by Ord. No. 1987-1]
§ 250-87. Adoption of code.
§ 250-88. Copies to be on file.
Copies of the sections of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey
(1953) adopted herein have been placed on file in the office of the Health
Officer of this local Board of Health upon the introduction of this article and
will remain on file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 250-89. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
article or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not less than $5 or more
than $500 for each violation.
§ 250-90. When effective; incorporation into Borough Code.
A. A code defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions or
acts and each of them as a nuisance, authorizing the inspection of
premises by an enforcing official, providing for the removal or
abatement of certain nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by
the Board of Health in removing or abating such nuisances and
prescribing penalties for violations is hereby established pursuant to
Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A copy of the adopted code sections are
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein.
B. The following sections of the code commonly known as the "Public
Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)" are hereby adopted:
(1) Section 2 - Nuisances defined and prohibited.
(2) Section 7 - Inspection of premises.
(3) Section 8 - Abatement of nuisances.
(4) Section 9 - Recovery of costs by the Board of Health.
(5) Section 10 - Enforcement.
A. This article and the code herein established shall take effect 30 days
after first publication.
B. This article is to be incorporated into the Revised Health Code of the
Borough of Closter, New Jersey, adopted February 17, 1983, by Ord. No.
1983-1.
§ 250-87 WATER § 250-90
189:931

ARTICLE XVII
Body Art Procedures
[Added 4-15-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-1]
§ 250-91. Adoption of regulations.
Regulations issued by the State of New Jersey regulating body art
procedures, commonly known as Chapter 8, New Jersey State Sanitary
Code, Body Art Procedures, N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq., are hereby adopted. A
copy of the adopted regulations are annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of text herein.
§ 250-92. Copies to be on file.
Copies of the said regulations adopted herein have been placed on file
in the office of the Health Officer of this local Board of Health upon the
introduction of this article and will remain there for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 250-93. Severance and effective date.
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this article or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, for any reason, be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or repeal the remainder of this article. All ordinances
or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency. This article shall take effect immediately upon final
passage and publication as required by law.
§ 250-91 WATER § 250-93
189:933

ARTICLE XVIII
Cosmetology, Hair Salons, Barber Shops and Nail Styling
Establishments
[Added 10-19-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-2]
§ 250-94. Findings and declarations.
The Board of Health of the Borough of Closter hereby provides for the
protection of the public by controlling the sanitary practices and licensing
at places of cosmetology, barbering, hair and nail styling.
§ 250-95. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARBER — Any person who is licensed to engage in any of the practices
encompassed in barbering.
BARBERING — Any one or a combination of the following practices when
done on the human body for cosmetic purposes and not for the treatment
of disease or physical or mental ailments and when done for payment either
directly or indirectly or when done without payment for the general public:
BARBERSHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of barbering
for the public.
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Closter Board of Health and/or regional board
of health of which Closter is a member.
DESIGNEE — Any person designated by the Health Officer to act for him/
her in the performance of his/her duties.
DISINFECTANT — An Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection registered product with
demonstrated bacterial, virucidal and fungicidal activity used in accordance
with manufacturer's instruction.
A. Shaving or trimming of the beard, mustache or other facial hair.
B. Shampooing, cutting, arranging, relaxing or styling of the hair.
C. Singeing or dyeing of the hair.
Applying cosmetic preparations, antiseptics, tonics, lotions or creams
to the hair, scalp, face or neck.
D.
Massaging, cleansing or stimulating the face, neck or scalp with or
without cosmetic preparations, either by hand, mechanical or electrical
appliances, or cutting, fitting, coloring or styling of hairpieces or wigs
to the extent that the services are performed while the wig is being
worn by a person.
E.
§ 250-94 WATER § 250-95
189:935
HAIRDRESSER/COSMETICIAN or COSMETOLOGIST HAIRSTYLIST — Any
person who is licensed to engage in the practices encompassed in
cosmetology and hairstyling.
HAIRDRESSING AND COSMETOLOGY — Any one or combination of the
practices as outlined in N.J.S.A. 45:5B-3(j) when done on the human body
for cosmetic purposes and not for the treatment of disease or physical or
mental ailments and when done for payment either directly or indirectly or
when done without payment for the general public.
HAIRDRESSING OR COSMETOLOGY SALON/SHOP — Any establishment
engaged in the practice of hairdressing, cosmetology, or barbering for the
public.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer of the Borough of Closter or his/
her duly authorized representative; throughout this article, references to
the revocation of a license by the Borough's Health Officer means the
municipal license (i.e., not a state or county-issued license).
NAIL SALON/SHOP — Any establishment engaged in the practice of
cutting, shaping, polishing or enhancing the appearance of nails of the
hands or feet, including but not limited to the application and removal of
sculptured or artificial nails.
NAIL TECHNICIAN — A person who, for compensation, cuts, shapes,
polishes or enhances the appearance of the nails of the hands or feet,
including but not limited to the application and removal of sculptured or
artificial nails.
OPERATOR — A person who owns, leases, or manages a salon/shop, or
any licensed person performing barbering, hairdressing, cosmetology or
manicuring.
OWNER — A person who owns a salon/shop establishment and is
responsible for upholding the regulations of this article in all areas of the
establishment.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, limited-liability partnership,
company, limited-liability company, corporation, trustee, association or any
public or private entity.
PERSON IN CHARGE — The individual present in the barbershop or
hairdressing and/or cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/shop who is the
apparent supervisor of the barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology
salon/shop or nail salon/shop at the time of inspection. If no individual
claims to be a supervisor, then any employee present is deemed to be the
person in charge for the purposes of this article.
SANITARY CONDITIONS — Safe and clean salon/shop conditions that
prevent the spread of communicable diseases and protect the public health
and welfare.
WORKING AREA — A separate room with more than one workstation, or a
private room set aside to serve one customer at a time.
§ 250-95 CLOSTER CODE § 250-95
189:936
WORK STATION — A chair, countertop and floor space set aside for the
purpose of serving a customer, including floor space for the operator to
stand while serving the customer.
§ 250-96. Barber and beauty shop requirements.
A. It shall be illegal for any person to open and/or operate a cosmetology
shop and/or nail salon or any facility using barber and/or beauty shop,
place of cosmetology, hair styling and/or nail salon equipment without
first obtaining a valid New Jersey State Board of Cosmetology license to
operate such a business and then obtaining a license from the Board of
Health.
B. Every barbershop, hairdressing, cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/
shop must comply with local planning and zoning regulations and all
other applicable ordinances before being issued a license.
C. Standards; prohibitions and requirements. Each salon/shop shall be
maintained to provide a safe and sanitary environment.
(1) Use of a cosmetology and/or nail salon/shop as sleeping quarters is
prohibited.
(2) Every cosmetology and/or nail salon/shop and all appurtenances or
equipment therein shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at
all times.
(3) Every cosmetology and/or nail salon/shop shall be well lighted, well
ventilated, and be provided with an adequate supply of hot and cold
water.
(a) Lighting shall be sufficient to provide adequate illumination in
the work area.
(b) The salon/shop shall be properly and adequately ventilated to
remove excess heat, vapors and odors.
(c) Windows shall be effectively screened against insects, rodents,
and other vermin.
(d) Every salon/shop must have an approved water supply with
sufficient hot and cold running water under pressure.
(e) All plumbing fixtures must be protected against backsiphonage
or backflow.
(f) Plumbing fixtures shall be clean and free from defects.
(4) The use of mugs, shaving brushes and dusting brushes is
prohibited.
(5) Razors, scissors, clippers, pinchers, needles and all other
instruments, electrical and nonelectrical, shall, after each use on a
patron, be sterilized by immersion in a suitable and approved
§ 250-95 WATER § 250-96
189:937
solution, or by some other method approved by the Board of
Health.
(a) Disinfectants shall be changed in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions to ensure complete disinfection.
No sediment from the item being disinfected shall be allowed
to remain in the bottom of the disinfection container.
(6) Combs and brushes shall be cleaned after each use with soap and
water and then shall be sterilized in the manner described above or
by some other manner approved by the Board of Health.
(7) Requirements of attendants:
(a) They shall wear a clean, washable outer coat or uniforms.
(b) They shall thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water
between each patron.
(c) They shall thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water
immediately after using the toilet, eating and/or smoking.
(d) They shall not remove warts or moles or treat any disease of a
patron, nor perform any medical procedure such as an
injection, nor dispense any medical advice.
(e) All operators shall have an exclusion policy for people with
communicable disease that may be transmitted through the
services of a barber, hairdresser, cosmetologist, or nail
technician.
(8) Headrests, if used, shall be protected with fresh paper and a
laundered towel for each patron.
(9) Individual paper neckbands or freshly laundered towels shall be
used and not reused unless laundered.
(a) All linens and towels shall be deposited in a covered, cleanable
receptacle after each patron.
(b) Clean towels and linens shall be stored off the floor in a clean,
protected location.
(10)No alum, stringent, antiseptic or other preparation shall be used in
stick form. If used at all, it shall be applied in the form of a powder
or liquid on a freshly laundered towel or some other clean material
that has not been used by another patron.
(11) The use of any cosmetic, acid, solution or any article or material
that may be injurious to the skin, hair, or health shall not be used.
(a) When only a portion of a cream, liquid, powder or other
cosmetic preparation is to be removed from the container, it
§ 250-96 CLOSTER CODE § 250-96
189:938
shall be removed in such a way as not to contaminate the
remaining portion.
(b) Multi-use of cosmetic applicators is prohibited. This includes
the use of lipsticks and makeup brushes, which are not
disposable. Powder puffs and sponges, except single-service
items, shall not be used.
(c) Lotions and powders shall be dispensed from a sanitary selfdispensing
container.
(12)Waste disposal shall be performed daily in a manner which is
determined to be acceptable by the Board of Health.
(13) Disposable or single-use articles shall be disposed of in a waste
receptacle after use on each patron unless stored in a separate
closed, clean container labeled with the patron's name and used
only on that patron.
(a) All disposable or single-use articles that come into contact with
blood and/or body fluids shall be enclosed in sealable plastic
bags prior to being placed in the waste receptacle.
(b) All sharp or pointed articles shall be disposed of in a punctureproof
container.
(14) An antimicrobial additive shall be placed in each foot spa or water
bath during use.
(a) After each patron, the salon/shop shall drain all water and
debris, properly disinfect and dry the foot spa or water bath.
(b) At the end of each day, the salon/shop shall remove and
immerse any filter in disinfectant and flush the foot spa or
water bath with low-sudsing soap and water.
(15) Each salon/shop shall provide adequate toilet and hand-washing
facilities for patrons and employees.
(a) Toilet and hand-washing facilities shall be in working condition
at all times, and kept clean and sanitary.
(b) Each hand-washing sink shall have a soap dispenser and
disposable towels or an air dryer for hand drying.
(16) Floors, walls and ceilings shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(17) Personnel shall have appropriate licenses as issued by the New
Jersey State Board of Cosmetology. Such licenses shall be displayed
in the establishment where the public can view them.
(a) Instruments that contact the customer, i.e., sanding disks,
stones, etc., shall be single-use items or be sterilized between
each customer.
§ 250-96 WATER § 250-96
189:939
§ 250-97. Application and Borough licensing.
§ 250-98. Licensing fees.
(b) Instruments and gauze and tissues that are contaminated with
blood shall be single-use, properly disposed of or sterilized
after contamination.
A. An application for a Borough license shall be sent to the owner or
person in charge of the cosmetology and/or nail salon/shop annually
each year in December.
B. All licenses are valid for one year or a portion thereof remaining when
issued and are renewable by submission of an application on or before
December 31 of each year.
C. Every applicant for a license to operate a cosmetology salon/shop and/
or nail salon/shop shall pay an annual license fee in accordance with
§ 250-98 hereafter.
D. No license shall be issued or renewed until a completed application has
been submitted, the license fee has been paid and the applicant's
barbershop or hairdressing and/or cosmetology salon/shop or nail
salon/shop meets the requirements set forth in this article and all other
applicable state and local regulations.
E. Licenses shall be valid until December 31 of each year as noted on the
license unless suspended by the Health Officer, or until such time as the
facility changes owners, closes, or goes out of business if any of those
events occurs before December 31 in any year.
F. Licenses shall not be transferable from person to person or from
location to location. Any planned change in ownership of a facility must
be reported promptly to the Board of Health, and such changes must be
approved by the Board of Health prior to the issuance of an operating
license.
G. Licenses must be displayed in a prominent location within the
establishment where patrons can observe them.
A. The annual fee for licenses of the public establishments regulated
herein are fixed as follows:
(1) Beauty parlors, nail salons and barbershops shall be assessed as
follows:
(a) Facility with one to four work stations: $75.
(b) Facility with five to 10 work stations: $100.
(c) Facility with 11 or more work stations: $150.
(d) Facility reinspection fee: $100.
§ 250-96 CLOSTER CODE § 250-98
189:940
§ 250-99. Rules and regulations; annual inspections.
§ 250-100. Violations and penalties.
B. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on the 31st day of December
of each year (except as otherwise indicated in § 250-97E above).
C. Licenses fees shall be paid to the Board of Health. The license fee under
this section for the year in which this section takes effect shall be paid
on or before 30 days from the effective date of this article and the
license so issued in that first year shall expire on December 31 of the
year that it becomes effective. Thereafter, all license fees shall be paid
on or before December 31 of each year. Any applicant whose check is
returned unpaid to the Board of Health shall be required to pay a return
check fee of $25.
D. An inspection fee, in addition to the annual license fee, shall be imposed
upon any cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/shop as follows:
(1) For each inspection carried out pursuant to a complaint when such
inspection results in a determination that said cosmetology salon/
shop or nail salon/shop is in violation of any provision of this article.
(2) For each reinspection carried out after either a failure of the
regular inspection or failure of an inspection carried out pursuant
to a complaint as set forth in Subsection D(1).
(3) There shall be a fee of $100 for each inspection as set forth in
Subsection D(1) and D(2).
A. The Health Officer shall promulgate such rules and regulations as are
necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.
B. At least once a year, the Health Officer or his/her designee shall inspect
each place of cosmetology, hair salon, barber shop, or nail styling salon/
shop and shall make as many additional inspections as are necessary
for the enforcement of this article.
C. The Health Officer or his/her designee, after proper identification, shall
be permitted to enter, during normal operating hours, any portion of
any of the aforementioned salons or shops for the purpose of making
inspections to determine compliance with this article.
D. In the event that the Health Officer or his/her designee finds unsanitary
conditions in the operation of a cosmetology salon/shop, hair salon,
barber shop, or nail salon/shop, or if a violation or multiple violations
occur, the Health Officer or his/her designee may immediately issue a
written notice to the license holder, or person in charge, citing such
conditions, specifying the corrective action to be taken and time frame
within such action shall be taken. If corrective action is not made in the
allotted time, the licensee may be fined and/or his/her license
suspended.
§ 250-98 WATER § 250-100
189:941
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not exceeding $1,200,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or a combination thereof,
and each violation of any of the provisions of this article and each day
the same is violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense.
B. A license may be suspended or revoked for a violation by the holder of
any provision of this article after an opportunity for a hearing by this
Board or its authorized representative. No license is transferable by
sale or otherwise.
C. License suspension.
(1) Failure to comply with the provisions of this article and applicable
state regulations shall be grounds for suspension of any license
issued under the provisions of this article.
(2) The Health Officer may suspend, without warning, prior notice or
hearing, any license to operate a cosmetology salon/shop or nail
salon/shop if the operation constitutes an imminent hazard to
public health, including, but not limited to, any one of the following:
(a) There is an outbreak of an infectious, pathogenic or toxic agent
capable of being transmitted to consumers.
(b) There is an absence of potable water, supplied under pressure,
in a quantity which, in the opinion of the Health Officer, is
capable of meeting the needs of the facility.
(c) There is sewage backup into the facility.
(d) An unlicensed individual is performing procedures requiring
licensure by the New Jersey State Board of Cosmetology.
(3) Suspension shall be effective immediately upon delivery of the
written order to the license holder or person in charge of the
facility by the Health Officer or his/her designee. When a license is
suspended, all cosmetology salon/shop or nail salon/shop
operations shall cease immediately and shall not resume until
written approval to resume has been issued by the Health Officer.
The Health Officer or his/her designee shall remove a suspended
license from the premises.
(4) When a license is to be suspended, the holder of a license, or the
person in charge, shall be notified in writing of the suspension, and
an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request
for hearing is filed with the Health Officer by the holder of the
license within two business days. If no written request for a hearing
is filed within two business days, the suspension is sustained. The
Health Officer may end the suspension at any time by giving
§ 250-100 CLOSTER CODE § 250-100
189:942
written notice to the license holder if reasons for suspension no
longer exist.
(5) Upon receiving a request for a hearing, the Health Officer shall
schedule a hearing, not later than 10 business days from the date of
actual receipt of the request, to afford the owner the opportunity to
present evidence and argument on all the facts or issues involved
and to examine the merits of such suspension.
(6) The Health Officer shall examine the merits of such suspension and
render a decision in writing to vacate, modify, or affirm such
suspension within 10 business days of the date of the hearing held
under this section.
(7) Whenever a license has been suspended, the holder of the
suspended license may make written request for license
reinstatement. Within 10 business days following receipt of a
written request, including a statement signed by the applicant that,
in his or her opinion, the conditions causing the suspension have
been corrected, the Health Officer or his or her designee shall
make a reinspection. If the Health Officer or his or her designee
determines that the applicant has complied with the requirements
of this article, the license shall be reinstated and returned to the
license holder.
(8) The Health Officer shall designate a time and place to conduct the
hearings provided for in this article. The Health Officer shall make
a final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall
sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the
hearing. The Health Officer shall furnish a written report of the
hearing decision to the license holder within 10 business days of
the hearing date. A request for a hearing shall not stay any
suspension or denial of a license until such time as a hearing has
been held and a decision rendered thereon.
(9) A notice or order provided for in this article is properly served
when it is delivered to the license holder or person in charge,
posted at a conspicuous location on the building, or when it is sent
by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the last known
address of the holder of the license. A completed and signed
inspection report shall constitute a written notice.
§ 250-100 WATER § 250-100
189:943

ARTICLE XIX
Pest Control
[Added 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-5]
§ 250-101. Frequency of pest control services; affected areas of
establishment.
All retail food establishments, except for those which sell only prepackaged
food and beverages, shall acquire the services of a licensed pesticide
application company trained in food service pest control and pesticide
application as often as necessary to keep establishments free of vermin
in both the interior and exterior of properties being occupied by the
establishments. Under no circumstances shall said service be less than
monthly. This includes, but is not limited to, garbage and grease receptacle
locations, dumpster areas and enclosures, kitchens, food preparation areas,
stock rooms, basements or any other areas of the interior of the
establishment. Retail food establishments which sell only prepackaged food
and beverages shall acquire the services described above as often as
necessary to keep establishments free of vermin in both the interior and
exterior of the properties being occupied by the establishments.
§ 250-102. Treatment only by licensed and/or registered experts.
Only such state-licensed and/or state-registered extermination experts shall
be allowed to treat food establishments. No aerosol cans of insecticides or
rodent poison shall be used by owners of the establishments themselves
within the area of said establishment.
§ 250-101 WATER § 250-102
189:945

ARTICLE XX
Tanning Booth Establishments
[Added 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-4]
§ 250-103. Title.
This article may be cited as the "Tanning Booth Ordinance of the Borough
of Closter."
§ 250-104. Findings; policy.
Whereas tanning booth establishments have enjoyed a recent, rapid growth
in popularity; and whereas the operation of tanning booths involves a
serious potential hazard to the public health, welfare and safety through the
exposure of persons to concentrations of ultraviolet light in excess of those
normally occurring in the environment; and whereas it has been established
that acute overexposure to the ultraviolet light emitted by tanning booth
lamps will cause skin burns and eye damage; and whereas it has been
established that chronic exposure to ultraviolet light can result in increased
incidences of skin cancer; now, therefore, it is the policy of the Board of
Health of Closter to protect the health, welfare, and safety of its citizens
from the potential hazards associated with the operation of tanning booth
establishments by the adoption of licensing procedures and standards to
govern such facilities.
§ 250-105. Definitions.
Wherever used in this article, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
TANNING BOOTH — Any enclosed or semi-enclosed area or room,
containing one or more ultraviolet lamps, intended for irradiation of any
part of the human body to induce skin tanning.
TANNING BOOTH ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial enterprise or
facility containing one or more tanning booths, provided that this definition
shall not include any hospital, clinic or other medical facility wherein
ultraviolet radiation is or may be used, under the supervision of a trained
medical staff, for the diagnosis or treatment of disease.
§ 250-106. License required; application.
A. No person shall at any time within the Borough of Closter conduct,
maintain or operate a tanning booth establishment without first having
obtained a license to do so from the Board of Health of the Borough of
Closter.
B. Application for such a license shall be made to the Board of Health, on
forms approved by it, signed and executed by the applicant.
§ 250-103 WATER § 250-107
189:947
§ 250-107. Conditions and requirements.
No license to conduct, maintain or operate a tanning booth establishment
shall be granted to any person until such person has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Board of Health that the following requirements have
been met.
A. Each tanning booth shall have, prominently displayed on its door or
beside its entrance, a sign that states: "Danger — Ultraviolet Radiation,
Follow Instructions. As with natural sunlight, overexposure can cause
injury and sunburn; repeated exposure may cause premature aging of
skin and skin cancer. Exposure of eyes to ultraviolet light without
protective eyewear may cause serious injury to eyes. Medications or
cosmetics applied to the skin may increase over sensitivity to ultraviolet
light, as may a family history of skin problems or allergy to sunlight.
Consult a physician before using this booth if you are taking any
medications or if you believe yourself sensitive to sunlight."
B. Each tanning booth shall be equipped with handrails, floor markings or
other suitable physical aids to assure that the user maintains the proper
exposure distance from the lamps.
C. Users shall, on each visit, be provided, free of charge, with sanitary
protective eyewear that protects the user's eyes from ultraviolet
radiation but permits sufficient vision to enable the user to maintain
balance, read necessary labels or instructions and effect a quick, safe
exit from the tanning booth.
D. Each timer used to control exposure duration, whether controlled by
the user from within the tanning booth or by the operator of the tanning
booth establishment, shall be accurate to within plus or minus 10% of
any selected timer interval.
E. The ambient air temperature in each tanning booth shall at no time
exceed 100° F.
F. Each tanning booth shall be sufficiently strong and rigid to resist
collapse due to the impact of a falling person. Tanning booth access
doors shall open outwardly, shall be free of locks or latches and shall, in
all other respects, be designed to facilitate safe and rapid entrance to
and exit from the booths. Tanning booth floors shall provide adequate
traction, even when wet, to allow such safe and rapid ingress and
egress.
G. Each tanning booth shall be equipped with heavy wire grids, ultraviolet
transmitting plastics or some similar physical barrier to protect users
from contact with ultraviolet lamps. Such barrier shall be sufficiently
strong and rigid to resist collapse due to the impact of a falling person.
H. In addition to the foregoing, each tanning booth and tanning booth
establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
compliance with the Closter Zoning Code, Building Code, Electrical
§ 250-107 CLOSTER CODE § 250-107
189:948
§ 250-108. Fees.
Every applicant for whom a license is granted, as required by the provisions
of this article, shall pay to the Board of Health an annual license fee for the
same in the amount of $150 for initial license and renewal license of $100.
§ 250-109. Contents of license; transferability; display.
§ 250-110. Expiration.
All licenses and permits granted under the provisions hereof shall expire on
December 31 of the year for which the same are granted, unless suspended
or revoked or unless issued for a temporary or shorter specified period.
§ 250-111. Suspensions and revocations.
A license or permit may be suspended or revoked for any violation by the
holder thereof of any provisions of this article after an opportunity has been
afforded to said holder for a hearing before the Board of Health or the
Health Officer of the Borough of Closter.
Code and every other ordinance of the Building Department of the
Borough of Closter.
I. Each tanning booth establishment shall obtain and maintain on file with
the Board of Health of the Borough of Closter a certification from a
dermatologist approved by the Board of Health stating that the
methods for exposure determination, both as to duration and distance,
utilized by the tanning booth establishment are safe and that such
methods comply with current medical standards.
J. Each tanning booth establishment and the equipment used therein shall
comply with the regulations promulgated by the United States Food and
Drug Administration and published in Volume 21 of the Code of Federal
Regulations at 1002.61(a)(4) and 1040.20.
K. When tanning equipment is in use, an attendant must be present at all
times to ensure its safety. This attendant must be versed in the proper
use and operation as well as the recommended exposure time of the
tanning equipment.
A. Each license issued under the provisions of this article shall bear the
actual date of issue thereof, the legal name of the person, firm,
corporation or other organization, society or group to whom issued and
the location of the premises or other place or operation for which the
license is requested.
B. No license shall be transferable.
C. Each tanning booth establishment shall display its license in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
§ 250-107 WATER § 250-112
189:949
§ 250-112. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article, upon conviction
thereof, shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than $500
for each violation. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 250-112 CLOSTER CODE § 250-112
189:950
ARTICLE XXI
Review of Plans
[Added 12-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-3]
§ 250-113. Plan submission and approval.
§ 250-114. Preoperational inspection.
Whenever plans and specifications are required by § 250-113 to be
submitted to the health authority, the health authority shall inspect the
retail food establishment prior to the start of operations to determine
compliance with the requirements of this Code Section.
A. A permit applicant or operator shall submit to the health authority
properly prepared plans and specifications for review and approval
before:
(1) The construction of a retail food establishment;
(2) The conversion of an existing structure for use as a retail food
establishment; or
(3) The remodeling of a retail food establishment or a change of type of
retail food establishment or food operation if the health authority
determines that plans and specifications are necessary to ensure
compliance with these rules.
B. The plans and specifications for a retail food establishment shall
include, as required by the health authority based on the type of
operation, type of food preparation, and foods prepared, the following
information to demonstrate conformance with rule provisions:
(1) The intended menu;
(2) The anticipated volume of food to be stored, prepared, and sold or
served;
(3) The proposed layout, mechanical schematics, construction
materials, and finish schedules;
(4) The proposed equipment types, manufacturers, model numbers,
locations, dimensions, performance capacities, and installation
specifications;
(5) Proposed program of training for the persons in charge and food
employees pertaining to protecting public health and the safety and
integrity of food; and
(6) Other information that may be required by the health authority for
the proper review of the proposed construction, conversion or
modification, and procedures for operating a retail food
establishment.
§ 250-113 WATER § 250-114
189:951
Chapter DL_RHC
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL_RHC-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
1994-1 3-17-1994 Adoption of Code by Board
of Health
Ch. 250, Art. I
1995-1 7-13-1995 Fees amendment Ch. 250, Art. XII
1995-2 7-13-1995 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. IV
1995-3 10-19-1995 Animals amendment Ch. 250, Art. III
2003-1 9-18-2003 Fees amendment Ch. 250, Art. XII
2003-2 10-16-2003 Animals amendment Ch. 250, Art. III
2004-1 4-15-2004 Body art procedures Ch. 250, Arts. XII
and XVII
2004-2 4-15-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 250, Art. XII
2004-3 11-18-2004 Bees amendment Ch. 250, Art. III
2004-4 11-18-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 250, Art. XII
2004-5 11-18-2004 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. IV
2006-1 3-16-2006 Animals amendment Ch. 250, Arts. III and
XII
2006-2 10-19-2006 Cosmetology, hair salons,
barbershops, and nail
styling establishments
Ch. 250, Art. XVIII
2007-1 10-18-2007 Animals amendment Ch. 250, Art. III
2009-1 7-16-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 250, Art. XII
2009-2 7-16-2009 Animals amendment Ch. 250, Art. III
2009-3 Salaries NCM
2009-4 11-19-2009 Adoption of Code by Board
of Health amendment
Ch. 250, Art. I
2010-1 3-18-2010 Retail food service
establishments
amendment
Ch. 250, Art. IV
2010-2 6-17-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 250, Art. XII
2010-3 12-16-2010 Review of plans Ch. 250, Art. XXI
2010-4 12-16-2010 Tanning booth
establishments
Ch. 250, Art. XX
§ 250-114 CLOSTER CODE § DL_RHC-1
189:952
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2010-5 12-16-2010 Pest control Ch. 250, Art. XIX
2010-6 12-16-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 250, Art. VII
2011-1 4-21-2011 Rules of construction;
definitions amendment;
fees amendment
Ch. 250, Arts. II and
XII
2011-2 7-14-2011 Animals amendment Ch. 250, Art. III
2011-3 Salaries NCM
2012-1 2-16-2012 Animals amendment Ch. 250, Art. III
2012-2 Salaries NCM
2013-1 Not adopted
2013-2 Not adopted
2014-1 Salaries NCM
2014-2 4-17-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 250, Art. XII
2015-1 Not adopted
2015-2 11-19-2015 Fees amendment Ch. 250, Art. XII
Appendix
Chapter A300
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A300-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the Borough Clerk's office and
is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this chapter.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
BOROUGH — The governing body of the Borough of Closter, in the County
of Bergen, in the State of New Jersey.
COMPANY — Cablevision of New Jersey, Inc. ("Cablevision"), the grantee of
rights under this chapter.
§ DL_RHC-1 WATER § A300-1
189:953
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications,
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and the Telecommunications Act of 1996,221 or as those
statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 C.F.R. § 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable,
any other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television,
including, but not limited to, those described in 47 C.F.R. 76.3), or as such
regulations may be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — The installation of drop cable to a customer's
premises where the distance from the point of entry into the building being
served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television system plant.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et.
seq., and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1.1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
§ A300-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Borough hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent and that Cablevision's operating
and construction arrangements are adequate, and feasible.
§ A300-3. Grant of franchise.
The Borough hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to place
in, upon, along, across, above, over and under its highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways and public places in the municipality poles, wires,
cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the
Borough of a cable television system and for the provision of any
communication service over such system as may be authorized by federal
or state regulatory agencies. Operation and construction, pursuant to said
consent, is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A300-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
15 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
221. Editor's Note: See 47 U.S.C. § 255 et seq.
§ A300-1 CLOSTER CODE § A300-5
189:954
§ A300-5. Expiration; renewal.
If Cablevision seeks a renewal of the consent provided herein, it shall,
prior to the expiration of this consent, apply for a municipal consent and
certificate of approval in accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A-16 and applicable
state and federal rules and regulations. The company shall also petition
the Board for approval authorizing continued operation during the period
following expiration of the consent granted herein and until such a time that
a decision is made by the Borough and the Board relative to the renewal of
said consent.
§ A300-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this chapter to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Borough and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A300-7. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any residents located in residentially zoned areas,
without the application of a line extension policy, at tariffed rates for
standard and nonstandard installation.
§ A300-8. Franchise fee.
Cablevision shall pay to the Borough an annual franchise fee in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30(d).
§ A300-9. Free service.
A. Cablevision shall, upon request, provide, free of charge, one standard
installation and monthly cable television reception service to all state or
locally accredited public elementary and secondary schools and all
municipal public libraries, as well as municipal buildings located within
the Borough.
B. Upon written request from the Borough, the company shall provide to
state and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and
municipal public libraries in the Borough, without charge, the
following; one standard installation per school or library; one cable
modem per installation; and basic cable modem service for the term of
this chapter for each installation. This offer shall be subject to the
terms, conditions and use policies of the company, as those policies may
exist from time to time.
C. Upon written request from the Borough, the company shall provide to
the Borough, without charge, at one designated location, the following:
one standard installation; one cable modem; and basic cable modem
service for the term of this chapter. This offer shall be subject to the
terms, conditions and use policies of the company, as those policies may
exist from time to time.
§ A300-5 WATER § A300-10
189:955
§ A300-10. Construction and system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the Borough:
§ A300-11. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A300-12. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work, as
determined by the Borough's engineer under the Borough's generally
applicable laws, rules and regulations.
B. If at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the Borough, shall remove or
relocate its equipment at its own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Borough, the company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days' prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Borough so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the company's facilities.
§ A300-10 CLOSTER CODE § A300-13
189:956
§ A300-13. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Borough pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
§ A300-14. Insurance required.
The company shall maintain, during the life of the franchise agreement,
insurance policies of the type and with the minimum limits indicated below
and in a form satisfactory to the municipality. The company shall provide
certificates of insurance reasonably satisfactory to the municipality, prior to
the commencement of work, for review by the risk management consultant.
A. Policy and limit guidelines as follows:
(1) Workers' compensation insurance in accordance with the laws of
the State of New Jersey. The company shall also have and maintain
employers' liability insurance.
(2) Commercial general liability insurance coverage, written on an
occurrence basis, and must not be altered by any endorsements
limiting coverage.
(a) Limits of liability shall not be less than the following:
[1] General aggregate: $2,000,000.
[2] Products/completed operations: $2,000,000.
[3] Personal injury and advertising injury limit: $1,000,000.
[4] Each occurrence combined single limit for bodily injury
and property damage: $1,000,000.
(b) The coverage shall include:
[1] Premises/operations.
[2] Independent contractors.
[3] Contractual liability covering liability assumed under the
indemnification provision contained in the agreement.
[4] Broad form property damage liability, including completed
operations.
[5] Coverage for liability arising from explosion, collapse and
underground damage, if blasting or excavation is to be
done.
[6] Personal injury coverage, including coverage for liability
arising from false arrest, malicious prosecution, willful
§ A300-13 WATER § A300-14
189:957
detention, libel, slander, defamation of character, invasion
of privacy and wrongful egress or entry.
[7] Products and completed operations for a period of two
years from substantial completion.
(3) Comprehensive automobile liability insurance covering the use of
all owned, nonowned, hired or leased automobiles with limits of
liability not less than $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage. Coverage should include uninsured
and underinsured motorist limits no less than the minimum
statutory limits.
(4) Umbrella liability insurance policy written on an occurrence basis
with a minimum combined single limit as shown below as "follow
form" excess of the company's employer's liability, commercial
general liability and comprehensive automobile liability insurance
policies required herein.
Project Cost Umbrella Limit
$50,000 and below $1,000,000
Over $50,000 to $500,000 $3,000,000
Over $500,000 to
$1,000,000
$5,000,000
Over $1,000,000 $10,000,000
B. Additional requirements as follows:
(1) Certificates of all insurance policies provided above satisfactory to
the Borough of Closter shall be furnished upon request. Each such
policy or certificate shall contain a provision that is not subject to
change or cancellation unless 30 days' prior written notice via
certified mail/return receipt shall have been given to the Borough
of Closter by the company's insurer. These must be received 30
days prior to commencement of work.
(2) The company agrees that it will defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the Borough of Closter, its officers, agents and employees
from and all liability suits, actions and demands and all damages,
costs or fees on account of injuries to persons or property, including
accidental death, arising out of or in connection with the work, or
by reason of the operations under this agreement.
(3) All insurance purchased and maintained by the company shall
designate the Borough of Closter, its officers, officials, agents,
employees and consultants as additional insureds.
(4) Except as modified by the Borough of Closter, in writing, the
insurance requirements herein shall also apply to subcontractors
and to the sub-subcontractors, and the company will be responsible
§ A300-14 CLOSTER CODE § A300-14
189:958
for supervision of the filing of insurance certificates prior to any
subcontractor commencing work on the project.
(5) The Borough of Closter shall maintain property insurance upon the
entire work at the site. The insurance shall insure against the perils
as provided by the Bergen JIF and its excess insurer.
(6) The Borough of Closter and the company waive all rights against
each other and the subcontractors, sub-subcontractors, agents and
employees, each of the other, and the architect and separate
companies, if any, and their subcontractors, sub-subcontractors,
agents and employees for damages caused by fire or other perils to
the extent covered by insurance obtained pursuant to Subsection
B(5) or any other property insurance applicable to the work. The
Borough of Closter or the company, as appropriate, shall require
the architect, separate companies, subcontractors and subsubcontractors,
by appropriate agreements, written where legally
required for validity, similar waivers, each in favor of all parties
enumerated in this subsection.
(7) All insurance coverage evidenced by the company in accordance
with this municipal consent shall be from A.M. Best's rated A- ("A
minus") VII or better insurance company licensed to do business in
the State of New Jersey.
(8) All proof of insurance submitted to the municipality shall clearly set
forth all exclusions and deductible clauses. The Borough of Closter
will allow certain deductible clauses which are not considered
excessive, overly broad or harmful to the interest of the Borough of
Closter. Standard exclusions will be allowed of any additional
exclusions. This will be at the reasonable discretion of the Borough
of Closter. Regardless of the allowance of exclusions or deductibles
by the Borough of Closter, the company shall be responsible for the
deductible limit of this policy and all exclusions consistent with the
risks he assumes under this agreement and imposed by law.
C. In the event that the company provides evidence of insurance in the
form of certificates of insurance, valid for a period of time less than the
period during which the company is required by the terms of this
agreement to maintain insurance, said certificates are acceptable, but
the company shall be obligated to renew its insurance policies, as
necessary, and to provide new certificates of insurance so that the
Borough of Closter is continuously in possession of evidence of the
company's insurance in accordance with the foregoing provisions.
D. In the event the company fails or refuses to renew its insurance policy,
or the policy is cancelled, terminated or modified so that the insurance
does not meet the requirements of this subsection, the Borough of
Closter may refuse to make payment of any further monies due under
this contract or refuse to make payment of monies due or coming due
under other contracts between the company's insurance for the periods
§ A300-14 WATER § A300-14
189:959
§ A300-15. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this chapter, a bond, in a form acceptable to the
municipality, in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the
faithful performance of its obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ A300-16. Rates.
The rates of the company for cable television services shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
§ A300-17. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Borough pursuant to state and federal requirements.
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Borough or any other person during an emergency if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Borough shall utilize the state-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ A300-18. Requests for nonfranchised competitive relief.
and amounts referred to above. Alternately, the Borough of Closter may
default the company and direct the surety to complete the work. During
any period when the required insurance is not in effect, the Borough
of Closter may suspend performance of the contract. If the contract is
so suspended, additional compensation or extension of contract time is
not due on account thereof.
A. In the event that the service of another multichannel video program
provider not subject to the Borough's regulatory authority within the
Borough creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the company shall have the right to request from the Borough lawful
amendments to its franchise that relieve it of the burdens which create
the unfair competitive situation. Should the company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate, in good
faith, appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the
company of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an
agreement on such terms, the Borough agrees to support the
company's petition to the Board for modification of the consent in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the Borough acknowledges that the
company shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such
amendments in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.7; provided, however, that the Borough shall be under no
§ A300-14 CLOSTER CODE § A300-18
189:960
§ A300-19. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this chapter, Cablevision, at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six months after such expiration, termination
or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A300-20. Public, educational and governmental access;
technology grant.
obligation to support Cablevision's request for such relief from the
Board.
C. In any subsequent municipal consent, the Borough shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of
multichannel video programming subject to the Borough's regulatory
authority as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such
subsequent consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as
the instant consent, the Borough agrees to support the company's
petition to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the company of
competitive disadvantages identified in the company's petition.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access as described in the
application for municipal consent.
B. The Borough agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming during times when the Borough is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use, and the company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Borough's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
C. Upon written request by the Borough, Cablevision shall install a fiber
access return feed at a municipally designated building, provided it is a
standard installation, solely for the benefit of the company's cable
television subscribers in the municipality. Upon completion of this
installation, Cablevision shall provide the Borough, in lieu of the
regional public access channel described in the application, with its
own designated PEG channel available for the exclusive use of the
Borough.
§ A300-18 WATER § A300-20
189:961
§ A300-21. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted, in writing, to the Borough by the company, except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this chapter by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited or altered by this chapter or to the extent that
they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A300-22. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws.
§ A300-23. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A300-24. When effective.
This chapter shall take effect upon issuance of a certificate of approval as
issued by the Board of Public Utilities.
Chapter A301
D. In consideration for the rights granted in this chapter, the company
shall provide the Borough with a technology grant in the amount of
$18,000. Cablevision shall provide an initial grant payment of $4,000
within the first year of the new franchise agreement. The remaining
grant of $14,000 shall be provided in annual installments of $1,000,
upon written request by the Borough (the "Annual Grant"). The annual
grant may be used by the Borough for any cable- and/or other
telecommunications-related purpose as the Borough, in its discretion,
might deem appropriate. Cablevision shall not be obligated to make any
additional payments beyond year 15 of the franchise. The annual grant
shall be payable to the Borough within 60 days from receipt of the
Borough's written request. Notwithstanding the foregoing, should
Cablevision apply for a system-wide certification or otherwise convert
its municipal consent to a system-wide certification in accordance with
applicable law, it shall be relieved of any payments due and owing after
the date of such conversion or award of a system-wide franchise. All
PEG access support provided by Cablevision shall be for the exclusive
use of the company's customers in the municipality.
§ A300-20 CLOSTER CODE § A300-24
189:962
FEES AND DEPOSITS
§ A301-1. Schedule of fees.
The following is a fee schedule for the payment of fees, permits and licenses
of the Borough of Closter, and said fee schedule shall replace all similar
applicable fees in various existing ordinances of the Borough of Closter.
Said fees shall be an annual amount, except where otherwise noted in
said schedule or in the originating ordinance of the Borough of Closter.
Additional provisions regarding fees and deposits may be found in the
applicable originating ordinances.
A. Borough Clerk.
(1) Alcoholic beverages: [Amended 6-8-1994 by Ord. No.
1994:673; 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708; 12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:854; 12-8-2004 by Ord. No. 2004:929;
7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(a) Plenary retail consumption Class C (33): $2,500.
(b) Plenary retail distribution Class D (44): $2,304.
(c) Club licenses (31): $188.
(2) Individual amusement machines, including video machines:
[Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708; 7-27-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016:1208]
(a) Jukeboxes: $100.
(b) All other coin-operated, each machine: $325.
(c) In addition to the annual fee set forth above, each applicant
shall be required to pay a one-time nonrefundable fee on
submission of application of $100.
(3) (Reserved)222
(4) Applications for appeal to governing body: [Amended 1-2-1996
by Ord. No. 1995:708]
(a) From decision of Zoning Board of Adjustment: $50.
(5) Auctions: [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708]
(a) Business or commercial, annual (charitable organizations
exempt): $50.
(b) Residential, per day (charitable organizations exempt): $25.
222. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(3), Animals, as amended, was repealed 12-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008:1024.
§ A300-24 WATER § A301-1
189:963
(c) Nonresident auction of jewelry or silverware: $100.
(6) Bowling alleys: [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708]
(a) Per lane: $25.
(b) Maximum: $350.
(7) (Reserved)223
(8) Certification of documents, each: $5. [Amended 1-2-1996 by
Ord. No. 1995:708]
(9) Dealers, secondhand gold and silver: $45. [Amended 1-2-1996 by
Ord. No. 1995:708; 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(10) Entertainment, live: [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708;
8-14-2013 by Ord. No. 2013:1149]
(a) Business establishments with 35 or more seats: $250 annually.
(b) Business establishments with less than 35 seats: A permit must
be obtained, but the fee will be waived for up to three dates
annually; thereafter, the fee is $50 annually.
(11) Filming. [Added 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708; amended
5-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1040]
(a) Filming of commercials, movies, etc., per diem permit:
[1] Filming permit on private property: $750.
[2] Filming permit for filming on public land: $1,250.
[3] Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for
educational purposes: $75.
(b) If, at the request of the applicant and with the consent of the
Borough, the permit is issued in less than five business days,
the cost of the permit shall be increased to:
[1] Filming permit on private property: $1,250.
[2] Filming permit for filming on public land: $1,750.
(12) Limousines. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708;
6-26-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:717; 6-26-2013 by Ord. No.
2013:1146; 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(a) Annual fee for limousine/livery service license: $50.
(b) Vehicles:
223. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), Bulky white goods and tire pickup, as amended,
was repealed 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208. See now Subsection N.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:964
[1] Certificate of compliance issued in duplicate for each
limousine covered under the required insurance policy:
$10 for each vehicle.
[2] Duplicate certificate of compliance if lost or misplaced: $5
for each vehicle.
(13) Business registration, retail establishments: $20 annually.224
[Added 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(a) Seasonal sidewalk cafe: additional annual registration fee of
$15.
(14) Pool or billiard table, each: $60. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No.
1995:708]
(15) Residency letters: $10. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No.
1995:708]
(16) (Reserved)225
(17) (Reserved)226
(18) (Reserved)227
(19) Redemption of shopping cart: $15. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord.
No. 1995:708]
(20) (Reserved)228
(21) Streets and sidewalks: [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No.
1995:708]
(a) (Reserved)229
(b) (Reserved)230
(c) (Reserved)231
224. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(13), Notarization, was redesignated as Subsection
F(10) 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024.
225. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(16), Refreshment stands, as amended, was repealed
7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208.
226. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(17), Hawkers, peddlers and street vendors, as
amended, was repealed 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208. See now Subsection B(16).
227. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(18), Contractors and builders, as amended, was
repealed 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208. See now Subsection C(9).
228. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(20) Soil removal, as amended, was repealed
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024.
229. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(21)(a), Restoration guaranty deposit, was
redesignated as Subsection C(1)(d) 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024.
230. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(21)(b), Street restoration permit, was redesignated as
Subsection C(1)(d) 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024.
231. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(21)(c) through (e), regarding streets and sidewalks,
as amended, was repealed 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234. See now Subsection F.
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:965
(22) (Reserved)232
(23) Special sales permits (must be displayed): [Amended 1-2-1996 by
Ord. No. 1995:708]
(a) Going out of business: $90. [Amended 7-27-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016:1208]
(b) Estate or house contents: $90. [Amended 7-27-2016 by Ord.
No. 2016:1208]
(c) Fire: $90. [Amended 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(d) Flea market or special outdoor events, to be paid by promoter,
charitable organizations exempt: $250.
(e) 233Sidewalk, per establishment, requires Mayor and Council
approval: $35.
(24) Businesses or places of amusement: $175. [Amended 1-2-1996
by Ord. No. 1995:708]
(25) 234 Site work permit: $35. [Added 7-27-2016 by Ord. No.
2016:1208]
(26) (Reserved)235
(27) Theaters: $350. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708]
(28) Used car sales establishments: $500.
(29) (Reserved)236
B. (Reserved)237
C. Construction Office. [Amended 9-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:726;
12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:753; 12-21-1998 by Ord. No.
1998:784; 7-14-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:798; 8-25-1999 by Ord.
No. 1999:790; 9-8-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:806; 12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:854; 6-12-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:864; 4-14-2004
by Ord. No. 2004:916; 11-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004:927;
232. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(22), Search of Borough records, as amended, was
repealed 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208.
233. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(23)(e), concerning garage, tag and yard sales, was
redesignated as Subsection C(1)(q) 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:753. This ordinance also
provided for the redesignation of this subsection, formerly Subsection A(23)(f), as
Subsection A(23)(e).
234. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(25), Site work permit, as amended, was redesignated
as Subsection C(1)(e)[2] 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024.
235. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(26), Copy of opinion to interested party, as amended,
was repealed 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208.
236. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(29), Wreckers or towing vehicles on police call list, as
amended, was repealed 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208. See now Subsection G(12)(c).
237. Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Certificate of continued occupancy, as amended, was
repealed 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:966
6-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:940; 12-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005:959; 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:1000; 12-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008:1024; 8-12-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1049;
4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010:1063; 1-4-2011 by Ord. No.
2010:1085; 6-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1193]
(1) Building subcode fees. Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $75. All
other uses and commercial: $100.
(a) New construction or additions:
[1] Per cubic foot of volume: $0.06.
[2] Minimum fee (principal building): $500.
[3] Minimum fee (accessory building): $200.
[4] Modular structures: $30 per $1,000 of estimated cost.
(b) Alterations, repairs, renovations, reconstruction and change of
use:
[1] Per $1,000 of estimated cost: $30.
(c) Roofing, reroofing and siding:
[1] Residential, per activity: $75 (e.g., roofing plus siding =
$150).
[2] Nonresidential, per activity: $100 (e.g., roofing plus siding
= $200).
(d) Demolition:
[1] Residential.
[a] Principal building: $350.
[b] Accessory structures: $150.
[c] Fireplace/masonry: $100.
[2] Nonresidential/mixed use.
[a] Principal building: $750.
[b] Accessory structures: $250.
[3] Interior demolition $100 per technical section subcode.
[a] Residential: minimum fee of $100.
[b] Mixed use/commercial: minimum fee of $200.
(e) State surcharge: calculated upon current state fees in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.19(b).
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:967
(f) Lead hazard abatement with certificate of clearance: $145.
(g) Asbestos abatement with administrative certificate: $160.
(h) Certificate of occupancy, UCC:
[1] Residential (new construction or rehabilitation): $100.
[2] Nonresidential: $200.
(i) Temporary certificate of occupancy, UCC:
[1] Initial issuance: $100.
[2] Each subsequent renewal and request for certificate of
occupancy: $200.
(j) Change of contractor: $25.
(k) Plan review fee: 20% of the anticipated permit fee which is
nonrefundable.
(l) Withdrawn permit administrative fee: 30% includes plan
review fee.
(m) Reinstatement of lapsed permit fee: 80% of original fee.
(n) Certificate of continued occupancy, UCC, applicant requested:
[1] General visual inspection by all subcode officials: $100 per
subcode.
(o) Uniform Construction Code variations:
[1] Residential: $125.
[2] Commercial/mixed use: $250.
(p) Retaining walls: $75, plus zoning review fee:
[1] If four feet or more in height per wall, or four feet or more
in cumulative height of series of walls (i.e., terraced walls),
additional $200.
(q) Zoning review fee.
[1] Residential: $75 for applications not involving either use
review or increase in habitable space/reconstruction/
addition/new construction.
[2] Residential: $125 for applications involving any of the
following:
[a] Use review (change or confirmation of building and/or
land use).
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:968
[b] New construction/reconstruction/addition (in excess
of 200 square feet).
[3] Nonresidential: (assembly; business; educational; factory/
industrial; high hazard; institutional; mercantile; storage;
utility/miscellaneous):
[a] For those applications involving use review only
(change or confirmation of building and/or land's
occupancy and/or use): $125.
[b] For those applications involving use review (change or
confirmation of building and/or land's) occupancy and/
or use in conjunction with either new building
construction/reconstruction or building addition:
$200.
[4] Signage: $75.
[5] Other/nonclassified: $75.
(r) Patios: zoning review fee, $75.
(s) Fences: zoning review fee (privacy): $75.
[1] Pool fence/barrier: zoning review fee, $75, plus:
[a] Residential flat fee: $75.
[b] Nonresidential flat fee: $100.
(t) Swimming pool zoning review fee: $75.
[1] Aboveground: $150.
[2] Semi-in-ground: $300; also requires soil movement permit.
[3] In-ground, per $1,000 of estimated cost: $30; also requires
soil movement permit.
(u) Signs: zoning review fee of: $75 plus:
[1] Flat fee of $100 if construction permit is required.
(v) Trailers used for construction offices and storage:
[1] Residential: $100 each.
[2] Nonresidential/mixed use: $300 each.
(w) Private walkways: zoning review fee, $75.
(x) Driveways: zoning review fee, $75.
(y) Change of tenancy/occupancy zoning, plus fire-prevention
fees:
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:969
[1] Residential: $100, plus $40 each per additional unit.
[2] Nonresidential or mixed (BCCO): $200, plus $100 per
additional unit.
(z) Shed: zoning review fee, $75.
[1] Two hundred square feet or more: requires soil movement
permit and foundation and construction permit.
[a] Flat fee of $75.
(aa) Temporary tents:
[1] Residential and nonresidential flat fee: $100.
(bb) Storage tanks, in gallons per installation:
Storage Tank
(gallons) Fee
330 or less $75
660 or less $125
1,000 or less $200
5,000 or less $500
5,001 or more $1,000
(cc) Tank demolition, per tank:
[1] Residential: $100.
[2] Mixed use/commercial: $200.
(dd) Outdoor cafes: $100.
(ee) Relocation of structure, plus zoning review fee:
[1] $30 per $1000 of estimated cost. $500 flat fee.
(ff) Special inspection fee request for emergency/extraordinary
situations:
[1] Special inspection fees. Any person, partnership or
corporation who requests and obtains a required code
inspection either before or after regular Building
Department hours of business or on holidays and
weekends shall be required to pay, in addition to any
established permit and certificate fees, the current
contractual hourly compensation rate (1 1/2 times their
normal hourly salary) for the Code Officials performing the
inspections, plus an administrative surcharge of 20% of
said calculated amount. Said fee shall be calculated and
based on the amount of time required for said inspections
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:970
with payment for a minimum inspection time of no less
than two hours with the calculated surcharge.
(gg) Search of Borough Records.
[1] Current year and back two years, no retrieval fee only the
per page copy charges.
[2] Beyond two years from the date of request: $40 per hour
or part thereof retrieval fee, plus copy charges per page.
(2) Electrical subcode fees. Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $75.
Minimum fee mixed use/commercial: $100.
(a) Receptacles and fixtures [lighting fixtures, receptacles,
switches, detectors, light poles, motors (fractional
horsepower), emergency and exit lights, communication points
and alarm devices/fire alarm control panel]:
[1] One to 25 units: $75.
[2] Each additional 25 or fraction thereof: $60.
(b) Motors and electrical devices over 1 HP:
[1] One horsepower to 10 horsepower: $100.
[2] From 11 horsepower to 50 horsepower: $200.
[3] From 51 horsepower to 100 horsepower: $250.
[4] Greater than 101 horsepower: $450.
(c) Transformers and generators over 1 KW (equipment and
appliances, including electrical range oven, dishwasher, dryer,
water heater, boiler, furnace, baseboard heat, space heaters,
transfer switches, or any other fixed or plug-in appliance),
each:
[1] One kilowatt to 10 kilowatts: $100.
[2] Over 11 kilowatts to 45 kilowatts: $100.
[3] Over 46 kilowatts to 112.5 kilowatts: $200.
[4] Over 112.5 kilowatts: $450.
(d) Service panels, entrances and subpanels:
[1] Less than or equal to 150 amps: $175.
[2] From 151 amps to 200 amps: $200.
[3] From 201 amps to 400 amps: $275.
[4] From 401 amps to 1,200 amps: $450.
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:971
[5] Over 1,201 amps: $750.
[6] Additional meters included in service: $35.
[7] Underground conduit:
[a] Residential, $1 per linear foot with minimum of $75;
[b] Nonresidential, $1.50 per linear foot with minimum of
$100.
(e) Air-conditioning units (disconnect, compress/condenser and
air handler):
[1] Each: $60.
[2] Replacement of any system part: $35.
(f) Burglar alarm system (complete): $60.
(g) Hydromassage tub (interior whirlpool tub/spa): $150.
(h) Swimming pools (includes receptacle, switch, trench, bonding
and equipotential bonding mat):
[1] Aboveground: $75.
[2] Semi-in-ground: $90.
[3] In-ground: $125.
[4] Light, each: $50.
(i) Hot tub or spa (exterior): $150.
(j) Certificate of compliance (annual inspection for public
swimming pools, spas and hot tubs): $100.
(3) Plumbing subcode fees. Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $75.
Minimum fee mixed use/commercial: $100.
(a) Water closet/toilet/urinals/bidets: $25.
(b) Bathtub: $25.
(c) Lavatory/sink: $25.
(d) Shower: $25.
(e) Floor drain: $25.
(f) Dishwasher: $25.
(g) Drinking fountain/water cooler: $25.
(h) Washing machine: $25.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:972
(i) Hose bibb: $25.
(j) Stacks: $25.
(k) Water heater:
[1] Residential: $70.
[2] Commercial: $125.
(l) Fuel oil piping: $65.
(m) Gas piping: $25 per connection.
(n) Steam/hot-water boiler/furnace:
[1] Residential: $65.
[2] Commercial: $125.
(o) Sewer pump/ejector: $65.
(p) Interceptor/separators: $65.
(q) Backflow preventer:
[1] Residential: $65.
[2] Commercial with test ports: $100.
(r) Sewer connection/replace/repair:
[1] Residential: $200.
[2] Commercial: $300.
(s) Water service connection.
[1] Two inches or less: $100.
[2] Over two inches: $200.
(t) Refrigerant units: $65.
(u) Active solar system: $65.
(v) Garbage disposal: $25.
(w) Indirect connection: $25.
(x) Humidifier: $25.
(y) Condensate line/drain: $25.
(z) Roof drains: $25.
(aa) Septic connection: $65.
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:973
(bb)Water softener: $65.
(cc) Swimming pool:
[1] Aboveground: $65.
[2] Semi-in-ground: $80.
[3] In-ground: $100.
(dd) Medical gas piping: $25 per connection.
(ee) Annual testing of commercial backflow devices: $75 per
device.
(ff) Swimming pool heater: $100.
(gg) Gas service, residential: $100.
(hh) Gas service, commercial: $200.
(4) Fire protection subcode fees. Minimum fee residential R3/R5: $75.
Minimum fee mixed use/commercial: $100.
(a) Installation of flammable/combustible/liquid storage tanks:
[1] Up to 350 gallons: $75.
[2] Over 350 gallons to 1,000 gallons: $100.
[3] Over 1,000 gallons to 5,000 gallons: $250.
[4] Over 5,000 gallons to 10,000 gallons: $500.
[5] Over 10,000 gallons: $1,000.
(b) Alarm/supervisory/signaling devices (smoke, heat, carbon
monoxide, pull stations, water flow, tampers, low/high air,
horn/strobes and bells), each:
[1] One through six: $100.
[2] Each additional device: $10.
(c) Wet and dry sprinkler heads:
[1] From one through 19: $200.
[2] From 20 through 100: $300.
[3] From 101 through 200: $400.
[4] From 201 through 400: $748.
[5] From 401 through 1,000: $1,036.
[6] Over 1,000: $1,323.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:974
(d) Stand pipes: $289.
(e) Kitchen hood exhaust system: $200.
(f) Pre-engineered systems:
[1] Wet chemical: $150.
[2] Dry chemical: $150.
[3] C02 suppression: $150.
[4] Foam suppression: $150.
[5] FM200 suppression: $150.
(g) Smoke control systems: $500.
(h) Gas- or oil-fired appliance: $60.
(i) Fireplaces/wood stoves: $75.
(j) Fire sprinkler component fee costs in addition to sprinkler
heads:
[1] Hydraulic calculations or alterations to pipe schedule, plan
review: $75.
[2] Dry pipe alarm, pre-action and similar devices: $75.
[3] Supervisory devices, each: $25.
[4] Water service for fire line:
[a] Up to two inches: $200.
[b] Two inches to five inches: $300.
[c] Six inches or larger: $750.
[d] Eight inches or larger: $1,000.
[5] Fire pump: $1,000.
(k) Fire alarm system components fees in addition to alarm
devices:
[1] Fire alarm panel, new installation or replacement: $100.
[2] Fire alarm system security and other devices (i.e., door
locks, electromagnetic releases, hold-open devices,
elevator control valves and floor control valves): $10 each.
(l) Metal chimney or liners:
[1] R3/R5, each: $60.
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:975
[2] Mixed use/commercial: $100.
(m) Emergency lights and exit signs, each: $5.
(5) Mechanical subcode fees.
(a) R3/R5 structure/use group minimum fee: $75.
[1] Water heater: $70.
[2] Fuel oil piping connections: $65.
[3] Gas piping connections, per connection: $20.
[4] Steam boiler with backflow: $130.
[5] Hot-water boiler with backflow: $130.
[6] Hot-air furnace: $130.
[7] Oil tank: $75.
[8] LPG tank: $75.
[9] Fireplace: $75.
[10] Hydronic piping: $65.
[11]Radiant heat piping: $65.
[12] Lawn irrigation system: $60.
(b) Minimum fee mixed use/commercial: $100.
[1] Mechanical work on other than an R3/R5 structure/use
group shall be calculated based upon $30 per $1,000 of
estimated cost.
(6) Tree removal permit. The fee for a tree removal permit shall be:
Number of Trees Fee
1 to 5* $100
6 to 10 $150
11 to 20 $250
21 to 50 $500
51 and over $1,000, plus an additional $100 for each
additional 5 trees or part thereof
NOTE:
* A permit is required, but there is no fee for less than two trees
in a twenty-four-month period. The twenty-four-month period is
counted from the date the permit is issued by the Construction
Office.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:976
(7) Elevator subcode fees: 100% of the state fees and subject to change
by the state pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6, plus administrative fee
of 15%.
(8) Garage sales. The administrative processing fee for a garage sale
permit shall be $10.
(9) Contractors and builders, annually: $25. [Added 7-27-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(10) Temporary permit: fee of $50; duration of no longer than one
month (30 days) and limit of no more than three temporary permits
per vendor in any twelve-month period. The duration of the
temporary permit and the fee may be waived and/or revised by the
Mayor and Council. To obtain a waiver/revision, the applicant must
submit a written appeal to the Mayor and Council, via the Borough
Clerk. Thereafter, the appeal shall be heard as soon as practicable
at a public meeting. [Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1210]
D. Fire Prevention Bureau.238
(1) Mercantile Use Group: $60. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:725; 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:854; 12-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008:1024; 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010:1085]
(2) Business Use Group: $60. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:725; 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:854; 12-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008:1024; 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010:1085]
(3) Storage Use Group: $60. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:725; 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:854; 12-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008:1024; 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010:1085]
(4) Factory Use Group: $60. [Amended 8-14-1996 by Ord. No.
1996:725; 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:854; 12-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008:1024; 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010:1085]
(5) Residential Use Group:
Class Fee
R1: Non-owner-occupied 1- and
2-family dwellings
$25
R2: 3 to 10 residential units $35
R3: 11 to 25 residential units $50
R4: 26 and more residential
units
$75, plus $20 for every 15 units
above 26
(6) Businesses or activities permits:
238. Editor's Note: For regulatory provisions regarding these fees, see Ch. 106, Fire Prevention.
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:977
Class Fee
P-1 Use of tar kettle $35
P-2 Storage, handling or use of
compressed gases not
otherwise specified
$5 per tank
P-3 Storage, handling or use of
hazardous materials or
chemicals not otherwise
specified, in accordance with
the following:
Liquid
Measurement
(gallons)
Weight
Measurement
(pounds)
Fee
5 to 55 5 to 500 $25
56 to 110 501 to 1,000 $50
111 to 550 1,001 to 5,000 $100
551 to 5,000 5,001 to 50,000 $250
Over 5,000 Over 50,000 $500
P-4 Storage,
handling or use of
liquid petroleum
gases (LPG,
propane) in
accordance with the
following:
Number of Tanks Fee per Tank
1 to 5 $15
6 to 20 $10, but not less than $75 total
Over 20 $7.50, but not less than $200
total
(7) Certificate of smoke detector/carbon monoxide detector
compliance: $50. [Amended 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006:972]
(8) Certificate of fire code status: $100.239
E. Land use fees.240
(1) Planning Board: [Amended 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:753]
239. Editor's Note: Former Subsection D(9), Fire alarms, added 9-8-1999 by Ord. No. 1999:801,
was repealed 6-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006:972.
240. Editor's Note: For regulatory provisions regarding these fees, see Chapter 35, Land Use
Procedures, § 35-30.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:978
(a) Minor subdivision: $500, plus deposit for costs. [Amended
12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959]
(b) Major subdivision, for each proposed lot: $500, plus deposit for
costs. [Amended 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959]
(c) Site plan approval: $350, plus deposit for costs. [Amended
12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959]
(d) Additional cost for site plan or subdivision approval with one or
more variances: $200, plus deposit for costs. [Amended
12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959]
(e) Deposit for costs: $150. [Amended 12-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005:959]
(f) Appeals and all other applications to the Board: $200.
[Amended 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959]
(g) Minor soil application: [Added 12-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:882; amended 9-14-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1213]
[1] Minor soil-moving application fee: $25.
[2] Minor soil-moving with engineering review application
fee: $50.
(h) Major soil-moving application fee: $350. [Added 12-11-2002
by Ord. No. 2002:882; amended 12-22-2008 by Ord. No.
2008:1024]
(i) An escrow deposit of $700 for a major soil-moving application
in order to conduct the required engineering review. Additional
escrow deposits may be required as deemed necessary by the
Planning Board or Planning Board Engineer. [Added
12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:882; amended 8-8-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007:991; 8-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2018:1243]
(j) An escrow deposit for a retaining wall may be required as
deemed necessary by the Planning Board Engineer. [Added
12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:882]
(k) Soil-moving fee. Major soil moving fee is $400; minor soil
movement is $0.75 per cubic yard, with a minimum of $25.
[Added 12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:882; amended
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024; 5-27-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009:1040; 4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010:1063]
(l) An escrow deposit of $600 to defray the costs of the Borough
Engineer's review of an application relative to stormwater
runoff as required by § 108-21D of this Code. [Added
8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:991]
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:979
(m) An escrow deposit of $250 is required for applications for
minor soil moving with engineering review permits to defray
the costs of engineering review of the "as built" and field
verification by the Engineer. [Added 9-14-2016 by Ord. No.
2016:1213]
(2) Escrow deposits for Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment. Unless set forth elsewhere in this ordinance, escrow
fees for professional review and consultation for site plan and
subdivisions shall be determined by the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment prior to the public hearing. [Amended
12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:753]
(3) Zoning Board of Adjustment: [Amended 12-22-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:753; 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959]
(a) Variances or special permits pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d:
[1] Non-use variance or special permit involving single-family
or two-family residential use: $200.
[2] Non-use variance or special permit, commercial, industrial
or multifamily dwellings in excess of a two-family
residential use: $500.
[3] Use variance application for a single-family or two-family
residence: $350.
[4] Use variance for commercial and industrial uses or
multifamily dwellings in excess of a two-family residential
use: $700.
(b) Site plan or subdivision:
[1] Minor subdivision: $500, plus deposit for costs.
[2] Major subdivision, for each proposed lot: $500, plus
deposit for costs.
[3] Site plan approval: $350, plus deposit for costs.
[4] Additional cost for site plan or subdivision approval with
one or more variances are requested: $200, plus deposit
for costs.
[5] Deposit for costs: $150.
[6] Appeals and applications, pursuant to Borough Code
§ 35-21; all other applications to Board: $200.
(4) Escrow deposits for Planning Board and Zoning Board
professionals:241 [Amended 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:753;
12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959]
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:980
(a) Minimum escrow fees for anticipated legal services:
[Amended 8-8-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:991]
[1] Planning Board: [Amended 4-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1159]
[a] Minor subdivision: $800.
[b] Major subdivision: $1,200.
[c] Site plan: $950.
[d] All other applications: $300.
[2] Zoning Board:
[a] Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a: $500.
[b] Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b: $500.
[c] Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c ("bulk"
variance):
[i] Single-family residential: $300.
[ii] Multifamily residential and nonresidential:
$1,000.
[d] Appeal pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d (“use”
variance): $1,000.
[e] Site plan: $1,500. [Amended 4-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014:1159]
(b) Minimum escrow for anticipated engineering services:
[1] Minor subdivision $800. [Amended 8-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018:1243]
[2] Major subdivision (or minor subdivision, where extension
of municipal utilities is involved):
[a] Three to 10 lots: $400 per lot.
[b] Eleven to 20 lots: $275 per lot.
[c] Twenty-one or more lots: $250 per lot.
[3] Site plan:
[a] Up to 3.0 acres: $900.
[b] Three and zero-tenths acres up to 6.0 acres: $1,200.
241. Editor's Note: For regulatory provisions regarding escrow deposits, see Chapter 35, Land
Use Procedures, § 35-31.
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:981
[c] Six and zero-tenths acres or greater: $1,500.
[4] For residential applications before the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, an engineering escrow fee of $300 shall be
required for any application which a majority of the Board
Members present at the work session determine requires
an engineering review by the Zoning Board Engineer.
[Added 1-4-2011 by Ord. No. 2010:1085]
(4.1) Special meeting fee (either board): $1,000. (Exception: if the
special meeting is called by the Board, the fee may be waived by
the Board.) [Amended 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959]
(5) Satellite earth station:
(a) Permit: $25.
(b) Deposit: $100.
(6) Residential development fees. [Added 1-4-1999 by Ord. No.
1998:786]
(a) Developmental fees for residential development shall be 1.5%
of the equalized value of the assessment. [Amended
7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(b) Fees exceeding those permitted in this section may be
collected where an agreement is entered into with the
developer which offers a financial incentive for paying higher
fees. An agreements are subject to approval by the Council on
Affordable Housing (COAH).
(c) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is
demolished or replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not
otherwise exempt from the development fee requirement. The
development fee shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure. [Added
11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1216]
(7) Nonresidential development fees. [Added 1-4-1999 by Ord. No.
1998:786]
(a) Development fees shall be 2.5% of the equalized assessed
value for nonresidential development or as otherwise required
by state law. [Amended 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(b) Fees exceeding those permitted in this section may be
collected where there is an agreement with the developer that
offers a financial incentive for paying higher fees. Such
agreements may include, but are not limited to, design
waivers, tax abatement, increased commercial/industrial
square footage, increased commercial/industrial lot coverage
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:982
and/or increased commercial/industrial impervious coverage in
return for an increased fee. The fee negotiated shall bear a
reasonable relationship to the additional commercial/industrial
consideration to be received. All agreements are subject to
approval by COAH.
(8) Eligible exaction, ineligible exactions and exemptions. [Added
1-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1998:786]
(a) Inclusionary developments shall be exempt from paying
development fees except when a developer elects to pay a fee
in lieu of building low- and moderate-income housing units, as
provided for in Subsection E(6)(b) of this chapter.
(b) Developers that expand an existing nonresidential structure
shall pay a development fee as required in Subsection E of this
section. The development fee shall be calculated based on the
increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved
structure.
(c) (Reserved)242
(d) Developers that have received preliminary or final approval
prior to the effective date of this subsection shall be exempt
from paying a development fee unless the developer seeks a
substantial change in the approval.
(e) Developers of churches, synagogues, public nonprofit uses or
hospitals shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
(9) Collection of fees. [Added 1-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1998:786]
(a) Developers shall pay 50% of the calculated development fee at
the issuance of building permits. The development fee shall be
estimated by the Tax Assessor prior to the issuance of building
permits.
(b) Developers shall pay the remaining fee upon the issuance of
certificates of occupancy. Upon issuance of certificates of
occupancy, the Tax Assessor shall calculate the equalized
assessed value and the appropriate development fee. The
developer shall be responsible for paying the difference
between the fee calculated at certificate of occupancy and the
amount paid at building permit.
(c) Development fees that are challenged by a developer shall be
placed in an interest-bearing account. If all or a portion of the
contested fees are returned to the developer, the accrued
interest on the returned amount shall also be returned.
242. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(8)(c), regarding improvements and expansions to
residential structures, was repealed 11-21-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1216. See now
Subsection E(6)(c).
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:983
(10) Housing Trust Fund. [Added 1-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1998:786]
(a) There is hereby created an interest-bearing Housing Trust
Fund in Fleet Bank for the purpose of receiving development
fees from residential and nonresidential developers. All
development fees paid pursuant to this section shall be
deposited in this fund. No money shall be expended from the
Housing Trust Fund unless the expenditure conforms to the
municipality's spending plan approved by COAH.
(b) If COAH determines that the Borough is not in conformance
with COAH's rules on development fees, COAH is authorized to
direct the manner in which all development fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be expended. Such authorization
is pursuant to this section, COAH's rules on development fees
and the written authorization from the governing body to the
Fleet Bank.
(11) Use of funds. [Added 1-4-1999 by Ord. No. 1998:786]
(a) Money deposited in a Housing Trust Fund may be used for any
activity approved by COAH for addressing the Borough's lowand
moderate-income housing obligation. Such activities may
include, but are not necessarily limited to, housing
rehabilitation; new construction; regional contribution
agreements; the purchase of land for low- and moderateincome
housing; extensions and/or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to low- and moderate-income housing sites;
assistance designed to render units to be more affordable to
low- and moderate-income people; and administrative costs
necessary to implement the Borough's housing element. The
expenditure of all money shall conform to the spending plan
approved by COAH.
(b) At least 30% of the revenues collected, not targeted for a
regional contribution agreement, rehabilitation program or a
municipal construction project, shall be devoted to render
units more affordable. Examples of such activities include, but
are not limited to, down payment assistance, low interest loans
and rental assistance.
(c) No more than 20% of the revenues shall be expended on
administrative costs necessary to develop, revise or implement
the housing element. Examples of eligible administrative
activities include personnel, consultant services, space costs,
consumable supplies and rental or purchase of equipment.
(d) Development fees shall not be used to reimburse the Borough
for municipal expenditures that preceded its judgment of
repose.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:984
(12) Expiration of provisions. Subsection E(6) through (12) permitting
the collection of development fees shall expire as a result of any of
the following:
(a) COAH's dismissal or denial of a petition for substantive
certification.
(b) COAH's revocation of either substantive certification or its
certification of this subsection.
(c) The expiration of the time defined by a judgment of repose or
substantive certification unless the Borough has filed an
adopted housing element with COAH, petitioned for
substantive certification and received COAH's approval of its
development fee ordinance.
(13) Fees for updating Borough Tax Map. Developers shall pay a fee of
$100 per lot for the updating of Borough Tax Map(s). [Added
12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:882]
(14) Fund for traffic studies and implementation of solutions to traffic
problems The Mayor and Council of the Borough of Closter, New
Jersey, deem it necessary to the public interest, health, safety,
comfort, convenience, protection of property values and general
welfare of the Borough of Closter to provide a mechanism whereby
the Planning Board or Zoning Board may require an applicant to
contribute to a fund dedicated to traffic studies and implementation
of solutions to traffic problems whenever either Board determines
that the applicant's plan may have a detrimental effect on traffic
and when a remedy to that determination is not evident or
practical. Said contributions may be used for traffic studies and
implementation of solutions to traffic problems at the site or
elsewhere in the Borough and/or future improvements at the site or
elsewhere in the Borough. [Added 9-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:873]
F. Miscellaneous.
(1) (Reserved)243
(2) Certification of documents, each: $5. [Amended 1-2-1996 by
Ord. No. 1995:708]
(3) For copies of public records which are required by law to be made,
maintained or kept on file, the fee shall be as set forth in N.J.S.A.
47:1A-1 et seq, the Open Public Records Act. [Amended 1-2-1996
by Ord. No. 1995:708; 7-24-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:870;
7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
243. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(1), Search of Borough records, was repealed
7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208.
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:985
(a) Whenever a requestor asks for copies of a record in a medium
not routinely used by the Borough, not routinely developed or
maintained by the Borough, or requiring a substantial amount
of manipulation or programming of information technology, the
Clerk may charge the requestor a special service charge,
which will differ from the flat fee set forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et
seq. and which will be equal to the actual cost of reproduction
of the record in the medium requested, including labor.
(b) Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation, or volume of
a government record embodied in the form of printed matter to
be inspected, examined, or copied is such that the record
cannot be reproduced by ordinary document-copying
equipment in ordinary business size or involves an
extraordinary expenditure of time and effort to accommodate
the request, the Clerk may charge a special service charge,
which will differ from the flat fee set forth in N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et
seq. and which will be equal to the actual cost of the
reproduction of that record.
(c) The requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object
to the special service charge prior to it being incurred.
(d) Reproduction of compact disc(s): equal to the cost of
purchasing the discs to be provided to the requestor.
(4) Reprints of portions of Code Book: letter size: $0.05 per page; legal
size: $0.07 per page. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No.
1995:708; 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(5) Certified list of persons requiring notice of hearing: $0.25 per name
or $30, whichever is greater. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No.
1995:708; 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024]
(6) Transcripts: equal to cost incurred by Borough.
(7) Notice of publication: equal to cost incurred by Borough.
(8) (Reserved)244
(9) Filming. [Added 8-24-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:679]
(a) Filming permit: $500.
(b) Filming permit for filming on public land: $1,000.
(c) Filming permit for nonprofit applicants filming for educational
purposes (including public land): $25.
(10) Notarization: $2 for residents or nonresidents. [Added
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024]
244. Editor's Note: Former Subsection F(8), Reproduction of compact discs, as amended, was
repealed 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:986
(11) Road opening. [Added 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024;
amended 12-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1234]
(a) Permit application fees.
Nonrefundable application fee:
Small openings $300
Extensive openings $300, plus an additional $1
per linear foot over 100 feet
Nonreported opening $750
Nonrefundable inspection fee
(non-engineering)*
$350 (covers a minimum of 4
inspections of not more than
1-hour duration each;
additional non-engineering
inspections at $75 per hour)
*Charges for engineering inspections are based on the hourly
professional fees set forth in Code § 171-40 and will be
charged against the applicant's security deposit
(b) Security deposit fee for guaranteeing paved area, curb,
sidewalk or driveway:
[1] Opening paved area, curb, gutter, sidewalk or driveway:
[a] Base charge: $30.
[b] Charge for each square yard of trench opened: $20.
[c] Charge for each square yard of paving: $7.50.
[d] Charge for each linear foot of curb: $10.
[2] Opening shoulders and roadside areas:
[a] Base charge: $30.
[b] Charge for each square yard of trench opened: $7.50.
[3] Boring, tunneling or driving under the road:
[a] Base charge: $30.
[b] Charge per linear foot of boring: $2.
(12) Late fee: application for use of town grounds. There shall be a fee
of $200 for the processing of any application for the use of town
grounds when that application is made less than six weeks prior to
the use date being requested. [Added 7-13-2011 by Ord. No.
2011:1100]
G. Police Department.245
(1) Accident reports.
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:987
(a) In person: in accordance with reproduction of records as listed
above.
(b) Other than in person: in addition to the above fees, $5 for the
first three pages, plus $1 per page thereafter.
(2) Alarm system. [Amended 9-25-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:730]
(a) Burglar (direct, dialer, central station), fire (direct, dialer,
central station) and local (audible, bell, siren): $50. [Amended
12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:854; 6-9-2010 by Ord. No.
2010:1068]
(b) Reconnection fee: $40.
(3) (Reserved)246
(4) Case reports: in accordance with reproduction of records as listed
above.
(5) Fingerprinting, noncriminal: $15. [Amended 12-11-2002 by Ord.
No. 2002:882]
(6) Firearms.
(a) Identification card: $5.
(b) Pistol purchase permit: $2.
(7) Good conduct letter: $25. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No.
1995:708; 12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:882]
(8) Photographs: $5 per each four-by-six color print. [Amended
1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708; 12-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:882]
(9) 247Applications: $50 for a resume-based application (for PTC
certified and transfer applicants); $100 for a full application that
requires a physical fitness test (pre-academy). [Amended
4-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014:1159]
(10) Tapes. Audio, video, etc., to view or listen to any tape in
headquarters: $75 per copy. This fee is subject to waiver for
indigent defendants by the Municipal Court Judge. [Amended
1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708; 12-11-2002 by Ord. No.
2002:882]
245. Editor's Note: For regulatory provisions regarding Police Department fees, see Ch. 50, Art.
VI.
246. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G(3), Bicycles, was repealed 6-9-2010 by Ord. No.
2010:1068.
247. Editor’s Note: Former Subsection G(9), Skateboards, roller skates and other humanpowered
recreational locomotion devices, impoundment storage, was repealed 6-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010:1068.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:988
(11) Borough Tax Map: $2. [Amended 12-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005:959]
(12) Towing and storage. [Added 7-24-1996 by Ord. No. 1996:720;
amended 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:854; 5-10-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006:968; 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024]
(a) Nonrefundable application fee: $25.
(b) The following is the maximum fee schedule for towing services,
either a regular tow or flatbed to garage: [Amended 6-9-2010
by Ord. No. 2010:1068; 2-8-2012 by Ord. No. 2012:1115]
Service
Regular
Business Hours
(8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.,
Monday
through Friday,
excluding
holidays)
After Business
Hours (before
8:00 a.m. and
after 5:00 p.m.,
plus all day
Saturdays,
Sundays and
holidays)
Passenger cars, small
vans, pickups,
motorcycles, mopeds and
trail bikes
$100 $110
Service calls (flat tires:
to remove tire and
replace with spare, add
$30 to rates)
$50 $60
Motor vehicle lockouts $60 $85
(c) The fee for vehicle storage is $40 per day, outside, or $75 per
day, inside, including the first day of towing. [Amended
6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010:1068]
(d) Charges may be added, in addition to those listed in Subsection
G(12)(b) above, as follows: $85 per hour due to unreasonable
delays or unusual difficulties encountered at the towing scene,
and up to $40 for Speedy Dry and/or other cleanup at the
accident scene. A fuel surcharge may also apply. [Amended
6-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010:1068]
(e) The Police Department shall retain a list of authorized towing
companies which, to the extent practicable, shall include only
towing businesses located within the Borough of Closter.
(f) Wreckers or towing vehicles on police call list: $125. [Added
7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
(13) Private duty police work: police officer’s hourly overtime rate, plus
an additional fee of 25% for administrative and operational costs,
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:989
apportioned as follows: 10% administrative, 10% vehicle
maintenance, and 5% fuel; nonprofit organizations pay a reduced
additional fee of 15% for administrative and operational costs.
[Added 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:753; amended
12-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1998:784; 12-17-2001 by Ord. No.
2001:854; 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:982; 4-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010:1065; 8-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010:1071;
7-26-2017 by Ord. No. 2017:1228]
(14) Applicants for new liquor licenses shall reimburse the Borough for
all outside professional accounting, attorney and auditing fees
related to the Police Department's investigation of said liquor
license application. [Added 12-11-2002 by Ord. No. 2002:882]
(15) Permit for inspection and connecting to sanitary sewer system:
$100. [Added 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024]
(16) (Reserved)
(17) Hawkers, peddlers, solicitors and street vendors: [Added
7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208; 8-8-2018 by Ord. No.
2018:1244]
(a) Hawkers/canvassers/solicitors: $75 per individual going doorto-
door to defray the cost to the Borough of processing,
verifying and supervising the application information as set
forth in this chapter.
(b) Street vendors: $100 per food truck; $100 per food stand
vendor.
H. Tax Assessor.
(1) List of property owners. If requested pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12, the fee shall be $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is
greater. If requested for any other purpose, the fee shall be $30.
[Amended 7-27-2016 by Ord. No. 2016:1208]
I. Tax Collector/Treasurer. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708]
(1) Duplicate tax bill: $5.
(2) Subsequent copies: $25. each.
(3) Returned check fee: $50. [Added 12-22-1997 by Ord. No.
1997:753; amended 4-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010:1063]
(4) Property tax history printout: $1 per block/lot. [Added
12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:753; amended 12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001:854; 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959]
(5) Copy of Tax Map: $1 per sheet, copy size not to exceed legal-sized
paper or 8.5 inches by 14 inches. Larger sizes are per sheet.
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
189:990
[Added 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:753; amended
12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024]
(6) Alpine sewer charges/assessment (if required): hookup,
maintenance and sewer charges shall be set annually, prior to July
1 or as soon as practicable thereafter, by resolution of the Mayor
and Council. [Added 12-17-2001 by Ord. No. 2001:854;
amended 12-14-2005 by Ord. No. 2005:959; 4-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007:982; 12-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008:1024;
8-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010:1072]
(7) Notice of tax sale: $25. [Added 12-14-2005 by Ord. No.
2005:959]
J. Municipal Court. [Added 8-24-1994 by Ord. No. 1994:676]
(1) Public Defender application fee: up to $200. [Amended
12-9-2015 by Ord. No. 2015:1200]
K. Power to waive fees. The Mayor and Council shall have the power to
waive the collection of all fees by any public official or board of the
Borough of Closter upon application being made to it by any charitable,
religious, veterans or eleemosynary organization. The Mayor and
Council shall have the power to waive, for a disabled person, any
municipal fee or charge required to secure a construction permit for
any construction, reconstruction, alteration or improvement which
promotes accessibility to his or her own living unit. For the purposes of
this section, the term "disabled person" is used as defined in N.J.S.A.
52:27D-126e. [Added 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 1995:708; amended
2-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2009:1029]
L. Recreation Commission fees. Registration for various recreational
activities shall be determined and published annually by the Recreation
Commission prior to the activities occurring. The registration fee shall
be no less than $100 per sport and no greater than $250 per family.
[Added 12-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997:753; amended 12-14-2005
by Ord. No. 2005:959; 4-11-2007 by Ord. No. 2007:982; 4-9-2014
by Ord. No. 2014:1159]
M. Parking Authority fees: fee collected per parking space in accordance
with Closter Code § 183-84C: $1,650. [Added 4-11-2007 by Ord. No.
2007:982]
N. Bulky white goods and tire pickup: [Added 7-27-2016 by Ord. No.
2016:1208]
(1) Per pickup, bulky white metal item: $35; no more than three items.
(2) Per tire, without rim: $10.
(3) Bulky white goods dropoff: $20.
(4) Tire (without rim) dropoff, per tire: $7.
§ A301-1 WATER § A301-1
189:991
Chapter A302
PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF
§ A301-1 CLOSTER CODE § A301-1
A302:992
ARTICLE I
Closter Nature Center Association
[Adopted 12-6-1977 as Ord. No. 1977:321 (Art. I of Ch. 121 of the
1967 Code)]
§ A302-1. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LESSEE — The Closter Nature Center Association, a nonprofit corporation.
LESSOR — The Borough of Closter.
SUBJECT PREMISES — All those premises in the Borough of Closter, more
particularly described in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof.248
§ A302-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to authorize the execution of a lease of the
subject premises by the Borough Clerk and the Mayor of the Borough of
Closter to the lessee, subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein
and further subject to the terms and conditions contained in said lease.
§ A302-3. Permitted use of premises.
The subject premises shall be used by the lessee for educational and
recreational purposes to promote, expand and carry on efforts and
endeavors for the preservation of open spaces for the purposes of
conservation, education and recreation, for the development of clean air,
clean water and clean soil and for the further preservation and
encouragement of wildlife and to further encourage an understanding of
the need for preservation and conservation of natural resources, to further
establish a conservation center within the Borough of Closter and to further
construction of facilities relating thereto for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
§ A302-4. Lease payment.
In consideration of the granting of a lease of the subject premises by the
lessor to the lessee, the lessee shall cause to be paid to the lessor the sum
of one dollar ($1.) annually on the date of execution the first year and on the
anniversary date of said lease for each year thereafter.
§ A302-5. Term of lease.
The subject lease shall be for a term of twenty-five (25) years commencing
upon the execution of the lease herein authorized.
248. Editor's Note: Schedule A, as amended, is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ A302-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § A302-6
A302:993
§ A302-6. Incorporation of lease into ordinance.
A copy of the subject lease which is hereby authorized is on file in the office
of the Clerk of the Borough of Closter. All of the terms and provisions of said
lease are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth herein at length
and are not reprinted due to the cost of said publication. All of the terms
and provisions of said lease are deemed a part hereof as if set forth herein
at length.
§ A302-7. Open program.
The purpose for which the subject premises shall be leased shall be for the
benefit of the entire Borough of Closter and for all those persons choosing
to participate in the program offered. The program shall be open to all
residents of the Borough of Closter.
§ A302-8. Enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Closter to enforce the conditions of this lease.
§ A302-9. Annual report.
The lessee shall be required to annually submit a report to the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter setting forth:
§ A302-10. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately after passage and publication
as provided by law.
A. The use to which the leasehold was put during each year.
B. The activities of the lessee undertaken in furtherance of the public
purpose for which the leasehold was granted.
C. The approximate value or cost, if any, of such activities in furtherance of
such purpose.
D. An affirmation of the continued tax-exempt status of the nonprofit
corporation pursuant to both state and federal law.
§ A302-6 CLOSTER CODE § A302-10
A302:994
ARTICLE II
Boy Scouts
[Adopted 11-10-1982 as Ord. No. 1982:438 (Art. II of Ch. 121 of the
1967 Code)]
§ A302-11. Definitions.
As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LESSEE — The Closter Scout Troop 63, Boy Scouts of America, a nonprofit
corporation.
LESSOR — The Borough of Closter.
SUBJECT PREMISES — All those premises in the Borough of Closter, more
particularly described in Schedule 1 attached hereto.249
§ A302-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to authorize the execution of a lease of the
subject premises by the Borough Clerk and the Mayor of the Borough of
Closter to the lessee, subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein,
and further subject to the terms and conditions contained in said lease.
§ A302-13. Permitted use of premises.
The subject premises shall be used by the lessee for educational and
recreational purposes to promote, through organization and cooperation
with other agencies, the ability of boys and girls to do things for themselves
and others, to train them in scoutcraft and to teach them patriotism,
courage, self-reliance and kindred virtues.
§ A302-14. Lease payment.
In consideration of the granting of a lease of the subject premises by the
lessor to the lessee, the lessee shall cause to be paid to the lessor the sum
of one dollar ($1.) annually on the date of execution the first year and on the
anniversary date of said lease for each year thereafter.
§ A302-15. Term of lease.
The subject lease shall be for a term of twenty (20) years commencing upon
the execution of the lease herein authorized.
§ A302-16. Incorporation of lease into ordinance.
A copy of the subject lease which is hereby authorized is on file in the office
of the Clerk of the Borough of Closter. All of the terms and provisions of said
lease are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth herein at length
249. Editor's Note: Schedule 1 is on file in the office of the Borough Clerk.
§ A302-11 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § A302-16
A302:995
and are not reprinted due to the cost of said publication. All of the terms
and provisions of said lease are deemed a part hereof as if set forth herein
at length.
§ A302-17. Beneficiaries.
The purpose for which the subject premises shall be leased shall be for the
benefit of the entire Borough of Closter and for all those persons choosing to
participate in the scout program offered. The scout program shall be open
to all residents of the Borough of Closter.
§ A302-18. Enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of the Mayor and Council of the Borough of
Closter to enforce the conditions of this lease.
§ A302-19. Annual report.
The lessee shall be required to annually submit a report to the Mayor and
Council of the Borough of Closter setting forth:
§ A302-20. Termination of portion of lease to Closter Nature Center
Association.
Pursuant to Paragraph 19 of the lease between the Borough of Closter and
the Closter Nature Center Association, those lands described in Schedule
1 of this ordinance are hereby removed from said lease and all rights and
obligations for such lands pursuant to said lease shall expire sixty (60) days
following the effective date of this ordinance.
§ A302-21. Amendment to Nature Center Lease.
Schedule A, as contained in Borough of Closter Ordinance No. 1977:321,
entitled "An Ordinance Authorizing the Leasing of Certain Public Lands
of the Borough of Closter, County of Bergen, State of New Jersey, to the
Closter Nature Center Association, A Nonprofit Corporation,"250 is hereby
amended so as to remove therefrom the lands described in Schedule 1 of
this ordinance.
A. The use to which the leasehold was put during each year.
B. The activities of the lessee undertaken in furtherance of the public
purpose for which the leasehold was granted.
C. The approximate value or cost, if any, of such activities in furtherance of
such purpose.
D. An affirmation of the continued tax-exempt status of the nonprofit
corporation pursuant to both state and federal law.
250. Editor's Note: See Art. I of this chapter.
§ A302-16 CLOSTER CODE § A302-22
A302:996
§ A302-22. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect sixty (60) days after passage and publication
as provided by law.
§ A302-22 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § A302-22
A302:997
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1993:658
11-22-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
1993:659
11-22-1993 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 35
Ord. No.
1993:660
12-22-1993 Detective Bureau
amendment
Ch. 50, Art. V
Ord. No.
1993:661
12-22-1993 Hazardous substance
recovery amendment
Ch. 114
Ord. No.
1993:662
1-3-1994 Capital improvement NCM
Ord. No.
1993:663
1-3-1994 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No.
1993:664
1-3-1994 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
1994:665
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1994:666
5-11-1994 Increase in appropriations NCM
Ord. No.
1994:667
5-25-1994 Discharge of wastes Ch. 160, Art. II
Ord. No.
1994:668
5-25-1994 Recycling amendment Ch. 169, Art.
III
Ord. No.
1994:669
5-25-1994 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1994:670
7-13-1994 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1994:671
7-13-1994 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1994:672
5-25-1994 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
1994:673
6-8-1994 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
1994:674
6-22-1994 Appropriation NCM
§ A302-22 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:998
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1994:675
6-8-1994 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1994:676
8-24-1994 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 11
Ord. No.
1994:677
8-24-1994 Feeding of waterfowl Ch. 71, Art. III
Ord. No.
1994:678
8-24-1994 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1994:679
8-24-1994 Television and movie filming Ch. 178
Ord. No.
1994:680
8-24-1994 Agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1994:681
8-19-1994 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
1994:682
9-7-1994 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
1994:683
10-12-1994 Television and movie filming
amendment
Ch. 178
Ord. No.
1994:684
10-12-1994 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1994:685
10-26-1994 Agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1994:686
10-26-1994 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1994:687
11-30-1994 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
1994:688
10-26-1994 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 48, Art. I
Ord. No.
1994:689
10-26-1994 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1994:690
11-9-1994 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1994:691
10-26-1994 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
1994:692
12-14-1994 Solid Waste amendment Ch. 169, Art.
III
Ord. No.
1995:693
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1995:694
5-24-1995 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 59
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:999
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1995:695
5-24-1995 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1995:696
5-24-1995 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1995:697
5-24-1995 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1995:698
7-26-1995 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 59
Ord. No.
1995:699
7-26-1995 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 65
Ord. No.
1995:700
7-26-1995 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 106, Art. II
Ord. No.
1995:701
7-26-1995 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 108
Ord. No.
1995:702
9-13-1995 Exchange of lands NCM
Ord. No.
1995:703
10-25-1995 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1995:704
11-8-1995 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 59
Ord. No.
1995:705
11-8-1995 Licenses amendment Ch. 127, Art. I
Ord. No.
1995:706
11-8-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
1995:707
12-27-1995 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1995:708
1-2-1996 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
1995:709
1-10-1996 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1996:710
3-13-1996 Police Department
organization amendment;
standards and guidelines for
promotion amendment
Ch. 50, Arts. I
and VII
Ord. No.
1996:711
4-24-1996 Soil movement amendment Ch. 167
Ord. No.
1996:712
4-24-1996 Municipal Court services Ch. 30, Art. III
Ord. No.
1996:713
Not adopted
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1000
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1996:714
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1996:715
6-12-1996 Traffic regulations
amendment; parking yards
and parking places
amendment
Ch. 183, Parts
1 and 2
Ord. No.
1996:716
5-22-1996 Agreement NCM
Ord. No.
1996:717
6-26-1996 Limousine or livery service;
fees and deposits
amendment
Chs. 129;
A301
Ord. No.
1996:718
6-26-1996 Driveways amendment;
fences amendment
Chs. 92; 103
Ord. No.
1996:719
7-24-1996 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1996:720
7-24-1996 Towing and storage Ch. 179
Ord. No.
1996:721
7-24-1996 Sexual harassment Ch. 58
Ord. No.
1996:722
9-11-1996 Obstructions amendment Ch. 171, Art. I
Ord. No.
1996:723
8-14-1996 Employment practices
amendment
Ch. 48, Art. II
Ord. No.
1996:724
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1996:725
8-14-1996 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
1996:726
9-25-1996 Outdoor cafes; zoning
amendment; fees and
deposits amendment
Chs. 141; 200;
A301
Ord. No.
1996:727
9-11-1996 Skateboards, roller skates
and other human powered
recreational locomotion
devices amendment
Ch. 75, Art. II
Ord. No.
1996:728
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1996:729
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1996:730
9-25-1996 Alarm systems amendment;
fees and deposits
amendment
Chs. 65; A301
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1001
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1996:731
10-23-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1996:732
11-13-1996 Property maintenance
amendment; signs
amendment; subdivision of
land and site plan review
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 147; 164;
173; and 200
Ord. No.
1996:733
11-25-1996 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1996:734
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1996:735
11-13-1996 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
1996:736
1-2-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1996:737
1-2-1997 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
1997:738
4-23-1997 Cable television franchise
amendment
Ch. A300
Ord. No.
1997:739
5-14-1997 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1997:740
8-13-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1997:741
6-11-1997 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1997:742
7-9-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1997:743
7-23-1997 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1997:744
8-13-1997 Gasoline service stations:
hours of operation
amendment
Ch. 112, Art. I
Ord. No.
1997:745
8-13-1997 Miscellaneous licenses
amendment
Ch. 127, Art. I
Ord. No.
1997:746
8-13-1997 Renaissance Committee Repealed by
Ord. No.
2000:825
Ord. No.
1997:747
8-13-1997 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk repair amendment
Ch. 171, Art. V
Ord. No.
1997:748
9-10-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1002
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1997:749
10-8-1997 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
1997:750
10-8-1997 Connection to borough
sanitary sewer system
Ch. 160, Art.
III
Ord. No.
1997:751
11-12-1997 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1997:752
11-12-1997 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1997:753
12-22-1997 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
1997:754
Never adopted
Ord. No.
1997:755
1-5-1998 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
1997:756
1-5-1998 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
1998:757
1-28-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1998:758
4-22-1998 Towing and storage
amendment
Ch. 179
Ord. No.
1998:759
4-22-1998 Receipt of bids for purchase
of land
NCM
Ord. No.
1998:760
5-13-1998 Sidewalks repair
amendment
Ch. 171, Art. V
Ord. No.
1998:761
5-13-1998 Lease of property NCM
Ord. No.
1998:762
6-10-1998 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 35
Ord. No.
1998:763
6-10-1998 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1998:764
6-10-1998 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1998:765
6-10-1998 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1998:766
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1998:767
8-12-1998 Street vacation Rescinded by
Ord. No.
1998:782
Ord. No.
1998:768
Not adopted
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1003
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1998:769
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1998:770
8-12-1998 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1998:771
8-12-1998 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1998:772
8-12-1998 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1998:773
10-28-1998 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
1998:774
10-14-1998 Acquisition of property NCM
Ord. No.
1998:775
10-28-1998 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
1998:776
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1998:777
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1998:778
10-28-1998 Signs amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 164; Ch.
200
Ord. No.
1998:779
10-28-1998 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1998:780
10-28-1998 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1998:781
10-28-1998 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
1998:782
12-21-1998 Rescinding Ordinance No.
1998:767
NCM
Ord. No.
1998:783
12-21-1998 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
1998:784
12-21-1998 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
1998:785
12-21-1998 Towing and storage
amendment
Ch. 179
Ord. No.
1998:786
12-21-1998 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
1999:787
4-14-1999 Senior citizen
transportation services
Ch. 30, Art. IV
Ord. No.
1999:788
4-14-1999 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1004
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1999:789
4-14-1999 Zero increase in stormwater
runoff
Ch. 108, Art. II
Ord. No.
1999:790
8-25-1999 Tree preservation and
removal
Ch. 181
Ord. No.
1999:791
5-12-1999 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1999:792
6-9-1999 Sidewalk repair amendment Ch. 171, Art. V
Ord. No.
1999:793
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1999:794
6-9-1999 Cooperative agreement
superseded
NCM
Ord. No.
1999:795
6-9-1999 Parking Authority Ch. 183, Part 6
Ord. No.
1999:796
6-9-1999 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 142
Ord. No.
1999:797
6-23-1999 Cable television franchise
amendment
Ch. A300
Ord. No.
1999:798
7-14-1999 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
1999:799
6-23-1999 Driveways amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
1999:800
7-14-1999 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
1999:801
9-8-1999 Fees and deposits Ch. A301
Ord. No.
1999:802
8-11-1999 Acquisition of property NCM
Ord. No.
1999:803
8-25-1999 Fair housing repealer Ch. 100
Ord. No.
1999:804
8-25-1999 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
1999:805
8-25-1999 Board or Recreation
Commissioners amendment
Ch. 56
Ord. No.
1999:806
9-8-1999 Garage sales Ch. 111
Ord. No.
1999:807
9-8-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
1999:808
9-8-1999 Driveways amendment Ch. 92
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1005
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
1999:809
8-20-1999 Emergency services length
of service award program
Ch. 14, Art. I
Ord. No.
1999:810
10-13-1999 Agreement to sell diesel
motor fuel
NCM
Ord. No.
1999:811
10-13-1999 Agreement to participate
Bergen County Open Space,
Recreation, Farmland and
Historic Preservation Trust
Fund
NCM
Ord. No.
1999:812
10-13-1999 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
1999:813
11-8-1999 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
1999:814
11-22-1999 Environmental Commission
amendment
Ch. 16
Ord. No.
1999:815
12-20-1999 Environmental Commission
amendment
Ch. 16
Ord. No.
1999:816
11-22-1999 Shade Tree Committee
amendment
Ch. 59
Ord. No.
1999:817
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1999:818
Not adopted
Ord. No.
1999:819
12-20-1999 Improvement Commission Ch. 29
Ord. No.
1999:820
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2000:821
Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2000:822
4-12-2000 Acquisition of land NCM
Ord. No.
2000:823
4-26-2000 Shade Tree Committee
amendment
Ch. 59
Ord. No.
2000:824
4-26-2000 Protection of trees Repealed by
Ord. No.
2002:859
Ord. No.
2000:825
4-26-2000 Renaissance Committee
repealer
Ch. 57
Ord. No.
2000:826
Not adopted
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1006
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2000:827
4-26-2000 Municipal court services
amendment
Ch. 30, Art. III
Ord. No.
2000:828
6-14-2000 Salaries amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2000:829
7-12-2000 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2000:830
8-23-2000 Cable television franchise
amendment
Ch. A300
Ord. No.
2000:831
8-23-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2000:832
Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2000:833
12-27-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2000:834
9-13-2000 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2000:835
12-13-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2000:836
10-11-2000 Board of Recreation
Commissioners amendment
Ch. 56
Ord. No.
2000:837
10-11-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2000:838
10-11-2000 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2000:839
12-27-2000 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
2000:840
1-2-2001 Fiber optic cable franchise NCM
Ord. No.
2001:841
3-28-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
2001:842
3-14-2001 Solid waste Ch. 169
Ord. No.
2001:843
6-27-2001 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2001:844
7-11-2001 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2001:845
7-11-2001 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2001:846
7-11-2001 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1007
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2001:847
8-8-2001 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2001:848
9-12-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2001:849
8-22-2001 Business certificate of
continued occupancy
Ch. 87
Ord. No.
2001:850
Alcoholic beverages Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2001:851
Zoning amendment Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2001:852
12-17-2001 Historic preservation Ch. 35, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2001:853
12-17-2001 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 89
Ord. No.
2001:854
12-17-2001 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2001:855
Personnel policies
amendment
Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2001:856
12-17-2001 Administrator amendment Ch. 3
Ord. No.
2001:857
12-17-2001 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2002:858
12-17-2001 Peddlers and solicitors
amendment
Ch. 127
Ord. No.
2002:859
3-13-2002 Protection of trees repealer;
Shade Tree Commission
Chs. 16,
reference
only; 60
Ord. No.
2002:860
3-13-2002 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2002:861
3-25-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
2002:862
4-24-2002 Alcoholic beverages:
consumption by persons
under legal age
Ch. 67, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2002:863
6-12-2002 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
2002:864
6-12-2002 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2002:865
6-12-2002 Public Works Department
amendment
Ch. 52
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1008
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2002:866
6-12-2002 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2002:867
7-10-2002 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2002:868
7-10-2002 Salaries amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2002:869
7-10-2002 Historic preservation
amendment
Ch. 35, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2002:870
7-24-2002 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2002:871
8-14-2002 School referendum NCM
Ord. No.
2002:872
9-11-2002 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2002:873
9-11-2002 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2002:874
10-9-2002 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 142
Ord. No.
2002:875
10-9-2002 Limousine or livery service
amendment
Ch. 129
Ord. No.
2002:876
10-9-2002 Amusements and
amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 69
Ord. No.
2002:877
11-13-2002 Vehicles and traffic: offstreet
parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 1
Ord. No.
2002:878
11-13-2002 General penalty amendment Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. No.
2002:879
11-13-2002 Conveyance of ambulance NCM
Ord. No.
2002:880
11-13-2002 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
2002:881
12-11-2002 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2002:882
12-11-2002 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2002:883
12-11-2002 Fences amendment Ch. 103
Ord. No.
2002:884
12-11-2002 Soil movement Ch. 167
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1009
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2002:885
12-11-2002 Defense and indemnification Ch. 12
Ord. No.
2002:886
12-11-2002 Uniform Construction Codes
amendment
Ch. 89
Ord. No.
2002:887
12-23-2002 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
2002:888
12-23-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2003:889
3-26-2003 CAP ordinance to exceed
index rate
NCM
Ord. No.
2003:890
3-26-2003 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2003:891
3-12-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2003:892
3-12-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2003:893
3-12-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2003:894
3-12-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2003:895
4-23-2003 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2003:896
5-14-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2003:897
5-28-2003 Emergency services
dispatching agreement
Ch. 30, Art. V
Ord. No.
2003:898
5-28-2003 Business and residential
certificates of occupancy
Ch. 87
Ord. No.
2003:899
5-28-2003 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2003:900
5-28-2003 Vehicles and traffic: offstreet
parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 1
Ord. No.
2003:901
6-25-2003 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2003:902
8-13-2003 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2003:903
9-10-2003 Dogs and cats; kennels
amendment
Ch. 71, Art. I
Ord. No.
2003:904
9-24-2003 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1010
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2003:905
10-8-2003 Adoption of Uniform Fire
Code amendment
Ch. 106, Art. II
Ord. No.
2003:906
10-8-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2003:907
10-8-2003 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
2003:908
11-24-2003 Handicapped parking
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 4
Ord. No.
2003:909
12-10-2003 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2003:910
12-22-2003 Claims and bills amendment Ch. 9
Ord. No.
2003:911
12-22-2003 Police Department:
organization amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I
Ord. No.
2003:912
1-5-2004 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
2004:913
Zoning amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
2004:914
4-14-2004 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2004:915
4-14-2004 Sale of property NCM
Ord. No.
2004:916
4-14-2004 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2004:917
5-26-2004 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2005:952
Ord. No.
2004:918
5-26-2004 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2004:919
6-9-2004 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2004:920
6-23-2004 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2004:921
7-14-2004 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
2004:922
7-14-2004 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2004:923
7-28-2004 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1011
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2004:924
8-25-2004 Police Department: quasipublic
and private duty
work amendment
Ch. 50, Art.
VIII
Ord. No.
2004:925
9-8-2004 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2004:926
10-13-2004 Business and residential
certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 87
Ord. No.
2004:927
11-22-2004 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2004:928
11-22-2004 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2004:929
12-8-2004 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2004:930
12-20-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2005:931
3-9-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2005:932
4-27-2005 Improvement Commission
amendment
Ch. 29
Ord. No.
2005:933
3-23-2005 CAP ordinance to exceed
index rate
NCM
Ord. No.
2005:934
4-13-2005 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2005:935
5-25-2005 Miscellaneous licenses
amendment
Ch. 127, Art. I
Ord. No.
2005:936
6-22-2005 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2005:937
6-22-2005 Salaries Superseded by
Ord. No.
2005:960
Ord. No.
2005:938
6-22-2005 Clerical Floater Ch. 43, Art. III
Ord. No.
2005:939
6-22-2005 Data Processing
Coordinator; Deputy
Ch. 43, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2005:940
6-22-2005 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2005:941
7-13-2005 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1012
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2005:942
7-13-2005 Flood damage prevention:
general regulations
amendment
Ch. 108, Art. I
Ord. No.
2005:943
8-24-2005 Pet waste Ch. 170, Art. I
Ord. No.
2005:944
8-24-2005 Litter control Ch. 170, Art. II
Ord. No.
2005:945
8-24-2005 Improper disposal of waste Ch. 170, Art.
III
Ord. No.
2005:946
8-24-2005 Wildlife feeding Ch. 170, Art.
IV
Ord. No.
2005:947
8-24-2005 Containerized yard waste Ch. 170, Art. V
Ord. No.
2005:948
8-24-2005 Yard waste collection
program
Ch. 170, Art.
VI
Ord. No.
2005:949
8-24-2005 Illicit connections Ch. 170, Art.
VII
Ord. No.
2005:950
8-24-2005 Dogs and cats; kennels
amendment; garbage,
rubbish and refuse
amendment; streets and
sidewalks: obstructions
amendment
Chs. 71, Art. I;
169, Art. I;
171, Art. I
Ord. No.
2005:951
Zoning amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
2005:952
10-11-2005 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
2005:953
12-14-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2005:954
10-26-2005 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2005:955
12-14-2005 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 59
Ord. No.
2005:956
12-14-2005 Acquisition of property NCM
Ord. No.
2005:957
12-14-2005 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2005:958
12-14-2005 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2005:959
12-14-2005 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1013
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2005:960
12-28-2006 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2005:961
Bond Not adopted
Ord. No.
2005:962
1-2-2006 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2006:963
3-22-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2006:964
Zoning amendment Never
introduced
Ord. No.
2006:965
3-22-2006 Stormwater control Ch. 170A
Ord. No.
2006:966
3-22-2006 CAP ordinance to exceed
index rate
NCM
Ord. No.
2006:967
4-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2006:968
5-10-2006 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No
2006:969
5-10-2006 Tree preservation and
removal amendment
Ch. 181
Ord. No.
2006:970
6-28-2006 General provisions:
violations and penalties
amendment
Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. No.
2006:971
6-28-2006 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
2006:972
6-28-2006 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2006:973
8-23-2006 Flood damage prevention:
zero increase in stormwater
runoff amendment
Ch. 108, Art. II
Ord. No.
2006:974
9-13-2006 Business and residential
certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 87
Ord. No.
2006:975
9-27-2006 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2006:976
10-11-2006 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2006:977
12-27-2006 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2006:978
Zoning amendment Never
introduced
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1014
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2006:979
12-13-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2007:980
2-14-2007 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 35
Ord. No.
2007:981
4-11-2007 Exceed municipal budget
appropriations; establish
cap bank
NCM
Ord. No.
2007:982
4-11-2007 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2007:983
4-11-2007 Improvement Commission
amendment
Ch. 29
Ord. No.
2007:984
5-23-2007 Officers and employees:
Land Use Coordinator
Ch. 43, Art. V
Ord. No.
2007:985
Zoning amendment Never
introduced
Ord. No.
2007:986
8-8-2007 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
2007:987
Fees and deposits
amendment
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2007:988
7-11-2007 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2007:989
8-8-2007 Bond amendment NCM
Ord. No.
2007:990
7-25-2007 Traffic regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
2007:991
8-8-2007 Flood damage prevention:
zero increase in stormwater
runoff amendment; fees and
deposits amendment
Chs. 108, Art.
II; A301
Ord. No.
2007:992
8-22-2007 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2007:993
10-24-2007 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 59
Ord. No.
2007:994
10-24-2007 Street excavations
amendment; subdivision of
land and site plan review
amendment
Chs. 171, Art.
VI; 173
Ord. No.
2007:995
11-19-2007 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2007:996
11-19-2007 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1015
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2007:997
12-12-2007 Reappropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2007:998
10-10-2007 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2007:999
11-19-2007 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2007:1000
11-19-2007 Tree preservation and
removal amendment; fees
and deposits amendment
Chs. 181;
A301
Ord. No.
2007:1001
11-19-2007 Police Department:
standards and guidelines for
promotion amendment
Ch. 50, Art.
VII
Ord. No.
2007:1002
Professional service
contracts
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2008:1003
Pay to play Not adopted
Ord. No.
2008:1004
3-12-2008 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 35
Ord. No.
2008:1005
5-14-2008 Contracts: political
contributions by contractors
Ch. 10, Art. I
Ord. No.
2008:1006
4-9-2008 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 35
Ord. No.
2008:1007
4-9-2008 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
2008:1008
4-9-2008 Shade Tree Commission
amendment
Ch. 59
Ord. No.
2008:1009
4-9-2008 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 81
Ord. No.
2008:1010
4-9-2008 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 142
Ord. No.
2008:1011
4-9-2008 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
Ord. No.
2008:1012
5-14-2008 Driveways amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
2008:1013
6-11-2008 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2008:1014
7-23-2008 Street excavations
amendment
Ch. 171, Art.
VI
Ord. No.
2008:1015
8-13-2008 Appropriation and bond NCM
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1016
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2008:1016
8-13-2008 Appropriation and bond NCM
Ord. No.
2008:1017
Zoning amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
2008:1018
9-24-2008 Construction and repair of
sidewalks and curbs
Ch. 93
Ord. No.
2008:1019
10-6-2008 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2008:1020
10-6-2008 Municipal Housing Liaison Ch. 43, Art. VI
Ord. No.
2008:1021
Driveways amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
2008:1022
11-24-2008 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2008:1023
11-12-2008 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2008:1024
12-22-2008 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2008:1025
1-5-2009 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1026
2-25-2009 Personnel policies: general
policy amendment;
employment practices
amendment
Ch. 48, Arts. I;
II
Ord. No.
2009:1027
2-11-2009 Miscellaneous licenses
amendment
Ch. 127, Art. I
Ord. No.
2009:1028
2-11-2009 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 142
Ord. No.
2009:1029
2-11-2009 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2009:1030
2-25-2009 Appropriation and bond NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1031
2-25-2009 Cable television franchise Ch. A300
Ord. No.
2009:1032
3-11-2009 Traffic signal installation NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1033
Driveways amendment Tabled
Ord. No.
2009:1034
3-11-2009 Solid waste amendment Ch. 169
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1017
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2009:1035
4-22-2009 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1036
4-22-2009 Zoning amendment Repealed by
Ord. No.
2010:1066
Ord. No.
2009:1037
4-22-2009 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1038
5-13-2009 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1039
5-27-2009 Driveways amendment Ch. 92
Ord. No.
2009:1040
5-27-2009 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2009:1041
Personnel policies
amendment
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2009:1042
6-10-2009 Fences amendment Ch. 103
Ord. No.
2009:1043
6-10-2009 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1044
6-10-2009 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1045
7-8-2009 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1046
7-8-2009 Personnel policies: general
policy amendment
Ch. 48, Art. I
Ord. No.
2009:1047
7-8-2009 Stormwater management:
outdoor dumpsters and
refuse containers; private
storm drains
Ch. 170, Arts.
VIII and IX
Ord. No.
2009:1048
8-12-2009 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk construction
amendment
Ch. 171, Art.
IV
Ord. No.
2009:1049
8-12-2009 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2009:1050
9-23-2009 Police Department:
standards and guidelines for
promotions amendment
Ch. 50, Art.
VII
Ord. No.
2009:1051
Adoption of Personnel
Manual
Withdrawn
Ord. No.
2009:1052
Personnel policies: general
policy amendment
Withdrawn
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1018
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2009:1053
Zoning amendment Withdrawn
Ord. No.
2009:1054
10-14-2009 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1055
10-14-2009 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1056
10-14-2009 Creation of Building
Maintenance/Road
Department position
NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1057
10-14-2009 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1058
11-9-2009 Personnel policies: general
policy amendment
Ch. 48, Art. I
Ord. No.
2009:1059
11-9-2009 Adoption of Personnel
Manual
NCM
Ord. No.
2009:1060
11-9-2009 Police Department:
organization amendment
Ch. 50, Art. I
Ord. No.
2009:1061
11-23-2009 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2009:1062
12-9-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2010:1063
4-14-2010 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2010:1064
4-28-2010 Personnel Manual
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1065
4-28-2010 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2010:1066
4-28-2010 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2010:1067
5-26-2010 Exceed municipal budget;
establish cap bank
NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1068
6-9-2010 Bicycles amendment;
skateboards, roller skates
and other human-powered
recreational locomotive
devices amendment; fees
and deposits amendment
Chs. 75, Arts.
I, II; A301
Ord. No.
2010:1069
6-23-2010 Solid waste amendment Ch. 169
Ord. No.
2010:1070
8-25-2010 Bond NCM
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1019
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2010:1071
8-25-2010 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2010:1072
8-25-2010 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2010:1073
8-25-2010 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1074
8-25-2010 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1075
9-7-2010 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1076
9-22-2010 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1077
9-22-2010 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1078
9-22-2010 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1079
Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2010:1080
10-13-2010 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1081
10-13-2010 Street vacation NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1082
11-22-2010 Reappropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1083
11-22-2010 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1084
12-8-2010 Reappropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2010:1085
1-4-2011 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2011:1086
2-23-2011 Authorization to use thirdparty
disbursement service
organization for payroll
NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1087
5-25-2011 Code of Ethics amendment Ch. 18
Ord. No.
2011:1088
4-13-2011 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1089
4-13-2011 Emergency appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1090
4-26-2011 Streets and sidewalks:
obstructions amendment
Ch. 171, Art. I
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1020
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2011:1091
4-26-2011 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1092
4-26-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1093
5-11-2011 One-time waiver of
retirement requirement for
dispatchers
NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1094
6-22-2011 Shade Tree Commission
amendment; tree
preservation and removal
amendment
Chs. 59; 181
Ord. No.
2011:1095
6-8-2011 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1096
6-8-2011 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1097
6-22-2011 Land use procedures
amendment
Ch. 35
Ord. No.
2011:1098
7-13-2011 Police Department: Deputy
Chief of Police amendment
Ch. 50, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2011:1099
7-13-2011 Adoption of Uniform Fire
Code amendment
Ch. 106, Art. II
Ord. No.
2011:1100
7-13-2011 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2011:1101
7-13-2011 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1102
8-10-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2011:1103
9-14-2011 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2011:1104
Appropriation Not adopted
Ord. No.
2011:1105
10-12-2011 Solid waste amendment Ch. 169
Ord. No.
2011:1106
10-12-2011 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2011:1107
10-12-2011 Parking Authority
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 6
Ord. No.
2011:1108
10-12-2011 Environmental Commission
amendment; Board of
Recreation Commissioners
amendment
Chs. 16, Art. I;
56
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1021
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2011:1109
10-26-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2011:1110
11-9-2011 Food and Assistance Board Ch. 60
Ord. No.
2011:1111
1-3-2012 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 142
Ord. No.
2011:1112
1-3-2012 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 142
Ord. No.
2012:1113
2-8-2012 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2012:1114
2-8-2012 Soil movement amendment Ch. 167
Ord. No.
2012:1115
2-8-2012 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2012:1116
2-22-2012 Pensions and retirement:
Defined Contribution
Retirement Program
Ch. 46, Art. I
Ord. No.
2012:1117
3-14-2012 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2012:1118
4-11-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
Ord. No.
2012:1119
4-25-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2012:1120
4-25-2012 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2012:1121
4-25-2012 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2012:1122
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2012:1123
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2012:1124
5-23-2012 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 65
Ord. No.
2012:1125
5-23-2012 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2012:1126
6-13-2012 Alcoholic beverages:
consumption by persons
under legal age amendment
Ch. 67, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2012:1127
6-13-2012 Creation of positions;
salaries
NCM
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1022
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2012:1128
Vetoed
Ord. No.
2012:1129
8-8-2012 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2012:1130
9-24-2012 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
2012:1131
9-24-2012 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2012:1132
9-12-2012 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2012:1133
10-24-2012 Parks and playgrounds
amendment
Ch. 142
Ord. No.
2012:1134
12-12-2012 Outdoor cafes amendment Ch. 141
Ord. No.
2012:1135
Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2012:1136
12-12-2012 Land use procedures
amendment; zoning
amendment
Chs. 35; 200
Ord. No.
2013:1137
2-27-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2013:1138
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2013:1139
3-13-2013 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2013:1140
5-8-2013 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2013:1141
4-10-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
Ord. No.
2013:1142
5-8-2013 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2013:1143
5-8-2013 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2013:1144
5-8-2013 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2013:1145
5-8-2013 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2013:1146
6-26-2013 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2013:1147
7-10-2013 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1023
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2013:1148
7-24-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2013:1149
8-14-2013 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2013:1150
9-25-2013 Business and residential
certificates of occupancy
amendment
Ch. 87
Ord. No.
2013:1151
11-13-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2013:1152
12-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
2014:1153
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2014:1154
3-12-2014 Fences amendment;
subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Chs. 103; 173
Ord. No.
2014:1155
4-9-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
Ord. No.
2014:1156
Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2014:1157
Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2014:1158
4-9-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2014:1159
4-9-2014 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2014:1160
4-9-2014 Personnel policies: general
policy amendment;
employment practices
amendment
Ch. 48, Arts. I
and II
Ord. No.
2014:1161
4-9-2014 Adoption of Personnel
Manual
NCM
Ord. No.
2014:1162
4-23-2014 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2014:1163
5-14-2014 Improvement Commission
amendment; subdivision of
land and site plan review
amendment
Chs. 29; 173
Ord. No.
2014:1164
5-14-2014 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2014:1165
5-14-2014 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1024
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2014:1166
5-14-2014 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2014:1167
5-14-2014 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2014:1168
6-25-2014 Zoning Map amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2014:1169
6-25-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2014:1170
7-9-2014 Acceptance of property NCM
Ord. No.
2014:1171
9-10-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, table
only
Ord. No.
2014:1172
9-10-2014 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk and curb area
maintenance amendment
Ch. 171, Art.
III
Ord. No.
2014:1173
9-10-2014 Shade Tree Commission
amendment; tree
preservation and removal
amendment
Chs. 59; 181
Ord. No.
2014:1174
Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2014:1175
10-8-2014 Noise amendment Ch. 134
Ord. No.
2014:1176
10-8-2014 Administrator amendment Ch. 3
Ord. No.
2014:1177
11-12-2014 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2014:1178
11-24-2014 Acceptance of property NCM
Ord. No.
2014:1179
12-22-2014 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2014:1180
12-22-2014 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2014:1181
12-22-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 200, table
only
Ord. No.
2014:1182
12-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic: offstreet
parking regulations
amendment
Ch. 183, Part 1
Ord. No.
2014:1183
1-5-2015 Salaries NCM
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1025
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2015:1184
6-10-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
Ord. No.
2015:1185
5-13-2015 Food and Assistance Board
amendment
Ch. 23
Ord. No.
2015:1186
6-10-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2015:1187
6-10-2015 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2015:1188
6-24-2015 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2015:1189
6-24-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
obstructions amendment
Ch. 171, Art. I
Ord. No.
2015:1190
6-24-2015 Improvement Commission
amendment
Ch. 29
Ord. No.
2015:1191
Personnel policies
amendment
Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2015:1192
6-24-2015 Flood damage prevention:
zero increase in stormwater
runoff amendment
Ch. 108, Art. II
Ord. No.
2015:1193
6-24-2015 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2015:1194
7-22-2015 Intermunicipal agreements:
municipal court services
amendment; senior citizen
transportation services
repealer
Ch. 30, Art.
III; Ch. 30,
Art. IV
(reference
only)
Ord. No.
2015:1195
9-9-2015 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2015:1196
9-21-2015 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2015:1197
10-14-2015 Intermunicipal agreements:
emergency services
dispatching agreement
repealer; games of chance
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 30, Art. V
(reference
only); Ch. 110;
Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2015:1198
11-9-2015 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2015:1199
12-9-2015 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2015:1200
12-9-2015 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1026
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2016:1201
Not
introduced
Ord. No.
2016:1202
2-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
2016:1203
4-27-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank NCM
Ord. No.
2016:1204
4-27-2016 Personnel Manual
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2016:1205
5-11-2016 Noise amendment Ch. 134
Ord. No.
2016:1206
Not adopted
Ord. No.
2016:1207
6-22-2016 Police Department:
department organization
and chain of command
Ch. 50, Art.
VIIA, footnote
only
Ord. No.
2016:1208
7-27-2016 Games of chance
amendment; fees and
deposits amendment
Ch. 110; Ch.
A301
Ord. No.
2016:1209
7-27-2016 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2016:1210
9-14-2016 Zoning amendment; fees
and deposits amendment
Ch. 200; Ch.
A301
Ord. No.
2016:1211
8-10-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2016:1212
8-10-2016 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2016:1213
9-14-2016 Soil movement amendment;
fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. 167; Ch.
A301
Ord. No.
2016:1214
10-26-2016 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2016:1215
11-21-2016 Subdivision of land and site
plan review amendment
Ch. 173
Ord. No.
2016:1216
11-21-2016 Fees and deposits
amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2016:1217
11-21-2016 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
regulations amendment
Ch. 183, Part 2
Ord. No.
2017:1218
1-25-2017 Officers and Employees:
Assistant Chief Financial
Officer
Ch. 43, Art.
VII
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1027
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2017:1219
2-8-2017 Salaries NCM
Ord. No.
2017:1220
3-8-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Handicapped Parking
Amendment
Ch. 183, Pt. 4
Ord. No.
2017:1221
3-8-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Sidewalk Repair
Amendment
Ch. 171, Art. V
Ord. No.
2017:1222
3-22-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
Ord. No.
2017:1223
4-12-2017 Short Term Rental Property
Prohibition
Ch. 151
Ord. No.
2017:1224
4-26-2017 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2017:1225
6-14-2017 Administrator Amendment Ch. 3
Ord. No.
2017:1226
6-28-2017 Bond NCM
Ord. No.
2017:1227
7-26-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Sidewalk and Curb Area
Maintenance Amendment
Ch. 171, Art.
III
Ord. No.
2017:1228
7-26-2017 Fees and Deposits
Amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2017:1229
8-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Traffic
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 183, Pt. 2
Ord. No.
2017:1230
11-8-2017 Acquisition of Property NCM
Ord. No.
2017:1231
11-8-2017 Property Maintenance
Amendment
Ch. 147
Ord. No.
2017:1232
11-8-2017 Animals: Pet Shops Ch. 71, Art. III
Ord. No.
2017:1233
11-20-2017 Acquisition of Property;
Appropriation
NCM
Ord. No.
2017:1234
12-13-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Street Excavations
Amendment; Fees and
Deposits Amendment
Ch. 171, Art.
VI; Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2017:1235
1-2-2018 Personnel Policies: General
Policy Amendment
Ch. 48, Art. I
Ord. No.
2017:1236
1-2-2018 Vehicles and Traffic: Parking
Authority Amendment
Ch. 183, Pt. 6
§ DL-1 CLOSTER CODE § DL-1
A302:1028
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2017:1237
1-2-2018 Land Use Procedures
Amendment
Ch. 35
Ord. No.
2018:1238
2-14-2018 Easement NCM
Ord. No.
2018:1239
3-14-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
Ord. No.
2018:1240
Not Adopted
Ord. No.
2018:1241
5-23-2018 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2018:1242
8-8-2018 Salaries and Compensation NCM
Ord. No.
2018:1243
8-8-2018 Fees and Deposits
Amendment
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2018:1244
8-8-2018 Licenses: Miscellaneous
Licenses Amendment; Fees
and Deposits Amendment
Ch. 127, Art. I;
Ch. A301
Ord. No.
2018:1245
12-20-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2018:1246
12-20-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2018:1247
12-20-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2018:1248
12-20-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2018:1249
12-20-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 200
Ord. No.
2018:1250
12-20-2018 Appropriation NCM
Ord. No.
2018:1251
12-20-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 200
§ DL-1 PUBLIC LAND, LEASING OF § DL-1
A302:1029